                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          COAL SMOKE AND THE COSTS OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

                                       W. Walker Hanlon

                                      Working Paper 22921
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22921


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




I thank David Atkin, Dan Bogart, Leah Boustan, Karen Clay, Dora Costa, Neil Cummins, Pablo
Fajgelbaum, Roger Foquet, Tim Guinnane, Matt Kahn, Ed Kung, Miren Lafourcade, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Petra Moser, Alexander Rothenberg, Werner Troesken and
seminar participants at Arizona, Arizona State, Boston University, Bristol, Carnegie-Mellon,
LSE, NYU Stern, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, USC, Warwick, Wharton, The World Bank, and
Yale for their helpful comments. Reed Douglas, Qiyi Song and Vitaly Titov provided excellent
research assistance. I thank the Rosalinde and Arthur Gilbert Program in Real Estate, Finance and
Urban Economics at UCLA, the California Center for Population Research at UCLA, and the
National Science Foundation (CAREER Grant No. 1552692) for generous funding. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by W. Walker Hanlon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Coal Smoke and the Costs of the Industrial Revolution
W. Walker Hanlon
NBER Working Paper No. 22921
December 2016
JEL No. N13,N53,Q52,R11

                                          ABSTRACT

While the Industrial Revolution brought economic growth, there is a long debate in economics
over the costs of the pollution externalities that accompanied early industrialization. To help
settle this debate, this paper introduces a new theoretically-grounded strategy for estimating the
impact of industrial pollution on local economic development and applies this approach to data
from British cities for 1851-1911. I show that local industrial coal use substantially reduced long-
run city employment growth over this period. Moreover, a counterfactual analysis suggests that
plausible improvements in coal use efficiency would have led to substantially higher urbanization
rates in Britain by 1911.


W. Walker Hanlon
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
whanlon@econ.ucla.edu
1         Introduction

The Industrial Revolution represented a watershed in economic growth, yet
there is a long-running debate over the costs that industrialization imposed
on the generations that lived through these events. In the early stages of
the Industrial Revolution, factories were predominantly driven by clean water
power, but by the mid-19th century, coal had become the dominant power
source. As a result, by the 1840’s, contemporary writers such as Engels (1845)
described cities blackened with thick smoke and urban slums crowded with
diseased and dying people.

        How large were the external costs of Britain’s reliance on dirty coal power
in the 19th and early 20th century? Existing work on this topic, such as
Williamson (1981b), suggests that these costs were not large. However, these
findings have been criticized for drawing broad conclusions, which seem to con-
tradict contemporary evidence, from relatively sparse data (Pollard (1981)).1
As a result, the debate over the size of the negative externalities that accom-
panied the Industrial Revolution remains largely unresolved. This matters,
both because of the central role that the Industrial Revolution played in eco-
nomic history and because the experiences of early industrial countries are
used to help inform the decisions of countries, such as China and India, that
are currently struggling with the negative consequences of industrial growth.

        This study documents the impact of industrial pollution on long-run local
economic development in English cities from 1851-1911. I focus specifically on
the effects of air pollution generated by coal burning, the most important type
of industrial pollution during this period. In order to measure how industrial
pollution affected local economic growth, I extend a standard Rosen-Roback
    1
        See also (Williamson, 1981a, 1982).


                                              1
model to accommodate many industries which are heterogeneous in their use
of a polluting input, coal. The theory delivers a new estimation approach
that has three key features. First, it allows me to separate the positive effect
of industry growth on local employment growth, through job creation, from
the negative effects that are generated when this growth occurs in heavily
polluting industries. These negative pollution effects, which operate on all
industries in a city, can occur either because pollution makes a location less
attractive (the amenities channel), or because pollution makes workers and
firms less productive (the productivity channel). The second feature of my
estimation strategy is that it will capture the impact of pollution occurring
through both of these channels. A third feature of my estimation strategy is
that it can be implemented without the need for local wage and rent data,
which are largely unavailable during the period I study. Instead, I use a model
to show how data on quantities, in this case the quantity of employed workers,
can be used in place of the more scarce data on prices (real wages in this
case). As a result, my approach requires only panel data on city-industry
employment, which I have constructed for every decade from 1851-1911 for 31
English cities

   My results show that industrial coal use substantially reduced long-run em-
ployment growth in English cities during this period. Specifically, in English
cities that experienced rapidly rising coal use, employment growth was system-
atically lower relative to the growth that we would have expected given the
initial mix of industries in each city and national industry growth rates. The
magnitude of these effects was large; based on my estimates, over a two-decade
period, a city in which local industrial coal use grew at a rate that was one
standard deviation above the national average would, as a consequence, have



                                       2
experience a reduction in employment growth of 21-26 percentage points, equal
to about one-half of the average growth in employment across two-decade peri-
ods. These estimates reflect the external effect that coal use in some industries
exerted on other sectors of the local economy. These findings are robust to the
inclusion of a wide range of control variables including the initial level of coal
use in each location, the city’s proximity to coal reserves, city features such
as weather, initial city innovation rates, changing local agglomeration forces
operating through input-output connections or labor market pooling, changes
in the share of high-skilled workers in the city, the share of exporting industries
in the city, changes in the average local firm size, etc.

   To assess the implications of these results for overall urbanization levels,
I conduct a simple counterfactual to study the impact of more efficient coal
use. This counterfactual is motivated by the 1871 Coal Commission Report, a
detailed 1300 page study of coal use in Britain commissioned by Parliament.
The report highlights substantial inefficiencies in industrial coal use and de-
scribes how simple low-cost improvements could have substantially reduced
industrial coal use. However, these improvements were not adopted due to the
combination of low coal prices, weak pollution regulation, and the fact that
most of the impacts of pollution were external to firms. Guided by this report,
I consider a counterfactual in which the growth of coal use from 1851-1911 was
reduced by ten percent. My results suggest that the 31 analysis cities would
have had an additional 1.5 million residents by 1911 and that their share of the
English population would have been higher by four percentage points. Thus,
my results suggest that had Britain adopted regulations to improve coal use
efficiency the nation would have been substantially more urbanized by the
early 20th century.



                                        3
       To my knowledge this is the first study to document the effects of in-
dustrial pollution on local economic development over the long-run, though I
build on previous work such as Kahn (1999).2 This is possible, in part, be-
cause of the unique features offered by the historical setting that I consider.
First, the cities covered by my study experienced high variation in the level
of local pollution. This variation makes it possible to identify the impacts of
pollution despite the fact that many other factors influence city growth. Sec-
ond, population mobility was relatively high during this period, which means
that city population and employment could respond to the effects of pollu-
tion.3 Third, regulation was relatively limited. This includes both pollution
regulation and regulations, such as zoning, that often constrain city growth in
modern contexts. Fourth, detailed census data are available which allow me
to track city-industry employment consistently across six decades in order to
study long-run effects.

       An important feature of the analysis approach that I propose is that it
will capture the effect of local industrial coal use on both the level of city
amenities, which influences the supply of workers in a city, as well as the
impact on the productivity of local firms, which will influence the demand for
workers. Previous work on this topic, such as Williamson (1981b), has focused
only on the amenity channel. However, a growing body of literature suggests



   2
     Kahn (1999) studies the impact of a decline in local manufacturing on local pollution
levels in rust-belt cities in the U.S., but does not estimate the impact of the pollution decline
on local economic development. Another closely related paper is Chay & Greenstone (2005),
which looks at the impact of pollution reductions resulting from the Clean Air Act on local
housing values. Two other related papers are Banzhaf & Walsh (2008) and Bayer et al.
(2009). The main difference between these previous contributions and the present paper is
that I study long-run effects while focusing on local employment as the main outcome of
interest.
   3
     See Long & Ferrie (2003) and Baines (1985).


                                               4
that air pollution can have important effects on productivity.4 The intuition
behind my approach is that, regardless of whether coal use affects consumer
amenities or firm productivity, the implications for employment are the same.
Thus, focusing on employment as the outcome of interest allows me to capture
both of these channels. In contrast, these two channels have opposing effects
on the urban wage premium. Thus, if the productivity channel is important
then a small urban wage premium (as found by Williamson (1981b)) can be
still be consistent with large pollution costs. Moreover, the model makes it
clear that when pollution affects productivity, the costs of urban pollution
cannot be inferred from the urban wage premium alone. Using a cross-section
of local wage, rent and price data from 1905, I provide tentative evidence
that the productivity effects of coal use were particularly important during
the 19th century. This suggests that approaches that ignore this channel may
be missing much of the costs of local pollution.

       This study reconciles the quantitative estimates of the costs of industrial
pollution during the Industrial Revolution with the qualitative historical evi-
dence describing the severity of the pollution problem during this period (e.g.,
Brimblecombe (1987), Mosley (2001),and Thorsheim (2006)) as well as with
our current understanding of the substantial impacts that air pollution can
have, even at the much lower concentrations experienced in modern devel-
oped economies. It also contributes to a growing set of quantitative studies
examining the historical impact of coal-based air pollution.5

       This study is also related to a growing literature in urban economics fo-
cusing on the consumption value of cities, and in particular, to work that
   4
     See, e.g., Graff Zivin & Neidell (2012), Hanna & Oliva (2015), Chang et al. (2014),
Chang et al. (2016), Isen et al. (Forthcoming), and Ebenstein et al. (2016).
   5
     These include Troesken & Clay (2011), Barreca et al. (2014), Clay et al. (2015), Clay
et al. (2016), Heblich et al. (2016), and Beach & Hanlon (2016).


                                            5
considers endogenous amenities related to the composition of city residents
(Moretti (2004), Diamond (2016)). In contrast, this paper highlights how the
industrial composition of cities can also affect city amenities, through pollu-
tion, and introduces an analysis strategy that can be used to measure the
impact of industrial pollution on local employment growth over the long-run.

        In the next section I describe the empirical setting. Data and measurement
are discussed in Section 3, followed by the theory, in Section 4. The analysis
is presented in Section 5, while Section 6 concludes.



2         Empirical setting

Landes (1998) describes the Industrial Revolution as composed of three ele-
ments: the replacement of human skill by machines, the introduction of en-
gines to convert heat into work, and the substitution of mineral power sources
– chiefly in the form of coal – for other power sources. One consequence of
these changes was rapid growth in coal use by industry, particularly in the
second half of the 19th century. British coal consumption averaged 65 mil-
lion tons annually in 1852-1862 and rose to 181 million tons in the 1903-1912
period.6 This amounted to 4.3 tons per person in 1911.7 Most of this coal
– 60-65 percent – was burned by industry, and coal remained the dominant
power source, by far, throughout this period.8 Because some industries were
    6
     These figures are from the U.K. Department of Energy and Climate Change. For further
details, see Appendix A.1.
   7
     These figures are in imperial tons per year. For comparison, in 2012 the U.S. consumed
about 2.5 tons of coal per person annually, China consumed about 2.7 tons per person, and
Australia, one of the heaviest users, consumed around 5.8 tons per person. However, today
most coal use occurs in electricity generation plants outside of urban centers.
   8
     Data from Mitchell (1988). Industry here includes both manufacturing and mining. In
contrast, residential coal use accounted for only 17-25 percent of domestic consumption, but
attracted more attention because it was particularly important in London. The remainder


                                             6
particularly intensive users of coal, and these industries tended to agglomerate,
industrial coal use could be highly geographically concentrated.9 Also, before
electricity transmission, power had to be generated on-site at factories, which
were located in urban areas where they could be reached on foot by workers,
increasing pollution exposure.

    The pollution released by coal burning factories in 19th century Britain
was widely recognized and discussed. For example, The Times (Feb. 7, 1882,
p. 10)10 wrote,

      There was nothing more irritating than the unburnt carbon floating
      in the air; it fell on the air tubes of the human system, and formed
      a dark expectoration which was so injurious to the constitution; it
      gathered on the lungs and there accumulated.

While pollution in London was more likely to be experienced by visitors and
noted by the press, coal smoke pollution was particularly severe in the indus-
trial cities of England. For example, describing a visit to Northwest England
in 1890, Cannon Hardwicke Drummond Rawnsley wrote,

      ...chimneys, solid and square, were belching forth clouds of Erebean
      darkness and dirt...The heavens were black with smoke, and the
      smother of the mills, to one whose lungs were unaccustomed to
      breathing sulphurised air, made itself felt.
is composed of use by transportation and utilities. It is worth noting that residential coal
use was more polluting, per ton burned, than industrial coal use. This is because it was
burned less efficiently (at lower temperatures) and released at lower altitudes.
    9
      These agglomeration patterns generally dated to the late 18th or early 19th century
and were often due to geographic factors. For example, the location of the textile industry
in the Northwest of England was driven by historical factors, such as the location of water
power, that were of less importance in the second half of the 19th century (Crafts & Wolf
(2014)).
   10
      Quoted from Troesken & Clay (2011). See that paper and Thorsheim (2006) for many
other examples.


                                             7
    Figure 1 provides an illustration of the impact of industrial pollution in
Sheffield, perhaps the most polluted of the northern industrial cities. These
images come from 1920, after the end of the study period, but are likely
to be similar to the conditions experienced during the late 19th and early
20th centuries. The left-hand image was taken on Sunday morning, when
the factories were at rest, while the right-hand image was taken from the
same vantage point on Monday at noon, when the factories were at work.
Residential pollution would have been present at both times, so the contrast
between these images illustrates the impact that industrial pollution had in
the industrial cities of England.

                  Figure 1: An illustration from Sheffield in 1920


 Sunday morning – the factories at rest            Monday at noon – the factories at work




The pictures above were taken from the same vantage point in Sheffield in 1920. While
this is after the study period, the levels of pollution it reveals are likely similar to those
experienced during the period I study. From William Blake Richmond, “The Smoke Plague
of London”, in London of the Future, Ashton Webb Ed., 1921. Reproduced from Inventing
Pollution, by Peter Thorsheim (2006), Athens: Ohio University Press.



    While the health effects of air pollution were not fully understood by con-
temporaries, there was some appreciation for the link between coal-based air

                                              8
pollution and poor health.11 Today we know that burning coal releases a va-
riety of pollutants into the atmosphere, including suspended particles of soot
and other matter, sulfur dioxide, and carbon dioxide. The release of suspended
particles is particularly severe when combustion is inefficient, as it often was
in the 19th century. These pollutants have a variety of negative effects on the
human system which have been documented in a large literature.12

       Several recent studies have documented the impact of pollution exposure
on worker productivity. For example, Graff Zivin & Neidell (2012) show that
ozone exposure reduced the productivity of agricultural workers. Using data
from Mexico City, Hanna & Oliva (2015) show that air pollution can impact
hours worked. Chang et al. (2016) shows that day-to-day variation in par-
ticulate pollution exposure lowered the productivity of pear packers. Their
estimates suggest that the relatively small reductions in PM2.5 particulates
achieved in the U.S. from 1999-2008 generated $16.5 billion in labor cost sav-
ings. Chang et al. (2014) uses evidence from call-center workers in China to
show that the productivity effects of air pollution exposure extend even to
white-collar jobs. In addition, early-life pollution exposure has been linked to
a range of negative outcomes, including on cognitive ability and human capital

  11
      One illustration of this is the 1867 report of the Sanitary Association by Dr. M.A.
Morgan on Manchester (reported by The Times, April 16, 1867), in which stated that,
“the chief solid impurity of the air of Manchester is coal smoke, and its mode of action on
the human body is of two kinds – (1), as an irritant to the lungs, producing bronchitis or
assisting in the production and maintenance of this disease...and (2), by its sulpheretted
hydrogen reducing the tone of the system, and rendering it easily susceptible to zymotic
[infectious] diseases.” Beyond the health effects, coal smoke also had a myriad of other
visible consequences. White cloths became stained and went out of style. Visibility was
often so reduced that it caused traffic accidents. There is even evidence that pollution
had evolutionary effects. Kettlewell (1955) describes how the Lepidoptera moths, originally
white, evolved to take on a dark gray color in order to blend into the polluted forests near
the northern industrial cities.
   12
      See Rückerl et al. (2011), Currie (2013) and Graff Zivin & Neidell (2013) for reviews of
literature on this topic.


                                              9
formation ((Ebenstein et al., 2016; Bharadwaj et al., Forthcoming)) and adult
earnings (Isen et al. (Forthcoming)).

       An important feature of this empirical setting is that Britain was a “highly
mobile” (Long & Ferrie (2003)) society during this period, with large flows
of population from rural areas as well as Ireland and Scotland into English
cities.13 This means that, when considering factors that influence city em-
ployment or population growth, the marginal mover that we should have in
mind was someone outside of the cities who was faced with a decision about
where to migrate. The search for work was the primary driver of these mi-
gration flows, though there is also some evidence that pollution levels affected
location decisions, both within and across cities.14

       Another important feature of this setting was the limited level of gov-
ernment regulation, including both pollution regulation and other regulations
that would have affected city growth. While some steps were taken to regulate
industrial pollution, these efforts often ran up against the laissez faire ideology
that dominated British policy during this period as well as the political power
of mill owners. New pollution regulations were passed, including The Sanitary
Act of 1866, The Public Health Act of 1875 , and The Public Health (Lon-
don) Act of 1891. However, these acts allowed for substantial interpretation,
contained important loopholes, and imposed relatively small fines.15 As a re-
  13
      Baines (1985) suggests that internal migration accounted for roughly 40% of the pop-
ulation growth of British cities during this period. Only one city in the analysis database,
Bath, did not experience substantial growth during the study period. Britain already had
a well-developed transportation network by 1851 the beginning of the period studied here,
including railroad connections to all of the analysis cities, as well as numerous canals and
turnpikes.
   14
      For example, in the 1880s Robert Holland wrote that, “[t]he rich can leave the sordid
city and make their homes in the beautiful country...the poor cannot do so. They must
breath the stifling, smoky atmosphere...” Quoted from Thorsheim (2006), p. 44.
   15
      One example provided by Thorsheim (2006) is that the acts regulated only “black
smoke.” Defendants were able to avoid fines by claiming that their smoke was merely “dark


                                            10
sult, historical evidence suggests that their effectiveness was limited, though
they may have had more impact toward the end of the nineteenth century.16
Other regulations affecting city growth, such as zoning laws, were also largely
absent from this setting, which provides a particular clean opportunity for
investigating the impact of pollution on city growth.17



3     Data and measurement

The first key piece of data for this study is a measure of local industrial com-
position. These data come from the Census of Population, which reports the
occupation of each person at each ten-year census interval from 1851-1911 for
31 of the largest cities in England.18 The occupational categories reported in
these data generally closely correspond to industries, such as cotton spinner
or steel manufacturer.19 To construct consistent series for 1851-1911, I com-
bine the many occupational categories available in each census into a set of 26
broad industries, spanning nearly the entire private-sector economy.20

    Because I am working with fairly aggregated industry categories, almost all

brown.”
  16
     See, e.g., Thorsheim (2006) and Fouquet (2012).
  17
     For example, no national zoning law existed in England until 1909. There were also
very few place-based policies of the kind found in many modern economies, and little spatial
redistribution of wealth through national taxes.
  18
     The set of cities in the database includes all of the English cities for which city-level
occupation data were reported by the Census for each decade from 1851-1911. These were
the largest cities in England in 1851 with the exception of Plymouth, which is excluded
because changes to the city border make it impossible to construct a consistent series for
that city. Figure 3 in the Appendix includes a map of these cities. This study uses the
most recent version of the database (v2.0) which was updated in March, 2016. The data,
additional documentation, and descriptive statistics can be found at http://www.econ.
ucla.edu/whanlon under Data Resources.
  19
     One unique feature of this data source is that it comes from a full census rather than a
sample. This is helpful in reducing the influence of sampling and measurement error.
  20
     A list of the industries included in the database is available in Appendix A.2.5.


                                             11
industries are present in all cities.21 However, the spread of industries across
cities was far from even. For example, textile producers agglomerated in cities
in Lancashire and Yorkshire, where they could account for as much as half
of all private-sector employment. Cities such as Sheffield, Birmingham and
Wolverhampton had a disproportionate share of metals industries, while ports
such as Bristol and Liverpool had high shares of transportation and services.

       The second necessary piece of information for this study is a measure of the
coal intensity of each industry. This information is drawn from the first Census
of Production, which was completed in 1907.22 This Census collected detailed
information on the amount of coal used in each industry, as well as industry
employment, allowing me to construct a measure of coal use per worker in
each industry.23

       These data show that coal use intensity varied enormously across indus-
tries, a feature that plays a key role in this study. A table describing coal use
intensity by industry is available in Appendix A.2.5. The most intensive indus-
trial coal users, such as metal & machinery or earthenware & bricks, used coal
to heat material up to high temperatures. These industries used more than
forty tons per worker per year. Textiles, a moderate coal-using industry which
consumed around ten tons per worker per year, generally used coal to power
steam engines. Other industries, such as apparel or tobacco products, used
very little coal, less than two tons per worker per year. This large variation in
coal use intensity at the industry level, together with the tendency of indus-


  21
     The exceptions are a few cities which have no employment in shipbuilding or mining.
Observations with no city-industry employment are dropped from the analysis, leaving me
with a slightly unbalanced panel.
  22
     While these data come from near the end of the study period, this is the earliest available
consistent source for this information.
  23
     Coal and coke are combined in this study. Coke consumption was small relative to coal.


                                              12
tries to agglomerate in particular locations, resulted in substantial variation
in the amount of industrial coal use at the city level.

       I model industrial coal use in cities as determined by city-industry em-
ployment (Lict ), the coal use intensity of each industry (θi ), and the national
efficiency of coal use per worker, ρt :


                                               X
                              COALct = ρt            (Lict ∗ θi ) .                         (1)
                                                 i

Estimates of θi for manufacturing industries are provided by the 1907 Census
of Production, while Census of Population data provide city-industry employ-
ment. The ρt term can be calculated by comparing data on industrial coal
use at the national level to the values obtained using data on θi and Lit .24
In general, other industries, such as services, were not likely to be major coal
users, so this measure should capture most industrial coal use.25

       One assumption implicit in this approach is that relative coal use per worker
across industries did not vary too much over time. Another important as-
sumption is that industry coal use does not vary too much across locations
in response to variation in the relative level of wages or coal prices. Put an-
other way, it is important that variation in city coal use due to local industry

  24
                                                                P P
           P P I use the fact that ln(ρt ) = ln(COALt ) − ln ( c i Lict ∗ θi ) . In this equa-
      Specifically,
tion, the c i Lict ∗ θi term can be calculated from the data, while national coal use in
industry is available from Mitchell (1988).
   25
      An exception is local utilities, particularly gas, which was a major user of coal. Coal
was used to make gas, which was then pumped to users in the city, where it was burned
for light or heat. Despite the fact that local utilities used coal, I exclude local utility coal
use from the pollution measure because gas providers may have reduced the amount of
coal smoke residents were exposed to if the gas replaced more polluting forms of energy
use in homes and offices. Another potential exception is transportation, particularly rail
transportation, which used a substantial amount of coal. However, most of this coal would
have been burned outside of stations, spreading it though the countryside. This makes it
very difficult to determine the location of pollution related to coal use in the transportation
sector. Thus, I also exclude transportation from the local coal use measure.


                                              13
composition and differences in industry coal use intensity resulting from tech-
nological factors is substantially more important than the variation due to
differences in the local prices of coal or other inputs. The enormous variation
in coal use intensity across industries is important for making this a reasonable
assumption.

       One way to check both of these assumptions is to compare estimated levels
of coal use calculated using the method described here to data on local coal
use levels. While such data are generally unavailable, there is information on
county-level coal use in the 1871 Coal Commission report. Comparing esti-
mates of industrial coal use at the county level for 1871, based on the approach
I have just described, to county-level coal use data from the 1871 report shows
that my approach does a good job of replicating industrial coal use at the
county level (the correlation is 0.912), particularly for more industrial and
urbanized locations. The full analysis is available in Appendix A.2.7.

       It is also possible to check the extent to which industry coal use varied over
time by comparing the 1907 data to data from the 1924 Census of Production,
the next full production census. This analysis, described in Appendix A.2.6,
shows that the relative coal use intensity across industries was quite stable
over time.26 Also, comparing 1907 and 1924 coal use per worker suggests that
there was broad improvement in coal use efficiency over time which occurred
relatively evenly across industries. This type of efficiency improvement will be
captured in the ρt term.

       Estimates of industrial coal use per worker at the city level are described


  26
    A regression of coal use per worker in 1924 values on coal use per worker in 1907 yields
a coefficient of 1.021 with a s.e. of 0.061 and an R-squared of .949. This is comforting,
particularly because the 1907-1924 period saw larger changes in the source of factory power,
due to the introduction of electricity, than did the 1851-1907 period.


                                            14
in Table 6 in Appendix A.2.4. These data show that there was substantial
variation across cities in the expected level of coal use per worker, even among
similarly sized cities. Sheffield, often cited as the prototypical polluted indus-
trial city, emerges as the most intensive user of coal in the database, followed
by other cities specializing in metals such as Birmingham and Wolverhampton.
Textile manufacturing towns, such as Manchester and Leeds, show moderate
levels, near the average. Commercial and trading cities, such as Liverpool and
Bristol, as well as London, use industrial coal less intensively. Bath, a resort
town, is the least polluted city in the database.




4        Theory

This section presents a spatial equilibrium model in the Rosen-Roback tradi-
tion, but modified in a few important ways in order to fit the empirical setting.
The economy is made up of a fixed number of cities, indexed by c. These cities
are small open economies that take goods prices as given. As is standard in
spatial equilibrium models, workers and firms can move freely across cities and
goods are freely traded. I begin by modeling the demand for labor in cities.

       The economy is composed of many industries, indexed by i, each of which
produce a homogeneous good. Each industry is composed of many perfectly
competitive firms, indexed by f . Firms produce output using labor, a polluting
input (coal), and a fixed local industry-specific resource.27 The production
function is,

  27
    In Appendix A.3.3 I consider a model that also incorporates capital. This does not
alter the basic estimating equation derived from the model, but it does influence how the
estimation results are interpreted relative to the model parameters.


                                           15
                                                                              i −βi
                                          yf ict = aict Lαf ict
                                                            i
                                                                Cfβict
                                                                   i
                                                                       Rf1−α
                                                                          ict       ,


where Lf ict is labor, Cf ict is coal, Rf ict is a local resource, and aict is the local
productivity level in industry i. Let αi , βi ∈ [0, 1) for all i, and αi + βi < 1 for
all i. Note that the production function parameters are allowed to vary at the
industry level. This will result in industries employing different input mixes,
with some using coal more intensively than others.

       Local resources are fixed within each city and are industry-specific, with an
available supply given by R̄ic .28 These resources can be thought of as natural
features or local endowments of entrepreneurial ability in a particular sector.
They play an important role in the model; by introducing decreasing returns
at the city-industry level, they allow multiple cities to be active in an industry
even when productivity varies across cities, trade is costless, and markets are
perfectly competitive.

       Firms maximize profit subject to output prices pit , the coal price φt , a
city wage wct , and the price of local resources χict . The firm’s maximization
problem in any particular period is,


                                                                i −βi
               max               pit aict Lαf ict
                                              i
                                                  Cfβict
                                                     i
                                                         Rf1−α
                                                            ict       − wct Lf ict − φt Cf ict − χict Rf ict .
        Lf ict ,Cf ict ,Rf ict



       Using the first order conditions from this problem, I obtain the follow-
ing expression for the relationship between employment and coal use in each
industry,
  28
   This type of approach has recently been used in papers by Kline & Moretti (2013),
Kovak (2013) and Hanlon & Miscio (2014).


                                                             16
                                                     !       !
                                Cict            βi        1
                                     =                       wct .                               (2)
                                Lict            αi        φt

This expression tells us that variation in the use of polluting inputs across
industries will be governed in part by the industry-specific production function
parameters αi and βi . The empirical analysis exploits the exogenous variation
due to the βi /αi parameters, reflected by the θi term in Eq. 1, while abstracting
from the variation due to the endogenous wct term. The (1/φt ) term in Eq. 2
implies that coal use per worker can vary over time in a way that is common
to all industries, a feature that is reflected in the ρt term in Eq. 1.

   It is worth emphasizing that the expression in Eq. 2 maps directly into
the coal use values calculated using Eq. 1. The fact that those coal use values
do a good job of reproducing observed coal use levels in 1871 (see Appendix
A.2.7), suggests that it is reasonable to apply the functional form used in
the model across the study period. Put another way, if the model were a poor
approximation of the world, then we would not expect coal use estimates based
on the structure of the model to do a reasonable job of matching the observed
data. Furthermore, the results in Appendix A.2.6 suggest that the patterns of
change observed from 1907-1924 are also consistent with Eq. 2.

   Using the first order conditions from the firm’s maximization problem,
and summing across all firms within an industry, I obtain the industry labor
demand equation:

                     1−βi                                                         1−β i
                   1−αi −βi
                                               1                     βi        − 1−α −β
           Lict = αi          (aict pit )   1−αi −βi
                                                       (βi /φt )   1−αi −βi
                                                                              wct i i R̄ic   .   (3)

Note that, in equilibrium, the sum of firm resource use must equal total city-
industry resources, which are fixed at R̄ic .


                                                  17
       One congestion force in the model is the limited supply of housing. The
housing market itself is not a central focus of this paper, so I model housing
in a reduced-form way,


                               ln(rct ) = λ ln(Lct ) + ln(ηc ) ,                              (4)

where rct is the rental rate, Lct is total city population, ηc represents fixed city-
specific factors that influence construction costs, and λ > 0 is a parameter that
determines the impact of increasing population on the housing price.29

       Now, we turn to the supply of labor in a city. The model is populated by
a continuum of homogeneous workers, each of which supply one unit of labor
to the market. Workers consume a basket of goods with price Pt and housing.
They also benefit from local amenities. The indirect utility function is,


                              wct              wct
                                                           
                   Vct = γ ln     + (1 − γ) ln     + ln(Act ) .
                              Pt               rct

where wct is the wage, Act is the amenity value, and the γ ∈ (0, 1) parameter
determines the relative expenditure shares of housing and goods.

       Workers are freely mobile across cities and have an outside option utility
ln(vt∗ ) in each period. In the empirical setting I consider, this can be thought
of as either the utility of emigrating or the utility of living in the rural areas
of the country. Given this, and using Eq. 4, the inverse labor supply equation
for city c is,
  29
     This expression is similar to that used in previous work (e.g., Moretti (2011)) except
that the elasticity of housing supply λ does not vary across cities. While this assumption
is likely to be unrealistic in modern settings because of variation in zoning laws or other
regulations, it is more reasonable in the empirical setting I consider. This is due in part to the
lack of land-use regulations in the period I study and in part to the relatively homogeneous
geography across English cities (compared to, say, U.S. cities).


                                               18
                                        (1−γ)λ
                            wct = Ptγ Lct        ηc1−γ A−1  ∗
                                                        ct vt .                      (5)

   In addition to workers, the model is also populated by capitalists who
receive the rent from land and local resources. For simplicity, I assume that
capitalists live and spend their income outside of the city.

   Next, I want to incorporate the impact of local industrial pollution into the
model. Coal pollution can impact the city by affecting both workers and firms.
Focusing first on residents, I express the local amenity value as Act = δc Cct−ψ A
                                                                                  ct ,

where Cct is city coal use, δc represents a fixed city amenity, the ψ parameter
determines the impact of local coal use on the amenity level, and A
                                                                   ct represents

an idiosyncratic shock to the local amenity level.

   Coal use can also affect the productivity of local firms. To build this chan-
nel into the model, I assume that local industry productivity can be separated
into the impact of national changes in industry productivity, ait , the impact of
city-level coal use on firm productivity, Cct−ν , where the parameter ν ≥ 0 deter-
mines the impact of local coal use on firm productivity, and an idiosyncratic
shock to city-industry productivity, Pict . Thus, I have aict = ait Cct−ν Pict .

   Given the outside option utility, the national coal price, a set of national
industry output prices, technology levels, and city industry resources, equilib-
rium in a city is defined as the set of local wages, resource prices, housing rent,
and population, and a set of industry employment and coal use levels, such
that firms maximize profits, the local markets for resources clear, the housing
market clears in each city, and city labor supply equals city labor demand.

   For the empirical analysis, I need an expression that relates the growth in
local industry employment to changes local industrial pollution. The starting


                                            19
point for this derivation is the industry labor demand expression given in Eq.
3 and the city labor supply expression in Eq. 5. Differencing these expressions
over time, taking logs, and substituting out the wage terms, I obtain,


                                                                                
                           −(1 − γ)(1 − βi )λ                      −ψ(1 − βi ) − ν
       ∆ ln(Lict )   =                             ∆ ln(Lct ) +                      ∆ ln(Cct )      (6)
                              1 − αi − βi                            1 − α i − βi
                                        
                                1
                     −                      βi ∆ ln(φt ) + (1 − βi )γ∆ ln(Pt ) + (1 − βi )∆ ln(vt∗ )
                           1 − αi − βi
                                                                           
                                                P                      A
                     −   ∆ ln(ait pit ) − ∆ ln(ict ) + (1 − βi )∆ ln(ct ) .




       Eq. 6 forms the basis for the main empirical specifications used in this pa-
per. The ∆ ln(Lct ) and ∆ ln(Cct ) terms on the right-hand side of this equation
capture, respectively, the impact of city congestion and of city coal use. The
model suggests that both of these will negatively impact city-industry employ-
ment growth, though it is worth noting that the impact of city size may be
positive if a city-size agglomeration force is included in the model.30 In the
middle row of Eq. 6 is a set of terms that vary only over time, but not across
space. These will be absorbed by year effects in the empirical analysis. On the
bottom row of Eq. 6, the first term reflects national industry-level demand
or productivity shocks, the building blocks of the Bartik instrument. These
can be absorbed by industry-time effects in the main analysis. The final two
terms on the bottom row of Eq. 6 are the error terms. The structure of these
terms makes it clear that I should allow for correlated errors across industries
within the same location and time period in the empirical analysis.


  30
    I have not added a city-size agglomeration force to the model because this complicated
the equilibrium conditions and because city-size agglomeration is not a major focus of this
paper.


                                                   20
    The focus of the empirical analysis will be estimating the coefficient on the
coal use and city-size terms in Eq. 6. As Eq. 6 shows, the impact of either coal
use or congestion is determined by a combination of several model parameters.
In the empirical analysis, I will estimate a single coefficient reflecting how,
together, these parameters govern the relationship between either congestion
or coal use and city growth, but I will not be able to identify the component
parameters individually. For further discussion of this expression and its link
to the coefficients estimated in the empirical analysis, see Appendix A.3.2.
Appendix A.3.1 relates the estimation approach suggested by Eq. 6 to the
larger Bartik instrumentation literature.




5     Analysis

This section begins with an analysis of the impact of coal use on local em-
ployment growth, first at the level of city-industries and then at the city level.
These are the central results of the paper. Following that, I present a simple
counterfactual that can help us think about the implications of coal use for
overall urbanization levels. Finally, I provide some tentative evidence on the
channels through which coal use may have affected city growth.

    Before moving to the main analysis, it is useful to start with some reduced-
form empirical patterns at the city level, in Figure 2. The y-axis of this graph
describes the difference between actual city employment growth, ∆ ln(Lct ) and
predicted city employment growth based on each city’s initial industry com-
position and the growth rates of each industry in all other cities. This is taken
across every two-decade period from 1851-1911 and then demeaned by period
(similar patterns also appear for each period). The x-axis describes the pre-

                                       21
dicted change in city coal use, based on each city’s initial industry composition,
the growth rate of each industry in all other cities, and the coal use intensity
of each industry. These values are taken over the same 20 year periods and
also demeaned by year. Figure 2 shows that, in cities and time periods where
we predicted a greater increase in coal use, overall city employment growth
is systematically lower than what we would expect given each city’s initial
industrial composition and national industry growth rates. This provides a
first piece of reduced-form evidence suggesting that rising coal use may have
lowered city employment growth.




            Figure 2: Deviation vs. predicted change in city coal use




The y-axis is the difference between actual city employment growth over each two-decade
period in city c and the predicted employment growth in that city-industry based on each
city’s initial employment by industry and employment growth in each industry in all other
cities, summed across industries. The x-axis is the predicted change in city-level industrial
coal use over the period, which is generated using the initial composition of city-industries
interacted with national industry growth rates and measures of industry coal use per worker.
The trend line is based on a third-order polynomial.


                                             22
5.1     Coal use and city-industry employment growth



The starting point for the main analysis is Eq. 6. Converting this to a regres-
sion form, I have,


                ∆ ln(Lict ) = b0 + b1 ∆ ln(Cct ) + b2 ∆ ln(Lct ) + ξit + eict ,          (7)




where the ξit is a set of industry-time effects which absorb the national-level
factors in Eq. 6 as well as the industry-specific productivity and demand
shocks, while eict incorporates the idiosyncratic shocks to city amenities and
city-industry productivity.

   It is clear that a regression implementing Eq. 7 will suffer from serious
identification issues. In particular, both the change in overall city employment
and the change in city coal use will be endogenously affected by city-industry
employment growth. To deal with this, I replace these terms with predicted
values. For overall city employment, let,

                                                                             
                                     X                                  X
      ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) =     ln  Ljct−τ       ∗ GRj−ct,t−τ  − ln  Ljct−τ 
                                      j6=i                                        j6=i



where GRi−ct,t−τ is the growth rate of industry i in all cities other than c
from t − τ to t. In this expression, τ determines the size of the time period
over which differences are taken. I will explore differences ranging from one to
three decades. This variable represents the expected growth in employment
in all other local industries, given national industry growth rates and the
initial industrial composition of the city. Note that, when studying industry i,

                                              23
that industry is dropped when constructing ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ).31 This helps
us avoid endogeneity concerns, but ultimately it does not have a substantial
impact on the results.

       Next, to reflect the predicted change in city coal use, I define,

                                                                                              
                                   X                                           X
 ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) = ln                 Ljct−τ ∗ GRj−ct,t−τ ∗ θj  − ln            Ljct−τ ∗ θj  .
                                   j6=i                                        j6=i



where θj is coal use per worker in industry j. Note that industry i is dropped
when calculating ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) in order to avoid endogeneity concerns.32
It is important to note that the difference between ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) and
∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) is due only to variation in the coal intensity of indus-
tries, represented by θj .33

       Putting these elements together, the main regression specification is,



          ∆ ln(Lict ) = b0 + b1 ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) + b2 ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) + ξit + eict .          (8)




       This specification addresses the most important identification concerns in
Eq. 7, i.e., the endogenous affect of city-industry employment growth on

  31
      In practice this will cause ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) to also vary at the industry level, but,
with a slight abuse of notation I do not include i in the subscript in order to make it clear
that this variable is capturing a city-level effect.
   32
      In practice this will cause ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) to also vary at the industry level, but,
with a slight abuse of notation I do not include i in the subscript in order to make it clear
that this variable is capturing a city-level effect.
   33
      Because of the way the ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) and ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) variables are con-
structed, there is likely to be a positive correlation between these variables. However, when
taking differences the correlation between these variables is generally not too high. In par-
ticular, the results in Appendix A.4.2 show that for two-decade differences the correlation
between these variables is 0.284 when all industries are included.


                                                   24
city-level congestion and coal use. The main identification assumption in this
analysis approach is that there is not some other industry feature that is
both correlated with industry coal use intensity and affects local employment
growth. This type of assumption is typical across the entire Bartik instrument
literature. After presenting the main regression results, I present a variety
of additional results including controls for the most likely channels through
which the identification assumption might be violated.

   An alternative to the reduced-form approach represented by Eq. 8 is to
use the predicted coal use to instrument for the actual change in coal use.
In the main results I prefer the reduced-form approach because it is easier to
work with and because the advantages of the IV approach are limited since
the variable that one would ideally want to instrument for, the local pollution
level, is unobserved. Nevertheless, I have also estimated IV regressions and
these deliver similar results (see Appendix A.4.6).

   The specification in Eq. 8 includes an assumption that the impact of coal
use is linear in logs. There are two available pieces of evidence supporting this
functional form. First, this functional form is consistent with the scatterplot
shown Figure 2. Second, Beach & Hanlon (2016) provides evidence that the
impact of coal use on mortality is linear in logs. To the extent that the
mortality rate is a good indicator of the impact of coal use this suggests that
the specification used here is reasonable.

   Note that Eq. 8 abstracts from heterogeneous industry responses to chang-
ing levels of city pollution or city congestion forces, a feature suggested by the
theory. While I begin the analysis by abstracting from heterogeneity in the
response to coal use across industries, later I will also present results that
explore these heterogeneous responses.


                                       25
       In relation to the theory, the estimated b1 coefficient from Eq. 8 will reflect
the impact of changes in local industrial coal use on city-industry employment
growth, which will depend on how coal use affects the city amenity level, how
coal use affects firm productivity, as well as the extent to which industries
can respond to these effects by shifting employment away from polluted lo-
cations.34 The theory suggests that this coefficient should be negative. Note
that, because ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) is also included in the regression specifica-
tion, the b1 coefficient should be interpreted as the impact of a rise in local
industrial coal use holding constant the overall local employment level, i.e.,
as an increase in the pollution intensity of local industry. Similarly, the b2
coefficient should be interpreted as reflecting the impact of an increase in local
employment holding fixed the level of local industrial coal use, i.e., a rise in
completely clean employment.35

       This estimation approach abstracts from variation in industry coal use
intensity across cities. This is driven in part by data constraints, since city-
specific industry coal use intensities are not observed. However, even if city-
level industry coal use intensity was observed, I would probably not want to
incorporate this into the explanatory variable because, as suggested by the
theory, this value will be endogenous and dependent on local wage levels.
Abstracting from spatial variation in industry coal use intensity avoids this
endogeneity concern.

       Estimation is done using pooled cross-sections of data (after taking differ-


  34
     In the model, the ability of industries to shift production away from more polluted
locations depends on the importance of fixed local resources in production. For further
discussion of the link between the estimated coefficients and the theory, see Appendix A.3.2.
  35
     In the theory, the sign of the b2 coefficient is predicted to be negative. However, I have
not included a city-size agglomeration force in the model. If this is included, then the sign
of b2 may be positive or negative.


                                              26
ences), an approach that allows me to exploit as much of the available data
as possible. This is vital because the key variation in this study occurs at the
city level and only 31 cities are observed in the data. We may be concerned
about spatial and serial correlation in this setting. To deal with these poten-
tial issues, I allow correlated standard errors across industries within the same
city, following Conley (1999) and across time within the same city-industry,
as in Newey & West (1987).36

       I begin the analysis, in Table 1, by exploring results with differences taken
over time periods ranging from one to three decades. The table includes results
for all industries, in Columns 1-3, and for a set of manufacturing industries
only, in Columns 4-6. I provide separate results for manufacturing industries
only because these produce more tradable products and so are a better fit for
the model, and also because some of the control variables that I will introduce
later are available for only this set of industries.

       Table 1 reveals several important patterns. The most important result for
this study is that the coal use variable always has a negative impact on city-
industry employment growth. This impact is clearer when we look over longer
time differences, and becomes statistically significant for differences of two or
three decades. The fact that the estimated impact grows over time suggests
that it may take time for workers and firms to react to the impact of rising

  36
    The theory suggests that errors may be correlated across industries within a city and
time period as a result of the Act term. For lag lengths over one there will mechanically
be serial correlation in these regressions because the differences will overlap. Thus, it is
important to allow for serial correlation at least equal to the lag length. An examination
of alternative approaches to treating the standard errors shows that allowing correlated
standard errors across industries within the same city has by far the largest impact on the
standard errors. Once this type of correlation is allowed, extending the standard errors to
allow correlation across industries in nearby cities (e.g., within 10km or 50km) does not
lead to any substantial additional increase in the confidence intervals. To implement these
standard errors, I follow Hsiang (2010).


                                            27
industrial coal use. These delays are not surprising given that we are looking
at reactions to changes in coal use levels, and that these reactions will involve
changes in fixed capital investment patterns and costly migration decisions.
In addition, if the effects of coal use are coming in part through productivity
impacts on workers (as suggested by the analysis in Section 5.3) then it is
likely to take time for these effects to emerge.


                Table 1: Baseline city-industry regression results


                                        DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment
                                  All industries                     Manufacturing industries
 Difference:                One        Two          Three          One       Two         Three
                         decade      decades      decades        decade     decades     decades
                            (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)           -0.611    -1.987*** -3.016***           -0.444 -2.218*** -3.257***
                         (0.621)      (0.732)      (0.803)       (0.685)    (0.632)     (0.813)
 ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )        -0.536       0.392       1.362*         -0.725     0.383       1.172*
                         (0.586)      (0.757)      (0.826)       (0.528)    (0.553)     (0.692)
 Constant               0.568*** 1.284***         2.544***         0.338   1.907***    2.883***
                         (0.158)      (0.199)      (0.373)       (0.217)    (0.332)     (0.481)
 Ind.-time effects          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
 Observations              4,809       4,012        3,208          2,773     2,312        1,849
 R-squared                 0.259       0.355        0.429         0.246      0.336       0.403
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across
  industries within a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across a
  number of decades equal to the lag length. All regressions use data covering each decade from
  1851-1911. The regressions for all industries include 26 private sector industries spanning
  manufacturing, services, transport, and utilities. The results for manufacturing industries
  are based on 15 industries.




   Table 1 also provides evidence of a negative short-run effect of employment
growth in other city-industries that becomes positive over longer periods. This
pattern is consistent with a city-size congestion force that weakens over time,
together with positive city-size agglomeration benefits. This is reasonable
if we think that there are some city features, such as infrastructure, that

                                            28
are difficult to adjust in the short-run but can be expanded in the long-run.
Finally, it is worth noting that the R-squared values increase as we move to
longer differences. This suggests that city-industry employment growth may be
subject to idiosyncratic short-run shocks, but that longer-run growth patterns
are more closely tied to predictable influences.

       Later, I will discuss in more detail the magnitude of the coal use effects
documented in Table 1, but before doing so it is useful to discuss some addi-
tional robustness results. Table 2 present the coefficient on the change in log
coal use for a variety of robustness results (full results are in Appendix A.4.3).
In the top panel, Columns 1-2 present results with a variety of city-level con-
trols (these are listed in the table comments). Of the available controls, I find
that cities with higher levels of initial innovation (based on patenting) and
better access to coal reserves grew more rapidly, while larger cities and those
with more rain or colder temperatures grew more slowly.37 These patterns
seem quite reasonable. Columns 3-4 present results from regressions including
city fixed effects. These results make it clear that the patterns I document are
not simply driven by a few slow-growing cities.38 Columns 5-6 present results
obtained while dropping London, the largest outlier city in the data. Finally,
Columns 7-8 present results including as a control log employment in each


  37
      One reason for including the coal proximity and weather variables is that they are the
key factors determining residential coal use levels. Thus, controlling for these helps me to
control for the effect of residential pollution.
   38
      Further evidence on this is provided in Appendix Table 16, where I estimate the re-
lationship between the lagged predicted change in city coal use and current city-industry
employment growth. These results show that changes in city coal use in a previous period
is not strongly related to city employment growth later on, and that including this variables
does not substantially affect the estimated relationship between the predicted change in coal
use in the current period and employment growth. Also, in Appendix Table 19 I present
additional results including as a control the Herfindahl Index calculated across industry
employment shares in each city at the beginning of each period.


                                             29
city-industry at the beginning of each period.39 Overall, my basic results do
not appear to be sensitive to these alternative specifications.

       In the middle panel of Table 2, I present results including a set of controls
based on industry characteristics, which are available only for manufacturing
industries. These controls directly address the main identification concern,
i.e., that there may be some other industry characteristic that is correlated
with coal use and affects city employment growth. The control variables that
I have constructed are the share of (high skilled) salaried to (lower skilled)
wage workers, average firm size, the share of output exported, the labor cost
share, the female worker share and the youth worker share.40 These reflect
factors that are commonly cited by urban economics as affecting city growth.
These industry characteristics are used to construct city-level changes using
the exact same approach that was used to construct changes in city coal use
using the industry coal per worker data. These variables are then included as
controls in the regressions in Columns 9-15. Including these variables does not
meaningfully affect my main results.41

       In the bottom panel of Table 2, I include controls based on connections
between industries, through input-output channels or labor force similarity.
Recent work by Ellison et al. (2010) suggests that these may be an important
channel for inter-industry agglomeration forces. The controls I use reflect, for
  39
      The full results, in Appendix Table 15, show that initial city-industry employment is
associated with slower subsequent city-industry growth.
   40
      The data used to construct these controls are described in Appendix A.2.3. We may also
be concerned that industries differ in the intensity with which they use land. Unfortunately,
I have not been able to find a suitable measure of the land use intensity of industries in this
period. However, the fact that I find that the impact of coal use is higher in industries with
a greater labor cost share (see Appendix A.4.4), which is likely to mean a lower land cost
share, suggests that land values are unlikely to be driving the results.
   41
      Of the available controls, only industry labor cost share strongly predicts city growth.
This likely reflects the relatively fast growth or services that took place during this period.
Full results are available in Appendix Table 17.


                                              30
each industry, the change in local employment in buyer industries, supplier
industries, or industries employing workforces that are demographically or
occupationally similar. The results in Columns 18-20 show that including
these controls does not alter the main results. Finally, in Columns 21-22, I add
controls for the initial level or the change in the rate of violence and industrial
accidents in each city based on mortality data. This addresses concerns that
workers in more coal-intensive industries could have brought other undesirable
features, such as a propensity for crime, or that coal-using industries could have
been more hazardous for workers.

   In Appendix A.4.6 I estimate IV regressions in which the predicted change
in local industrial coal use is used as an instrument for the change in local
industrial coal use based on actual city-industry growth. The estimated coef-
ficients on coal use obtained from these regressions range from -1.12 to -1.63.

   I conduct two other exercises to assess the stability and statistical signif-
icance of the results. First, in Appendix A.4.7, I undertake a permutation
exercise in in which I randomly reassigned the industry coal use per worker
values across the 26 analysis industries 1000 times and then re-estimate results
using the specification corresponding to Column 2 of Table 1. Comparing the
estimated coal use coefficients from these placebo regressions to the coefficient
obtained using the true data implies a confidence level of 99.1%. With the full
set of city-level controls, the confidence level implied by the permutation test
is 93.6%. Second, I re-run the results dropping each of the cities in the data
using the specification in Column 2 of Table 1. This yields coefficients ranging
from -1.30 to -2.29 with p-values ranging from 0.0018 to 0.0367.




                                        31
                           Table 2: Robustness regression results with two-decade differences

                                                       DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment
                              With additional                With city                 Dropping                  Initial ind.
                                   controls                fixed effects                London                  size controls
                           All ind.       Manuf.      All ind.       Manuf.     All ind.      Manuf.     All ind.          Manuf.
                               (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)              (8)
     ∆Ln(P redCoal)        -1.526**       -1.151*   -1.614***        -1.112*   -1.980***     -2.220***  -2.070***        -2.100***
                            (0.696)       (0.622)     (0.586)        (0.614)    (0.740)       (0.670)     (0.737)          (0.637)
     Observations            4,012          2,312      4,012          2,312      3,882         2,237        4,012           2,312
                                   Additional controls based on industry characteristics (manufacturing industries only)
                           Salaried       Average     Export          Labor     Female         Youth         All
                         worker shr. firm size          shr.        cost shr. worker shr. worker shr.
                               (9)          (10)        (11)           (12)       (13)          (14)        (15)
     ∆Ln(P redCoal)       -2.197***      -2.300*** -2.217*** -2.688***         -2.206***     -1.857***  -2.181***
                            (0.634)       (0.676)     (0.673)        (0.633)    (0.639)       (0.657)     (0.705)
     Observations            2,312          2,312      2,312          2,312      2,312         2,312        2,312
                             Additional controls based on inter-industry connections                    Controlling for violence
                             IO in         IO out     Demog.           Occ.        All                     Initial         Change
                                                    similarity similarity                                   level
32




                              (16)          (17)        (18)           (19)       (20)                      (21)             (22)
     ∆Ln(P redCoal)       -2.135***      -2.149*** -2.149*** -2.179***         -2.093***                 -2.076**         -2.140**
                            (0.743)       (0.725)     (0.718)        (0.719)    (0.748)                   (0.964)          (0.989)
     Observations            3,549          3,549      3,549          3,549      3,549                      2,411           2,411
      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within a city
      in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across a number of decades equal to the lag length. All
      regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-1911 and include the predicted change in city employment as
      well as industry-time effects. The additional controls in Columns 1-2 are the number of air frost days in each city,
      rainfall in each city, patents in the city from 1852-1858, log city population at the beginning of each period, the log
      of city coal use at the beginning of each period, carboniferous rock deposits within 50km and a seaport indicator.
      Columns 7-8 include controls for initial industry size. The controls in Columns 9-15 are city-level controls based on
      industry features constructed using the same approach used for city coal use. The controls in Columns 16-20 are
      for changes in industries sharing buyer or supplier linkages to the observation industry (IO in and IO out) or using
      demographically or occupationally similar labor forces. The violence controls are based on city-level mortality due to
      violence or accidents.
       As an additional check, in Appendix Table 22 I estimate the impact of coal
use separately for five main coal using industries. These results show similar
estimated coal use impacts across the different industries. This is comforting,
because it suggests that the results I’m obtaining are specifically related to
the level of coal use, regardless of which industry it comes from.

       Overall, these results consistently show a negative and statistically signifi-
cant relationship between city coal use and city-industry employment growth,
regardless of whether we are focused on all industries or just manufacturing
industries. The magnitude of the estimated coefficients for two-decade differ-
ences range from -1.11 to over -2.5, with my preferred estimates, which include
the full set of available controls, falling between -1.2 and -1.5. To interpret
these estimates, it is useful to know that the average increase in log city coal
use across all periods was 0.372 with a standard deviation of 0.176. Given
these results, we should expect a city with an increase in coal use that is
one standard deviation above the mean to have a reduction in city-industry
employment growth of 21-26 percentage points over two decades. Average
city-industry employment growth across all cities and periods was 43.7 per-
cent and the standard deviation was 0.52. Thus, a one s.d. greater increase
in city coal use would be expected to reduce city-industry employment growth
by roughly one-half of either the average or the standard deviation of city-
industry growth. These results imply that rising coal use had a powerful effect
on city employment growth.

       While the results described thus far estimate average effects of coal use
across all industries, the theory suggests that these effects are likely to be het-
erogeneous.42 In particular, if coal pollution primarily affects workers (through
  42
    I have also attempted to look at whether the impacts of growing coal use were more
severe in cities that were more vulnerable to pollution because of the local climatic condi-


                                            33
either amenity or productivity channels), then we should expect these effects
to be larger for more labor intensive industries. When I run regressions that
include the interaction of the coal use variable with industry labor cost share
this is what I find.43 In particular, in the regression results shown in Appendix
A.4.4, I observe negative and generally statistically significant coefficients on
the interaction between the coal use and industry labor cost share variables.

    Next, I shift my attention to estimating the impacts on overall city em-
ployment or population. Analyzing city-level results is useful because it allows
me to look at alternative outcome variables, such as overall city population,
and because these results incorporate a natural weighting of the importance
of different industries. The city-level regression specification is,




  ∆ ln(Lct ) = a0 + a1 ∆ ln(P rW orkpopct ) + a2 ∆ ln(P rCoalct ) + ξt + ect ,             (9)


where ∆ ln(Lct ) is the change in actual city population (either the working
or the total population), ∆ ln(P rW orkpopct ) is the predicted change in the
working population of city c, ∆ ln(P rCoalct ) is the predicted change in log
coal use in the city, and ξt is a full set of year effects. As before, predicted
variables are generated using lagged city-industry employment patterns and
industry growth rates in all other cities, with differences taken over two-decade
periods.44
tions. Unfortunately the variation in climatic conditions across the sample cities was not
large enough to generate robust results when interacted with local industrial coal use, and
using city topographical features to measure pollution vulnerability raises concerns about
the extent to which these features might have impacted city growth through other channels.
   43
      The labor cost share variable is the ratio of labor costs to total revenue. This variable
is available only for manufacturing industries.
   44
      For specifics on the construction of these explanatory variables, see Appendix A.4.8.
Note that there is an important difference between the specification in Eq. 9 and the


                                              34
    City-level results are presented in Table 3. Columns 1-2 present results ob-
tained by aggregating the private-sector industries used in the main analysis to
the city level. Columns 3-4 present results for the entire working population of
the city.45 Columns 5-6 present results for the total city population, including
children, students, the retired, and other non-workers.


                        Table 3: City-level regression results


  DV: ∆ Log of city employment in analysis industries (two decade differences)
                                  City employment            Total city            Total city
                                in analysis industries working population          population
                                   (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
 ∆ ln(P rW orkpopct )             0.955        0.433      0.756      0.0795     0.385     -0.229
                                 (0.666)      (0.726)    (0.664)     (0.724)   (0.624) (0.730)
 ∆ ln(P rCoalct )               -1.457**     -1.655**   -1.352** -1.400** -0.986          -1.055
                                 (0.657)      (0.670)    (0.650)     (0.665)   (0.633) (0.686)
 Time effects                      Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
 Other controls                                 Yes                    Yes                 Yes
 Observations                      155          155        155         155       155       155
 R-squared                        0.067        0.202      0.084       0.208     0.099     0.213
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors allow serial correlation across two decades.
 The data cover 31 cities over each decade from 1851-1911, with differences taken over twenty-
 year periods. The additional controls included are the number of air frost days in each city,
 rainfall in each city, patents in the city from 1852-1858, log city population at the beginning
 of the period, and log city coal use at the beginning of the period. The full results show
 that rainfall and initial city size are negatively related to city growth, while patenting and
 the initial level of coal use are positively associated with city growth.




    Table 3 shows that rising city coal use was negatively related to city em-
ployment or population growth, though the impact on private sector workers
is stronger than on all workers, which in turn is stronger than the impact on
overall population. This may reflect that government workers and others in

regressions based on Eq. 8: in Eq. 9, the ∆ ln(P rW orkpopct ) term will reflect both the
positive direct impact of industry growth on overall city employment as well as any negative
congestion effects generated by increasing population.
  45
     This includes government workers, agricultural workers, casual laborers, etc.


                                             35
similar occupations, as well as non-workers such as retirees or family members,
may have been less flexible in adjusting to changing levels of local pollution.46



5.2       Implications for urbanization levels

Was there scope for environmental regulations to reduce the negative exter-
nalities of coal use documented above? If so, what impact might these im-
provements have had on the British urban system? In an attempt to answer
these questions, this section provides a counterfactual analysis of the impact of
improved coal use efficiency. The counterfactual that I consider is motivated
by rich historical source, the 1871 Coal Commission report.47 This extremely
detailed report, over 1300 pages long, aimed to understand all aspects of coal
use in Britain. As part of this study, one committee was specifically assigned
to, “inquire whether there is reason to believe that coal is wasted by careless-
ness or neglect of proper appliances for its economical consumption.” This
group, Committee B, interviewed some of the leading luminaries of the time,
including Henry Bessemer, the inventor of the Bessemer process, and Charles
William Siemens, the inventor of the regenerative furnace.

       The main finding of Committee B was that there was evidence of wide-
spread waste and inefficiency in the use of coal that could have been remedied
at relatively small cost.48 The committee highlighted two major areas where
  46
      At the city level it is also possible to look at how the impact of coal use differs between
men and women and across different age groups of the population. This analysis, available
upon request, shows that the impact of coal use is similar for both genders. Similar coal use
effects are also observed across age groups, though there is some evidence of slightly larger
negative effects for the local population of children under five, a pattern that is consistent
with the mortality effects of air pollution.
   47
      The full title of this report is, Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into
the Several Matters Relating to Coal in the United Kingdom.
   48
      Perhaps we should not be surprised that 19th century producers failed to achieve effi-
ciency in their coal use given that, even in the modern U.S., these is some evidence suggesting


                                               36
relatively low-cost improvements could lead to substantial reductions in indus-
trial coal use. The first was the procedures used for adding coal to boilers.49
On this, the Committee writes, “The careless and wasteful manner of stoking
in most of the coal-producing districts is not only a source of vast waste, but of
extreme annoyance to all the surrounding neighborhood” (p.103).50 Second,
the committee argues that efficiency gains could have been achieved cheaply
through insulating boilers and steam engines to limit heat loss, with savings
estimated at 30 percent. They write, “...we feel called upon to notice the
enormous waste of heat, and consequently wasteful consumption of fuel, in a
very large majority of the steam boilers used in this country...” (p. 103).51

    Having found that such improvements were available, the committee then
asked, why were these efficiency-improving technologies not implemented by
manufacturers? Their findings suggest three main explanations. First, coal
was abundant and relatively inexpensive, and the committee found that, “in
places where coal is cheap and abundant, it is used with but little regard to
economy, and that indeed in some localities the men actually boast of the
quantity of coal which they have contrived to burn” (p. 129).52 Second,
a widespread failure to adopt energy efficiency technologies with positive net present values.
See, e.g., McKinsey & Co. (2009), “Unlocking Energy Efficiency in the U.S. Economy.”
  49
     On p. 104, the report states that, “Imperfect combustion must be regarded as the first
essential loss. The air is supplied so unskillfully that much passes into the chimney as hot
air, carrying with it the vast quantity of unconsumed carbonaceous matter which we see
escaping in black clouds from the top of the chimney. This imperfect combustion may be
traced to the bad construction of the fireplaces, and to the reckless way in which coal is
thrown into, and over, the mass of ignited matter in the fireplace.”
  50
     The report goes on to state that, “Coal is piled upon the fire without any discretion,
producing dense volumes of the blackest smoke, which is so much fuel actually thrown away;
nor is the waste the worst part of it; vegetation is destroyed, or seriously injured, for miles,
and that which acts so seriously on the plant cannot fail to be injurious to man.”
  51
     The report goes on to describe how boilers were, “left to the influence of every change in
the atmospheric conditions, quite exposed to winds, rains, and snows, when a slight covering
of a non-conducting substance would, by protecting them, improve their steam producing
power, and save a considerable quantity of coal.”
  52
     With the exception of a few short spikes, coal prices were generally low and stable across


                                              37
pollution regulations were generally weak and ineffective, providing producers
with little additional incentive for efficiency improvements (Thorsheim (2006),
Fouquet (2012)). Third, coal pollution imposed city-level externalities, so that
producers had little incentive to unilaterally reduce their coal consumption.53

    Overall, the findings of the Coal Commission report suggest that, near the
middle of my study period, efficiency gains in the range of 10-30% could have
been achieved using existing technology at relatively low cost. Motivated by
these findings, I use the model in order to consider a counterfactual in which
the growth of coal use across the study period was reduced by ten percent
without imposing additional economic costs.

    The counterfactual is implemented by starting with the 1851 population of
cities and then working forward, adding in the additional population that we
would expect the cities to attract given a ten percent reduction in the growth of
local industrial coal use in each period based on the estimates obtained above.54
The counterfactual relies on the structure of the model, so it incorporates the
countervailing congestion effects associated with increased population growth.


the study period (Table 6 in Appendix A.1). Clark & Jacks (2007) suggests that this may
have been due to a relatively flat supply curve for coal in Britain during the 19th century.
   53
      The fact that manufacturers made unilateral investments in chimneys suggests that they
internalized at least some of the costs that direct exposure of their workers to coal smoke
would have imposed. However, these chimneys merely served to disperse the coal smoke
more broadly and manufacturers in the large cities that I investigate had little incentive to
internalize these broader effects.
   54
      To be specific, when running the counterfactual for total population I use the coefficient
estimates from Column 5 of Table 3. This simple counterfactual includes an important
assumption about the elasticity of labor supply faced by cities. Each city faces an upward-
sloping city labor supply curve, and these curves can shift over time as a result of global
forces shaping labor supply. However, given global labor supply conditions, which determine
the reservation utility in each period, the supply curve for workers to any particular city is
not affected by the growth of the other analysis cities. While this is a strong assumption,
it is not unreasonable in the setting I consider because English cities were part of a large
international labor market where they competed with locations as distant as Australia,
Argentina and the U.S. for workers, particularly workers from Ireland.


                                              38
       The results of this exercise for overall city population, shown in Table 4,
suggest that the population of the 31 analysis cities in 1911 would have been
larger by about 1.5 million under the counterfactual.55 As a result, these
cities would have included 38% of the English population in 1911, compared
to the 34% actually achieved in that year. Today the 31 largest urban areas
in England account for just over 40% of the population. Thus, a reduction
in the growth of coal use could have led British cities to approach modern
urbanization levels much earlier.56


Table 4: Actual and counterfactual total population of the 31 analysis cities




5.3       Consumer disamenities or productivity effects?

In the model, coal use can affect city growth through either consumer amenities
or firm productivity. To separate these channels, we need location-specific
  55
      In Appendix A.4.9 I explore counterfactuals for the working population of these cities
using estimates based on either the city-industry or city-level regression results. The results
based on city-level estimates are quite similar to those obtained using the theoretically-
consistent city-industry level regressions allowing heterogeneous effects of coal use across
industry. Thus, the city-level results are likely to provide a good approximation for the true
effect of coal use.
   56
      These results are particularly interesting because of the strong link between urbanization
and income, a pattern that has been observed across many countries and time periods. See
Acemoglu et al. (2002) for some evidence on this relationship.


                                              39
wage, rent, and price data. While such data are generally unavailable, they
are provided for a cross-section of 51 cities in 1905 from a report produced
by the Board of Trade.57 While these data are limited, and therefore the
results of this section should be interpreted with caution, they can provide
some suggestive evidence on the channels that may be generating the effects
documented above.

       To begin, I use the model to derive a standard expression relating the
quality-of-life in cities to local amenities. Starting with the indirect utility
function and substituting in for the amenities term I obtain,




       [γ ln(Pt ) + (1 − γ) ln(rct )] − ln(wct ) = −ψ ln(Cct ) − vt∗ + ln(δc A
                                                                              c ).        (10)


The left-hand side of this equation is the difference between local costs, weighted
by expenditure shares, and the local wage, a standard measure of local quality-
of-life.58 Estimating this equation allows me to obtain the parameter ψ, which
determines how local coal use affects city employment growth through the
amenity channel.59        These regressions are run using wage data for skilled
builders and skilled engineers, occupations that are found in most or all of

  57
      The Board of Trade data cover slightly more than 51 cities, but I am only able to use
cities where city-industry data are also available, since those data are needed in order to
calculate city coal use.
   58
      Albouy (2012) suggests adjusting the standard approach to (1) include the local cost of
goods other than housing, (2) include non-wage income, and (3) account for federal income
taxes and deductions. Non-wage income and income taxes are not a major concern in my
empirical setting. I incorporate the first adjustment he recommends into my analysis by
using Board of Trade cost of living estimates which include both housing and local goods
prices.
   59
      This is essentially the same data and estimating approach used in Williamson (1981b),
though he uses different data to infer local pollution levels. This highlights the fact that his
approach will identify only the amenity channel.


                                              40
the cities.60 The cost data include both rental rates and the local prices of
goods, which the Board of Trade combined based on the expected share of
expenditures going towards housing.

       Table 5 presents the results. Columns 1-3 use the wages of skilled builders
while Columns 4-6 are based on skilled engineer’s wages, which are available
for a smaller set of cities. Each column includes the log of city coal use as an
explanatory variable, while additional control variables are added in Columns
2-3 and 5-6.61 In all specifications, city coal use is negatively related to the
amenity value of the city, and this relationship is statistically significant in
most of the results.62

       The results in Table 5 indicate that coal use had a negative impact on the
quality-of-life in British cities in 1905. However, the magnitude of the esti-
mates suggest that this effect was not large. In Appendix A.4.10 I describe
how these estimates, together with the results from the main analysis, can
be used to analyze the relative importance of the amenities and productivity
channels. These calculations show that, for plausible values of the produc-
tion function parameters, the impact of coal use on city employment growth
through the channel of consumer amenities is much smaller than the impact

  60
      Skilled occupations are used because skilled workers were likely to be more mobile
across cities, so these wage data are more likely to reflect city amenities, and because the
wives of skilled workers were less likely to work, so the wage of skilled male workers will
better reflect household income than the wage of unskilled workers. This issue was raised
by Pollard (1981) in his critique of Williamson (1981b), who focused instead on unskilled
wages. Further details on the Board of Trade data are presented in Appendix A.2.2.
   61
      Spatial correlation is potentially a concern in these regressions. To deal with this, I have
explored allowing spatial correlation of standard errors for cities within 50km of each other,
following Conley (1999). I find that this delivers smaller confidence intervals, and therefore
more statistically significant results, than those obtained using robust standard errors. To
be conservative, Table 5 reports the larger robust standard errors.
   62
      Further analysis shows that these effects are driven by a combination of lower rents
and goods prices in more polluted cities together with small and generally statistically
insignificant increases in wages.


                                               41
through productivity effects.63

          Table 5: Comparing quality-of-life measures to city coal use


                  DV: QOLc for Skilled Builder            DV: QOLc for Skilled Engineer
                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
 Ln(COALc )        -0.0172* -0.0504** -0.0454** -0.0294*** -0.0452**                 -0.0378*
                  (0.00946) (0.0203)        (0.0195)     (0.0108)     (0.0174)       (0.0194)
 Ln(P OPc )                   0.0421**       0.0329                    0.0185         0.0129
                              (0.0208)      (0.0208)                  (0.0187)       (0.0208)
 Controls                                      Yes                                      Yes
 Observations         51          51            51          47            47             47
 R-squared           0.053      0.133         0.204       0.139         0.153          0.183
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses. The QOL measure
 is constructed using data for 1905 from the Board of Trade. COALc is calculated using
 industry coal interacted with city’s industrial composition in 1901. CityPop is the population
 of the city in 1901. Note that wage data for skilled engineers is available for fewer cities
 than wage data for skilled builders. Included controls: air frost days and rainfall.




6      Conclusion

There has long been debate over the magnitude of the external costs of the
Industrial Revolution and the “dark satanic mills” that it brought to English
cities. By bringing together new data and a novel estimation approach, this
paper moves us closer to resolving this debate. My results show that local in-
dustrial pollution related to coal use came with large costs for local economic
growth. The findings of this study contrast sharply with previous work (e.g.,
Williamson (1981b)), which suggested that these costs were “trivial,” but are
in line with both the historical evidence on the severity of the pollution expe-
rienced by cities in the 19th century as well as our current understanding of
the substantial impacts that such pollution can bring.
  63
    I consider plausible values of the production function parameters because, given the
available data, it is not possible to directly estimate all of the necessary parameters.


                                             42
   The problems of industrialization and pollution experienced by 19th cen-
tury English cities are echoed today in the industrial cities in the developing
world. Policymakers in places such as China and India face important ques-
tions about whether to encourage industrial growth or to protect the local
environment. Often, the economic benefits of industrial growth are directly
observable, while the costs imposed by pollution are less tangible. This study
provides the first rigorous estimates of the long-run local economic impacts
that can accompany industrial pollution. While the relationship between in-
dustrialization and pollution has surely changed over the past century, the
magnitude of the effects I document provide a warning against ignoring the
economic consequences of local pollution. At the same time, this study devel-
ops tools that can potentially be applied in order to measure the consequences
of industrial pollution in other relatively data-sparse settings.




                                       43
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, & Robinson, James A. 2002. Reversal of Fortune:
  Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1231 – 1294.
Albouy, David. 2012 (May). Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life
  across Metropolitan Areas. Working paper.
Baines, Dudley. 1985. Migration in a Mature Economy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, & Walsh, Randall P. 2008. Do People Vote with Their Feet? An
  Empirical Test of Tiebout’s Mechanism. The American Economic Review, 98(3), pp.
  843–863.
Barreca, Alan, Clay, Karen, & Tarr, Joel. 2014 (February). Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bitu-
  minous Coal and American Home Heating. NBER Working Paper No. 19881.
Bartelme, Dominick. 2015 (October). Trade Costs and Economic Geography: Evidence from
  the U.S. Mimeo.
Bayer, Patrick, Keohane, Nathaniel, & Timmins, Christopher. 2009. Migration and He-
  donic Valuation: The Case of Air Quality. Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 58(1), 1 – 14.
Beach, B., & Hanlon, W.W. 2016 (June). Coal Smoke and Mortality in an Early industrial
  Economy. Mimeo.
Bharadwaj, P, Gibson, M, Graff Ziven, J, & Neilson, C. Forthcoming. Gray Matters: Fe-
  tal Pollution Exposure and Human Capital Formation. Journal of the Association of
  Environnmental and Resource Economists.
Bowley, A.L. 1937. Wages and Income in the United Kingdom Since 1860. London: Cam-
  bridge University Press.
Brimblecombe, Peter. 1987. The Big Smoke: A History of Air Pollution in London Since
  Medieval Times. Methuen.
Chang, T., Graff Ziven, J., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. 2014 (February). Particulate Pollution
  and the Productivity of Pear Packers. NBER Working Paper No. 19944.
Chang, T., Graff Ziven, J., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. 2016 (June). The Effect of Pollution
  on Worker Productivity: Evidence from Call-Center Workers in China. NBER Working
  Paper No. 22328.
Chay, Kenneth Y., & Greenstone, Michael. 2005. Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from
  the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy, 113(2), pp. 376–424.
Clark, Gregory, & Jacks, David. 2007. Coal and the Industrial Revolution, 1700-1869.
  European Review of Economic History, 11(1), 39 – 72.
Clay, K, Lewis, J., & Severnini, E. 2015 (October). Pollution, Infectious Disease, and
  Mortality: Evidence from the 1918 Spanish Influenza Pandemic. NBER Working Paper
  No. 21635.
Clay, Karen, Lewis, Joshua, & Severnini, Edson. 2016 (April). Canary in a Coal Mine:
  Impact of Mid-20th Century Air Pollution Induced by Coal-Fired Power Generation on
  Infant Mortality and Property Values. NBER Working Paper No. 22115.
Conley, Timothy G. 1999. GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of
  Econometrics, 92(1), 1 – 45.
Crafts, Nicholas, & Wolf, Nikolaus. 2014. The Location of the UK Cotton Textiles Industry
  in 1838: a Quantitative Analysis. Journal of Economic History, 74(4), 1103–1139.
Currie, J. 2013. Pollution and Infant Health. Child Development Perspectives, 7(4), 237–242.


                                            44
Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’
   Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review, 106(3).
Ebenstein, A., Lavy, V., & Roth, S. 2016. The Long-Run Economic Consequences of High-
   Stakes Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution. American Eco-
   nomic Jounal: Applied Economics, 8(4).
Ellison, G., Glaeser, E., & Kerr, W. 2010. What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
   from Coagglomeration Patterns. American Economic Review, 100(3), pp. 1195–1213.
Engels, Friedrich. 1845. The Condition of the Working Class in England. Penguin Books.
Fernihough, Alan, & O’Rourke, Kevin. 2014 (January). Coal and the European Industrial
   Revolution. NBER Working Paper No. 19802.
Fouquet, R. 2012. The Demand for Environmental Quality in Driving Transitions to Low-
   Polluting Energy Sources. Energy Policy, 50, 138–149.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, & Neidell, Matthew. 2012. The Impact of Pollution on Worker Pro-
   ductivity. American Economic Review, 102(7), 3652–73.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, & Neidell, Matthew. 2013. Environment, Health, and Human Capital.
   Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 689–730.
Hanlon, W.W., & Miscio, A. 2014 (December). Agglomeration: A Dynamic Approach.
   NBER Working Paper No. 20728.
Hanna, Rema, & Oliva, Paulina. 2015. The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence
   from a Natural Experiment in Mexico City. Journal of Public Economics, 122, 68–79.
Heblich, Stephan, Trew, Andrew, & Zylberberg, Yanos. 2016 (June). East Side Story:
   Historical Pollution and Neighborhood Segregation. Mimeo.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic
   production in the Caribbean and Central America. Proceedings of the National Academy
   of Sciences, 107(35), 15367–15372.
Isen, Adam, Rossin-Slater, Maya, & Walker, W Reed. Forthcoming. Every Breath You Take
   – Every Dollar You Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970.
   Journal of Political Economy.
Kahn, Matthew E. 1999. The Silver Lining of Rust Belt Manufacturing Decline. Journal of
   Urban Economics, 46(3), 360 – 376.
Kettlewell, H Bernard D. 1955. Selection Experiments on Industrial Melanism in the Lepi-
   doptera. Heredity, 9, 323–342.
Kline, Patrick, & Moretti, Enrico. 2013. Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
   Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.
   Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Kovak, Brian K. 2013. Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What is the Correct Measure of
   Liberalization? American Economic Review, 103(5), 1960–1976.
Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. New York, NY: W.W. Norton
   & Company.
Lee, Jamie. 2015 (January). Measuring Agglomeration: Products, People and Ideas in U.S.
   Manufacturing, 1880-1990. Mimeo.
Long, Jason, & Ferrie, Joseph. 2003. Labour Mobility. In: Mokyr, Joel (ed), Oxford
   Encyclopedia of Economic History. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mitchell, B.R. 1984. Economic Development of the British Coal Industry 1800-1914. Cam-
   bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, Brian R. 1988. British Historical Statistics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
   Press.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. Workers’ Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from


                                            45
   Plant-level Production Functions. American Economic Review, 94(3), 656–690.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. Local Labor Markets. Pages 1237–1313 of: Handbook of Labor
   Economics, vol. 4. Elsevier.
Mosley, Stephen. 2001. The Chimney of the World. Cambridge, UK: The White Horse
   Press.
Newey, Whitney K., & West, Kenneth D. 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Het-
   eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica, 55(3),
   pp. 703–708.
Pollard, Sidney. 1981. Sheffield and Sweet Auburn–Amenities and Living Standards in the
   British Industrial Revolution: A Comment. The Journal of Economic History, 41(4),
   pp. 902–904.
Rückerl, R, Schneider, A, Breitner, S, Cyrys, J, & Peters, A. 2011. Health Effects of
   Particulate Air Pollution: A Review of Epidemiological Evidence. Inhalation Toxicology,
   23(10), 555–592.
Thomas, Mark. 1987. An Input-Output Approach to the British Economy, 1890-1914. Ph.D.
   thesis, Oxford University.
Thorsheim, Peter. 2006. Inventing Pollution. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.
Troesken, W, & Clay, K. 2011. Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World’s First Environmen-
   tal Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog. In: Libecap,
   G., & Steckel, R. H. (eds), The Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and
   Present. University of Chicago Press.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1981a. Some Myths Die Hard–Urban Disamenities One More Time:
   A Reply. The Journal of Economic History, 41(4), pp. 905–907.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1981b. Urban Disamenities, Dark Satanic Mills, and the British
   Standard of Living Debate. The Journal of Economic History, 41(1), pp. 75–83.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1982. Was the Industrial Revolution Worth It? Disamenities and
   Death in 19th Century British Towns. Explorations in Economic History, 19(3), 221 –
   245.




                                           46
A     Appendix
A.1     Empirical setting appendix
Figure 3 presents a map of the cities included in the analysis. We can see that
the cities are drawn from across the country, though there is a concentration
of cities in the Northwest region, the industrial heartland of England.

                Figure 3: English cities included in the study




    The next set of figures illustrate the increase in coal use across the study
period. Figure 4 shows the steady rise in British coal consumption across the
study period using data from Mitchell (1988). Figure 5 breaks this down by
the different categories of users. This figure shows that the uses captured in my
industrial coal use measure, which includes manufacturing, iron & steel, and
mining, cover the majority of total coal consumption. In contrast, residential
use accounts for just 17-25% of coal consumption during the period I study,
a fraction that was declining over time. Figure 6 describes the price of coal
at the major exporting ports. There are a couple of important points to take
away from this figure. First, except for a few short spikes, the price of coal

                                       47
was largely stable across the study period. Second, prices were quite similar
in different parts of the country, reflecting the low cost of transportation in
England during this period.


               Figure 4: British coal consumption, 1854-1910




                         Data from Mitchell (1988).




            Figure 5: British coal consumption by use, 1830-1913




                         Data from Mitchell (1988).


                                      48
             Figure 6: Coal prices at the major exporting ports




                          Data from Mitchell (1984).



A.2     Data appendix
This appendix provides additional details on the new data sets used in this
study, beginning with the data gathered from the 1907 Census of Production.
I do not review the construction of the Census of Population data, which
is described in detail at http://www.econ.ucla.edu/whanlon under Data
Resources.


A.2.1    Census of Production data

The 1907 Census of Production, Britain’s first industrial census, provides the
earliest comprehensive look at the characteristics of British industries. For
the purposes of this paper, the most important piece of information provided
by the Census of Production is the amount of coal and coke burned in each
industry. Figure 7 shows an example of what these data look like for the iron
and steel industries.
   To construct coal use per worker in each industry, I begin by adding to-
gether coal and coke used in each industry. Next, I inflate that value to reflect
the fact that only a fraction of firms in the industry furnished particulars to

                                       49
the census office. I then match the industries listed in the Census of Produc-
tion to the broader industry categories available in the Census of Population
data and sum across each of the Census of Population categories. Finally, I
divide by the number of workers in the industry, which is also reported in the
Census of Production.

      Figure 7: An example of the Census of Production fuel use data




    It is necessary to make an additional modification for one industry, “Chem-
icals, coal tar products, drugs and perfumery”, which was one component of
the broader “Chemical and allied trades” category. The adjustment is neces-
sary due to the fact that a large amount of coal was used by that industry to
produce coal-based products such as coal tar. Since this coal wasn’t burned,
I don’t want to count it toward industry coal use. Unfortunately, the Census
does not separately report the amount of coal used for products such as coal
tar and the amount burned for energy. To separate these amounts, I use the
horsepower of engines in the industry, which is reported in the Census. I then
calculate the amount of coal used per horsepower in all of the other branches
of the “Chemicals and allied products” sector and then multiply the number of
horsepower used in the “Chemicals, coal tar products, drugs and perfumery”
by this value to obtain an estimate of the amount of coal burned in that sub-

                                      50
sector. The result of this adjustment is a reduction of about one-third in the
amount of coal use per worker in the Chemical & Drug sector.


A.2.2    Board of Trade data

This study also takes advantage of data from a 1908 report from the Labour
Department of the British Board of Trade, which reports data primarily gath-
ered in 1905. The goal of this report was to document the conditions of the
working class in the various major towns of Britain, including the rents and
prices they faced for common goods such as bread, meat and butter, and the
wages they earned.
    The first piece of data provided by these reports are rental rates. The
rental data were “obtained from officials of the local authorities, from the sur-
veyors of taxes, or from the house owners and agents in the various towns...A
considerable number of houses in each town were visited, partly for purposes of
verification and supplementary inquiry, and partly that some account might
be given of the character of the houses and accommodation afforded.” All
rents were then converted to an index, with London as the base, by comparing
the rent of the most predominant dwelling type in a town to the rental rate
for that dwelling type in London. It is worth noting that these index numbers
reflect the cost of housing relative to a similar accommodation in London,
not the amount spent by a worker on housing relative to a similar worker in
London.
   Price data for the towns were obtained by surveying “representative trades-
men in possession of a working-class custom,” as well as co-operative societies
and larger multi-branch retail firms. The prices were quoted for October 1905.
The center of the price ranges for each item in a town is then used. To weight
the items, the Board of Trade used information from an inquiry into the ex-
penditures of working-class families in 1904. These data were obtained from
1,944 surveys filled out by workmen throughout the country. Together, these
data allow the construction of index numbers describing the price level of
goods commonly purchased by workers in each city. The Board of Trade also
constructed a combined index of prices and rents in which prices were given a
weight of 4 and rents a weight of 1.
   Wage data are also available from these reports. These data come from four
trades which were present in many towns: construction, engineering, printing
and furnishing. Of these, I focus on the construction and engineering trades,
where data are available for more towns than the printing and furnishing
trades. For the construction and engineering trades, separate wage data were

                                       51
collected for skilled workers and unskilled laborers. The wage data are weekly
wage rates and may be affected by variation in the standard number of hours
worked across locations.


A.2.3   Constructing additional control variables

One threat to identification in this study is the possibility that there may be
other industry features that vary across industries in a way that is correlated
with industry coal use and affects overall city size. One way to help guard
against this concern is to construct additional control variables based on other
potentially important characteristics that vary across industries. For the pur-
poses of this study it is possible to construct additional controls for several
potentially important factors:
    Salaried workers: Work by Moretti (2004) and Diamond (2016) suggests
that the presence of high-skilled workers may impact overall city growth. To
control for this potential effect, I use data from the 1907 Census of Production
which divides workers into wage earners and salaried workers. This gives me
the share of salaried employment by industry, which I interact with overall
industry employment information in order to obtain estimates of the share of
salaried workers in the city.
    Firm size: The 1851 Census includes information gathered from busi-
ness owners on the number of workers that they employ. This information
is available by industry. Using this, I construct a variable reflecting the firm
size experienced by the average worker in each industry in that year. I can
then interact this with city-industry employment in order to get a population-
weighted average firm size in each city.
    Labor cost share: Labor cost shares were constructed using information
from the 1907 Census of Production and from Bowley (1937). For each in-
dustry, the Census of Production provides the gross and net output value as
well as employment by gender. To calculate total labor cost share in each
industry I use wage data from Bowley (1937), which reports the average wage
for different industry groups in 1906, separated into male and female wages.
Multiplying these by the number of male and female workers in each industry
from the 1907 Census of Production gives total labor cost in each industry.
    Export shares: The share of industry output sold to export is estimated
using information from the 1907 Input-Output table constructed by Thomas
(1987). This table includes both total industry sales as well as industry export
sales, which together give me the share of industry sales that are exported.

                                      52
    Industry female and youth labor shares: The share of female workers
in each industry and workers under 20 in each industry are based on Census
of Population data for 1851, which reports industry occupation by gender and
divided into those over and under 20.
   Rainfall and Air-frost data: The data on rainfall and air frost days
comes from modern data collected by the Met weather service for a thirty-
year period. An air frost day is defined as a day in which the air temperature
drops below the freezing point of water at a height of one meter above ground.
    City patenting data: The data on patenting at the city level are from
1852-1858. These data come from a compilation done by the Patent Office and
included among the patent abstract records at the British Library’s Business
and Intellectual Property Section. I am not aware of a source that lists patent
counts by location after 1858.
    Proximity to Carboniferous geological strata: The data on the loca-
tion of the carboniferous geological strata comes from the British Geological
Survey. The proximity of each city to the carboniferous strata was constructed
using GIS. In the analysis presented in this appendix, I use the share of bedrock
within 50km of the city that is made up of carboniferous strata. I have also
explored alternative windows, such as 10km and 100km.
   Input-output connections: The input-output data used in this study
were constructed by Thomas (1987) using data from the 1907 Census of Man-
ufactures.
    Industry demographic similarity: The demographic similarity of the
workforces of any pair of industries is based on data from the Census of Popula-
tion from 1851. These data divide industry employment into male and female
workers and those over or under 20. The demographic similarity measure for
a pair of industries is simply the correlation between the two industries in the
share of the workforce that is in each of these four bins.
    Industry occupational similarity: The occupational similarity of any
pair of industries is based on the correlation in the vector of employment shares
for each occupation. Industry occupation data is built on U.S. Census data
for 1880 (the British census does not simultaneously measure occupation and
industry until later).




                                       53
A.2.4    City coal use intensity data



Table 6: Industrial coal use per private-sector worker for analysis cities
(tons/year)




Author’s calculations based on city-industry employment data from the Census of Popula-
tion and industry coal use per worker data from the Census of Manufactures, as described
in Section 3.


                                          54
A.2.5    Industry coal use intensity data



  Table 7: Industry coal use per worker and industry employment in 1851

     Industry                                  Coal/          Workers in 1851
                                                worker     National Analysis cities
     Earthenware, bricks, etc.                  48.9         83,353          19,580
     Metal and engine manufacturing*            43.7        431,411         167,052
     Chemical and drug manufacturing            40.1         35,655          11,501
     Mining                                     28.9        328,062          18,413
     Oil, soap, etc. production                 20.7         17,063          12,188
     Brewing and beverage production            19.4         27,527           8,179
     Leather, hair goods production             12.1         57,097          26,737
     Food processing                            12.0        302,259         113,610
     Textile production                         10.1        968,412         315,646
     Paper and publishing                        9.7         66,622          42,578
     Shipbuilding                                6.1         26,840          14,498
     Wood furniture, etc., production            5.4        136,794          69,648
     Vehicle production                          2.6         15,574           9,021
     Instruments, jewelry, etc.                  2.0         43,818          31,048
     Apparel                                     1.6        873,835         328,669
     Tobacco products                            1.1          3,915           3,298
         *Metal and engine manufacturing includes iron and steel smelting. Coal
         per worker is in tons per year. These values come from the 1907 Census
         of Production. The number of workers in each industry in 1851 come
         from the Census of Population Occupation reports.




A.2.6    The change in relative industry coal intensity over time

The assess the stability of relative coal use intensity across industries, I com-
pared data from the 1907 Census of Production to the 1924 Census. Figure
8 provides a scatterplot of industry coal use per worker for each industry in
1907 and 1924 as well as corresponding regression results. Each point in the
figure corresponds to one industry. This figure shows that there was very little
change in the relative coal intensity of industries from 1907 to 1924. This is
reflected in the coefficient on coal use per worker in 1907, which is very close
to, and statistically indistinguishable from, one. Also, all of the points are
below the 45 degree line, which appears in the regression results as a negative
constant term. This suggests that there were changes in coal use per worker
that were similar, in percentage terms, across all industries during this period.

                                          55
          Figure 8: Comparing industry coal use in 1907 and 1924




                                      DV: Coal per worker in 1924
             Coal per worker in 1907               1.021***
                                                   (0.0612)
             Constant                             -0.623***
                                                    (0.151)
             Observations                             17
             R-squared                               0.949
                           Standard errors in parentheses
                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



    The stability in relative industry coal use intensity described by Figure 8
is a particularly strong result because we would expect industry coal use to
change more slowly in the 1851-1907 period than in the 1907-1924 period due
to the adoption of electrical power by some manufacturing industries during
the latter period. The shift to electricity had the potential to substantially
affect industry coal use, whereas in the 1851-1911 period coal was the dominant
energy source for industries and there were few alternatives.

A.2.7   Comparing to 1871 county-level coal use

As an additional check of the coal use measure I have constructed, I compare
county-level industrial coal use calculated using my methodology to estimates
for 1871 based on data from the 1871 Coal Commission Report. That report,
which was prompted by fears of a coal shortage in the early 1870s, included
a survey of industrial coal use in a selection of English counties. Within each
county, circulars were sent to firms asking them about their coal use. Using

                                       56
the resulting reports, and adjusting for the number of circulars returned in
each county, I am able to calculated industrial coal use levels in the counties
surveyed, though these figures will be imperfect because only major indus-
trial establishments were surveyed. I then compare these estimates to results
obtained by applying my methodology to county-level industrial employment
data from the 1871 Census of Population combined with industry coal use
intensity measures from the 1907 Census of Production.
    Figure 9 describes the results for the set of available counties. In this
graph, the y-axis describes county-level coal use constructed from the 1871
Coal Commission report while the x-axis gives the county coal use estimated
using the methodology introduced in this paper. In general, the points lie close
to the 45 degree line, suggesting that my methodology does a reasonable job
of matching the estimates obtained using the data from the Coal Commission
report.


           Figure 9: Comparing county industrial coal use in 1871




   The methodology used in this paper does particularly well for the larger
and more industrial counties. The greatest differences occur in the more rural
counties with low levels of coal use, where my methodology overestimates in-
dustrial coal use relative the the figures from the 1871 Coal Commission report.

                                      57
However, these are also the counties where the figures from the Coal Commis-
sion report are most likely to understate county coal use because smaller in-
dustrial establishments, which were omitted from the Coal Commission report,
are likely to form a more important coal user in less industrialized counties.
Overall, these results provide additional evidence that the methodology used
to calculate industrial coal use in this paper delivers reasonable results.



A.3         Theory appendix
A.3.1        Further theory results and aggregating to the city level

To gain further intuition, and to move closer to the Bartik-instrument approach
used in previous studies in this literature, it is useful to substitute out the ait
and pit terms in Eq. 6. To do so, I begin with Eq. 3, sum across all cities, and
then take time differences, to obtain,

                                                      !      1                   !      −βi
                       Lit              ait pit           1−αi −βi
                                                                          φt          1−αi −βi
                            =                                                                    Ωit ,                    (11)
                      Lit−1          ait−1 pit−1                         φt−1
where Ωit reflects how changes in city wage levels interact with the national dis-
tribution of industries across locations (determined by local industry-specific
resources) to affect national industry growth rates, which I will refer to as the
adjustment factor.64 Then, substituting Eq. 11 into Eq. 6, I obtain:

                                                                           !
                           −(1 − γ)(1 − βi )λ
∆ ln(Lict ) = ∆ ln(Lit ) +                     ∆ ln(Lct )                  (12)
                               1 − αi − βi
                               !                           !
               −ψ(1 − βi ) − ν                     1
            +                    ∆ ln(Cct ) −                (1 − βi )γ∆ ln(Pt )
                  1 − αi − βi                 1 − α i − βi
                                                                                                       
                 + (1 −      βi )∆ ln(vt∗ )     −   ∆ ln(Pict )      + (1 −          βi )∆ ln(A
                                                                                                ct )       − ln(Ωit ) .

                                      βi −1       −ν                  1
                                                                                                 βi −1        −ν              1
                                                                                                                                              −1
                                     1−αi −βi    1−αi −βi       P   1−αi −βi                     1−α −βi      1−α −βi    P   1−α −βi
  64
                              P                                                         P
       Specifically, Ωit =        c wct         Cct          ict              R̄ic         c wct−1
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                            Cct−1i      ict−1 i       R̄ic         .
This adjustment factor reflects the extent to which national industry growth rates fail to
correctly reflect the technology and demand shifts, represented by the ait pit terms, because
of changes in the wages or coal use levels occurring in different cities in which industry i is
present. Note that when summing across all cities, the adjustment factor will not vary at
the city level.


                                                           58
This expression suggests that changes in city pollution levels (∆ ln(Cct )) or
city congestion forces (∆ ln(Lct )) will cause systematic deviations between city-
industry employment growth (∆ ln(Lict )) and the national employment growth
in that industry (∆ ln(Lit )). Thus, Eq. 12 highlights the basic intuition behind
my empirical strategy.
    Typically, studies using a Bartik instrument approach aggregate national
industry-level shocks to obtain city-level effects. However, the vast majority
of the studies in this literature do not micro-found the Bartik instrument that
they use, particularly when the instrument relies on heterogeneity in industry
inputs (e.g., variation in industry-level employment of skilled vs. unskilled
workers). Next, I explore the extent to which my theoretical framework can
be aggregated in order to motivate a city-level analysis. This exercise serves to
highlight some of the issues faced in connecting existing reduced-form Bartik
instrument studies to microfoundations. It also clarifies the advantages of the
industry-level analysis used in most of this paper.
    In order to have any hope of aggregating to the city level, we have to begin
by sacrificing industry production function heterogeneity. It is still possible to
incorporate some industry-level heterogeneity in the form of industry demand
shifter, as in Bartelme (2015), but I have not found a way to incorporate
heterogeneity in input shares.
    After setting αi = α and βi = β, Eq. 12 can be summed to the city level
to obtain:

                                                                                
                   −ψ(1 − β) − ν                  −(1 − β)γ                 −(1 − β)
∆ ln(Lct )   =                     ∆ ln(Cct ) +               ∆ ln(Pt ) +              ∆ ln(vt∗ )(13)
                        σ                             σ                        σ
                                                    "X                    P  1−α−β1         #
                   −(1 − β)         A        1−α−β             Lict−1 Lit       ict           1
             +                ∆ ln(ct ) +              ln                                          .
                   1−α−β                        σ           i
                                                               Lct−1 Lit−1 P  ict−1         Ωit


where σ = 1 − α − β − (1 − γ)(β − 1)λ > 0. The key thing to note in
Eq. 13 is the last term on the right-hand side, which includes each industry’s
initial share of city employment interacted with the national industry growth
rate: the building blocks of the Bartik instrument. Thus, this expression
suggests that endogenous disamenities such as coal-based pollution can cause
city-level employment growth to systematically diverge from what we would
expect based on the initial mix of industries in a city and national industry
growth rates. However, Eq. 13 also highlights that when this Bartik-style
approach is applied at the city level it is at best an approximation due to
the presence of the Ωit term, which cannot be directly mapped to the theory.

                                              59
This helps explain why previous studies in the literature, with the exception of
Bartelme (2015), have not offered a micro-founded Bartik estimation strategy.
    This exercise illustrates the advantages of the industry-level analysis used
in this paper. Running the analysis at the industry level makes it possible to
derive the estimating equation directly from the theory.


A.3.2    Discussion – linking the theory and empirical results

The coefficient estimated in the main regression results (e.g., Table 1) corre-
sponds to the exponent on the coal term in Equations 6 and 12, i.e.,

                                −ψ(1 − βi ) − ν
                                                .
                                 1 − αi − βi

This subsection examines this expression in some detail. To begin, consider
the denominator in this expression: 1 − αi − βi . This value corresponds to the
exponent on the local city-industry resources in the production function and
therefore the share of firm costs spent on these fixed local resources. Thus,
this parameter determines the importance of fixed local factors in production,
which in turn determines the ease with which production can be relocated
across locations. The more important are local resources, the more difficult
it is to relocate production across locations. As a result, the larger is the
1 − αi − βi term, the smaller will be the response of local employment to local
coal use.
    Next, consider the left-hand term in the numerator, −ψ(1 − βi ). Note that
1−βi = (1−αi −βi )+αi . Thus, holding fixed the importance of local resources
in production, the 1 − βi term is directly related to αi , which determines the
importance of labor in production. This term is telling us that the effect of coal
use on employment in a particular industry through the amenities channel will
be directly linked to the importance of workers in production in that industry.
This makes sense because the impact of changing amenities operates entirely
through workers.
    Next, consider the second term in the numerator, ν. This reflects the
impact of coal use on employment through the productivity channel. Unlike
the amenities term, this productivity term is not multiplied by 1 − βi . This
is because of the way that I have modeled the productivity effects of coal use,
and in particular, the fact that local coal use affects total factor productivity,
rather than specifically affecting workers. This is the simplest way to model
the productivity channel and it will be realistic if coal use has effects on the

                                       60
productivity of other inputs. Alternatively, a more sophisticated model might
focus on the effect of coal use on labor-augmenting technology only.
    The coefficient estimates obtained from the empirical analysis will reflect
the combined impact of all of these forces. In particular, the coefficient es-
timates will incorporate (1) the impact of coal use on productivity, given by
the ν term, (2) the impact of coal use working through local amenities, which
depends on how much coal affects amenities, given by the ψ term, and the
importance of labor in the production function, reflected by the 1 − βi term,
and (3) the ability of the industry to respond to these forces by shifting pro-
duction across locations, which will depend on the importance of city-industry
resources in production.
    Finally, note that workers are paid their marginal product in the model, so
that if workers become less productive because of the impact of coal use, firms
will have a natural tendency to pay them less. However, in spatial equilibrium,
firms in a polluted city cannot just pay less productive workers less, or else
the workers will choose to go to a different city. Instead, the marginal product
of workers must be increased so that their wages are consistent with spatial
equilibrium. This is achieved by some workers leaving the city, so that the
ratio of workers to local resources falls, which increases the marginal product
of workers in order to bring the local wage back to spatial equilibrium.


A.3.3     Extension – adding capital to the model

In this appendix I consider a simple extension to the theory that incorporates
capital into the model. To do so, I modify the production function to be,

                                                                     i −βi −ιi
                         yf ict = aict Lαf ict
                                           i
                                               Cfβict
                                                  i
                                                      Kfιiict Rf1−α
                                                                 ict           ,

where Kf ict is the amount of capital used by the firm. Capital is mobile across
locations and the price of capital, st , can vary over time.
   Solving this model through, I obtain a modified version of Eq. 12:

                                                                                 
                 −(1 − γ)(1 − βi − ιi )λ                      −ψ(1 − βi − ιi ) − ν
 ∆ ln(Lict ) =                                 ∆ ln(Lct ) +                            ∆ ln(Cct(14)
                                                                                                 )
                    1 − α i − βi − ι i                           1 − α i − βi − ι i
                                   
                         1
             −                         βi ∆ ln(φt ) + ιi ∆ ln(st ) + (1 − βi − ιi )γ∆ ln(Pt )
                 1 − αi − βi − ιi
                                                                                                
                                      P                            ∗                        A
             − ∆ ln(ait pit ) − ∆ ln(ict ) + (1 − βi − ιi )∆ ln(vt ) + (1 − βi − ιi )∆ ln(ct ) .


                                                  61
    As this expression makes clear, adding capital to the model (at least in this
simple way) does not alter the basic estimating equation. The main effect is
to change somewhat the interpretation of the estimated coefficient in terms of
the model parameters. To gain some intuition here, suppose that the exponent
on the local resources term in the production function (1 − αi − βi − ιi ) does
not change as a result of the inclusion of capital into the model, so that the
denominator of the coefficient on the coal use term is unchanged. In this case,
we can see that the impact of adding capital to the model is to affect the
impact of consumer amenities on employment. In particular, the impact of
consumer amenities on employment growth, which was originally determined
by −ψ(1 − βi ) is now determined by −ψ(1 − βi − ιi ). This implies that the
impact of rising coal use on local employment in industry i will be smaller
when the labor share of expenditure in industry i is smaller. However, the
overall implications of the model are essentially unchanged.
   How will the growth in capital in a city industry respond to increasing city
coal use? To see this, I follow the same procedure used for labor to solve for
the change in capital across a period:

             "          −(1−αi −βi )           −βi           −αi γ            −αi λ(1−γ)
 Kict              st                       φt              Pt                Lct
         =
Kict−1            st−1                     φt−1            Pt−1              Lct−1
                                                                                                             1
                         −ψαi −ν             −αi                                αi             # 1−αi −βi −ιi
                                                                             A              P
                                                                      
                  Cct                  vt ∗                 pit ait           ct              ict
                 Cct−1                vt−1 ∗             pit−1 ait−1        A
                                                                             ct−1           P
                                                                                             ict−1



This expression tells us that the growth of capital in a city-industry will also
be reduced as a result of the growth in city coal use (a similar pattern will
be observed for city-industry coal use). The exponent on the coal use term
shows that this will occur both as a result of reduced firm productivity (the ν
term) and through the consumer disamenity (the ψ term), with the impact of
the consumer disamenity effect dependent on the importance of labor in the
industry’s production function.
   It is also interesting to look at how the change in capital used in a city-
industry compares to the change in labor used. To explore this, I derive:
                                       !−1               !γ                                          !ψ
                                                                              A
                                                                       !             !
         Kict /Kict−1            st                Pt          vt ∗            ct            Cct
                      =
         Lict /Lict−1           st−1              Pt−1        vt−1 ∗         A
                                                                              ct−1          Cct−1



                                                    62
    This expression suggests that firms will become more capital intensive in
cities in which coal using is growing more rapidly (similarly, they will also
become more coal-intensive). In the current model, this effect occurs only
through the consumer disamenity effect, because I have modeled the produc-
tivity effect such that it will have a symmetric effect on capital and labor.




A.4     Analysis appendix

A.4.1   Summary statistics for analysis variables


Table 8 presents summary statistics for the main analysis variables used in
the industry-level analysis when all private-sector industries are included, us-
ing two-decade differences. Table 9 presents summary statistics when only
manufacturing industries are included, also using two-decade differences. Ta-
ble 10 presents summary statistics for the city-level analysis.




Table 8: Summary statistics for variables used in the main city-industry anal-
ysis (two decade differences)

                  Variable         Mean      Std. Dev. Min.       Max.
             ∆Ln(Lict )            0.437        0.52     -5.032   3.689
             ∆Ln(P rEM Pict )      0.369       0.256     -0.151   1.251
             ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )     0.271       0.057      0.086   0.478
             ∆Ln(P redCoal)         0.372      0.176     0.136    0.852
             Ln(City Patenting)    4.312       1.509        0     8.875
             City Air-frost Days   39.633      9.941      22.7     56
             City Rainfall          0.805       0.19     0.557    1.294
                     N=                             4012



                                        63
 Table 9: Summary statistics for analysis of manufacturing industries only

                  Variable         Mean      Std. Dev. Min.       Max.
             ∆Ln(Lict )            0.393       0.523      -2.73   3.689
             ∆Ln(P rEM Pict )      0.326       0.244     -0.151   1.251
             ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )     0.251       0.078     0.035    0.512
             ∆Ln(P redCoal)         0.369      0.184     0.121    0.853
             Ln(City Patenting)    4.313       1.509        0     8.875
             City Air-frost Days   39.615       9.94      22.7     56
             City Rainfall          0.805      0.189     0.557    1.294
                     N=                             2312




        Table 10: Summary statistics for city-level analysis variables

                  Variable             Mean     Std. Dev.     Min.     Max.
         ∆ Emp., Analysis Industries   0.333      0.181       -0.112   0.921
         ∆ Emp., All Workers           0.321       0.18       -0.128   0.915
         ∆ Total Population            0.334      0.179       -0.039   0.915
         ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )              0.27      0.056        0.106    0.41
         ∆Ln(P redCoal)                0.372      0.176        0.169   0.838
                     N                                  155




    Note that there are slight differences between the city-level coal variable
summary statistics based on the city-industry data and those based on the
city data. In theory these should be the same. The sources of the differences
are due primarily to the fact that there are a small number of missing city-
industries observations due to zeros in the city-industry level database, which
means that not all cities have the same number of observations.


A.4.2   Correlation between the key right-hand side variables

Because of the way that the ∆Ln(P rCityEM P ) and ∆Ln(P redCoal) vari-
ables are constructed, it is natural that these will be correlated. Table 11
examines these correlations for different time differences. We can see that
these variables show fairly high correlations in levels. However, when we look
in changes the correlation drop substantially, particularly when focusing on
manufacturing industries only. Because these variables appear in the regres-

                                        64
sions in changes, this suggests that the results are not being driven by a strong
correlation between these variables.


      Table 11: Correlations between Ln(P rCityEM P ) and Ln(P redCoal)


                                             All industries
                               One decade    Two decade Three decade
                               differences    differences   differences
                    Levels       0.8914         0.8911        0.8928
                    Changes      0.4793         0.2843        0.2128

                                   Manufacturing industries only
                               One decade Two decade Three decade
                               differences differences   differences
                    Levels       0.9252       0.9270       0.9289
                    Changes      0.2169      -0.0854       -0.1125




A.4.3       Additional robustness tables: City-industry analysis

Table 12 explores the robustness of my main results to the inclusion of a variety
of city-level control variables, focusing on results for all industries using two-
decade differences. Column 1 adds in geographic controls for air-frost days
and rainfall, two important features of the British climate, as well as the level
of patenting in the city in the 1850s to capture the innovative potential of
the local economy.65 In Column 2, I explore the impact of adding a control
for changes in city borders. This control is omitted from most of the analysis
because city border changes were an endogenous response to city growth, but
it is still comforting to see that the results hold even when I control for these
border changes. In Column 3, I add in controls for city size and city coal
use at the beginning of each difference period. These results show that larger
cities grew more slowly on average, while those with more initial coal use
grew more rapidly, perhaps reflecting better access to coal deposits. Column
4 adds in an additional control for the share of the bedrock within 50km of
the city that is composed of carboniferous (coal bearing) geological strata.
This provides an exogenous measure of each city’s access to coal deposits. I
have also experimented with using the share within 10km or 100km and these
deliver similar results. Column 5 adds in an indicator variable for whether
 65
      Data on patenting rates by location are not available after 1858.


                                              65
a city is a major seaport. This does not substantially alter the results. I
have also calculated results in which I include variables for the tonnage of
shipping through the port in 1865 or the number of vessels and these deliver
similar results. Finally, Column 6 presents results with London excluded from
the data. In general, the signs on the city controls are as expected. For
example, the positive effect of access to coal reserves is consistent with work
by Fernihough & O’Rourke (2014). However, the inclusion of these variables
does not change the baseline results.


        Table 12: City-industry regression results with city-level controls


                  DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)            -2.455***      -2.194***     -1.794***       -1.513**       -1.526**      -1.980***
                            (0.781)         (0.746)       (0.683)        (0.691)        (0.696)        (0.740)
 ∆Ln(P redCityP op)          0.243           0.334         -0.644         -0.740         -0.791         0.449
                            (0.700)         (0.702)       (0.626)        (0.595)        (0.604)        (0.771)
 Ln(City Patenting)         0.00657        0.00514       0.0220*        0.0258**      0.0252**
                           (0.00891)      (0.00843)      (0.0118)       (0.0115)       (0.0116)
 City Air-frost Days      -0.00376**     -0.00387**    -0.00353**     -0.00302**     -0.00386**
                           (0.00153)      (0.00157)     (0.00148)      (0.00150)      (0.00185)
 City Rainfall              -0.0691         -0.0634        -0.150       -0.251**       -0.251**
                            (0.108)         (0.102)       (0.108)        (0.112)        (0.110)
 Ln(Initial city pop.)                                  -0.145***      -0.0990**      -0.0953**
                                                         (0.0301)       (0.0388)       (0.0395)
 Ln(Initial coal use)                                    0.114***        0.0626         0.0630
                                                         (0.0311)       (0.0438)       (0.0441)
 Border Chg. Flag                         0.105***
                                           (0.0288)
 Carb. access (50km)                                                     0.131*         0.127*
                                                                        (0.0673)       (0.0684)
 Seaport flag                                                                           -0.0247
                                                                                       (0.0380)
 Constant                  2.169***        1.961***      2.124***      2.085***       2.112***        1.612***
                            (0.435)         (0.422)       (0.399)        (0.384)        (0.389)        (0.314)
 Ind-time effects             Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Dropping London                                                                                         Yes
 Observations                4,012           4,012          4,012          4,012         4,012          3,882
 R-squared                   0.361           0.369          0.373          0.375          0.375         0.351
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
 a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. All regressions use
 data covering each decade from 1851-1911. City patenting uses data from 1852-1858. Air-frost days are
 days when the air temperature drops below freezing. Air-frost and rainfall data are from the Met. Initial
 city population and initial city coal use are based on the initial year for each differenced period. The border
 change flag indicates whether the city border changed in a period. Carb. access (50km) is the share of the
 bedrock within 50km of the city that is composed of carboniferous (coal bearing) geological strata. The
 seaport flag is an indicator for whether the city was a major seaport, as identified based on trade data from
 1865.




    An alternative to including the set of city-level controls is to instead include

                                                     66
a full set of city fixed effects. Results including city fixed effects are described
in Table 13.

         Table 13: City-industry regression results with city fixed effects

                                             DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment
                                     All industries                         Manufacturing only
   Difference:              Two decades       Three decades      Two decades            Three decades
                                  (1)                (2)              (3)                     (4)
   ∆Ln(P redCoal)             -1.614***          -2.311***          -1.112*               -1.911***
                               (0.586)            (0.699)           (0.614)                (0.648)
   ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )            -0.153             0.849            -0.0729                 0.714
                               (0.527)            (0.568)           (0.537)                (0.662)
   Ind-time effects               Yes               Yes               Yes                    Yes
   Observations                 4,012              3,208             2,312                  1,849
   R-squared                     0.333             0.422             0.314                  0.393
   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries
   within a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. Lagged
   predicted coal use is the predicted change in city level coal use from the two previous decades. All
   regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-1911, but because of the need to use changes
   over the previous two decades as a right-hand side variable, the outcomes variables are limited to
   the 1871-1911 period.




   An alternative approach to the main regression specification is suggested
by Eq. 12 from the theory, which expresses the change in log employment in
industry i and city c relative to the change in log employment in industry i
across all cities. I can implement this alternative estimation strategy using,


∆ ln(Lict ) = b0 +b1 ∆ ln(P rEM Pi−ct )+b2 ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct )+b3 ∆ ln(P rCoalct )+ξt +eict ,
                                                                                         (15)


where ∆ ln(P rEM Pict ), is the growth in employment that we would predict
given employment growth in industry i in all cities other than c, i.e.,

             ∆ ln(P rEM Pi−ct ) = ln (Lict−τ ∗ GRi−ct,t−τ ) − ln (Lict−τ ) .

Note that in Eq. 15, the full set of industry-time effects has been replaced by
a set of year effects so that the ∆ ln(P rEM Pi−ct ) term can be included.
    It is important to note that, unlike the specification used in the main
results, the specification shown in Eq. 15 only approximates the expression
suggested by the theory (Eq. 12). This is because the adjustment factor Ωit is
included in the error term when regressions are based on 15. In contrast, the
adjustment factor is absorbed by the industry-time effects when regressions

                                                     67
are based on Eq. 8. Thus, comparing results based on Eq. 15 to those based
on Eq. 8 reveals the bias generated when the adjustment factor is left in the
error term.
   Table 14 presents results based on this alternative specification for lag
lengths ranging from one to three decades. We can see that these results are
qualitatively similar to those presented in Table 1, but the effect of coal use is
consistently smaller than the effect estimated in the main text. This suggests
that failing to account for the adjustment factor is biasing the results in Table
14 towards zero.



          Table 14: Results using the regression specification in Eq. 15


                                                DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment
                                   All industries                           Manufacturing industries
 Difference:                One          Two         Three            One        Two              Three
                          decade      decades      decades         decade     decades           decades
                             (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)              (6)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)            -0.453     -1.491**    -2.278***         -0.169   -1.326***         -1.768***
                          (0.515)      (0.622)      (0.689)        (0.501)     (0.452)           (0.510)
 ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )         -0.749       -0.163       0.579        -0.973**      -0.380           -0.0951
                          (0.500)      (0.661)      (0.729)        (0.396)     (0.417)           (0.453)
 ∆Ln(P rEM Pict )        0.925***     1.000***     1.054***       0.889***    1.004***         1.041***
                         (0.0409)     (0.0314)     (0.0309)       (0.0585)    (0.0473)          (0.0451)
 Constant                 0.301**     1.111***    1.687***          0.248     1.077***          1.578***
                          (0.137)      (0.263)      (0.318)        (0.152)     (0.236)           (0.302)
 Time effects               Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes              Yes
 Observations              4,809         4,012       3,208          2,773        2,312            1,849
 R-squared                 0.175         0.273       0.341           0.177       0.261            0.320
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
 a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across a number of decades equal to the lag
 length. All regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-1911. The regressions for all industries
 include 26 private sector industries spanning manufacturing, services, transport, and utilities. The results
 for manufacturing industries only are based on 15 industries.




    Another factor that may influence city-industry growth rates is the initial
size of the city-industry at the beginning of a period. If this were somehow
correlated with industry coal use, then this could potentially bias the results.
To explore this issue, Table 15 presents results that include as a control the
initial size of the city-industry (in logs) at the beginning of each period. These
results show that, on average, initially smaller industries were able to achieve
more rapid growth. However, controlling for this factor does not reduce the
estimated impact of coal use on industry growth.

                                                   68
 Table 15: City-industry regression results with initial industry size controls

                                             DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment
                                       All industries                        Manufacturing only
   Difference:                Two decades      Three decades      Two decades            Three decades
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)                    (4)
   ∆Ln(P redCoal)               -2.070***         -3.213***         -2.100***              -3.376***
                                  (0.737)           (0.790)           (0.637)                (0.812)
   ∆Ln(P redCityEmp)            1.002***          2.238***             0.641                 1.667**
                                  (0.785)           (0.828)           (0.548)                (0.702)
   Ln(Lict−τ )                 -0.0402***        -0.0695***        -0.0378***             -0.0550***
                                (0.00914)          (0.0124)          (0.0110)               (0.0141)
   Constant                      1.737***          2.757***          1.940***               3.077***
                                  (0.305)           (0.370)           (0.329)                (0.481)
   Ind-time effects                 Yes               Yes               Yes                    Yes
   Observations                    4,012             3,208             2,312                  1,849
   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries
   within a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. Lagged
   predicted coal use is the predicted change in city level coal use from the two previous decades. All
   regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-1911, but because of the need to use changes
   over the previous two decades as a right-hand side variable, the outcomes variables are limited to
   the 1871-1911 period.




    Table 16 considers results that include the change in local coal use in the
two decades before each observation as an explanatory variable. These results
can help address concerns that there may be cities that have rapidly rising coal
use and slow employment growth across all periods. These results show that
there is no clear relationship between coal use in the previous two decades and
city-industry employment growth, regardless of whether the current predicted
change in city coal use is included in the regression. Moreover, including
lagged coal use has little impact on the estimated coefficient on the relationship
between the predicted change in coal use in the current two-decade period
and city-industry employment growth (though with fewer observations the
standard errors are larger).

                                                    69
 Table 16: City-industry regression results with lagged changes in coal use

               DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                                    All industries                     Manufacturing only
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)                         (4)
  ∆Ln(P redCoal)                              -2.485**                                -2.152**
                                               (1.001)                                 (0.842)
  ∆Ln(P rCityEM P )               -0.944        0.676     -1.953***                     -0.646
                                 (0.733)       (1.045)      (0.436)                    (0.607)
  Lagged ∆Ln(P redCoal)           -0.484       0.0261        0.377                       0.596
                                 (0.448)       (0.464)      (0.417)                    (0.451)
  Constant                      1.038***      0.980***       0.293                     0.437*
                                 (0.179)       (0.176)      (0.234)                    (0.239)
  Ind.-time effects                 Yes          Yes          Yes                         Yes
  Observations                     2,400        2,400        1,382                       1,382
  R-squared                        0.328        0.342        0.355                      0.360
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries
  within a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. Lagged
  predicted coal use is the predicted change in city level coal use from the two previous decades. All
  regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-1911, but because of the need to use changes
  over the previous two decades as a right-hand side variable, the outcomes variables are limited to
  the 1871-1911 period.




    Table 17 presents results obtained while including additional control vari-
ables based on several available industry characteristics: the share of salaried
to wage workers in an industry, average firm size, the share of output exported,
the ratio of labor costs to revenue, the share of industry workers that were fe-
male, and the share of industry workers that were under 20. Each of these
controls is constructed using the same approach that was used to construct
the predicted change in local industrial coal use. The data used to construct
these variables are described in Appendix A.2.3.
    Table 17 makes it clear that the main results are robust to the inclusion
of these controls. Of the available controls, only changes in the labor inten-
sity of local production appears to have any meaningful relationship to local
employment growth. Given previous results, it is somewhat surprising to see
that changes in the share of skilled workers in the city had little impact on
overall city employment growth. This suggests that worker skills may have
been somewhat less important in the historical setting I consider than they
are in modern cities.

                                                    70
Table 17: Results including controls based on other industry characteristics


                    DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                                (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)             -2.197*** -2.300***       -2.217***    -2.688***    -2.206***   -1.857***     -2.181***
                             (0.634)       (0.676)      (0.673)      (0.633)      (0.639)     (0.657)       (0.705)
 ∆Ln(P redCityEmp)             0.386        0.467        0.383        0.712        0.404       0.310       1.829**
                             (0.561)       (0.641)      (0.564)      (0.540)      (0.540)     (0.557)       (0.818)
 ∆Ln(Salariedwkr.shr.)        0.0935                                                                         -1.217
                             (1.152)                                                                        (1.549)
 ∆Ln(Avg.f irmsize)                         0.181                                                          1.511**
                                           (0.613)                                                          (0.754)
 ∆Ln(Exportsshr.)                                      -0.00380                                               1.651
                                                        (1.089)                                             (1.283)
 ∆Ln(Laborcostshr.)                                                  10.74**                               30.41***
                                                                     (5.284)                                (7.155)
 ∆Ln(F emaleemp.shr.)                                                              0.123                     1.144
                                                                                  (0.586)                   (0.796)
 ∆Ln(Y outhemp.shr.)                                                                           -2.683     -20.44***
                                                                                              (2.551)       (4.341)
 Constant                   1.891***      1.947***     1.906***     2.146***     1.903***    1.670***      1.587***
                             (0.351)       (0.351)      (0.357)      (0.335)      (0.334)     (0.364)       (0.366)
 Ind. time effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 Observations                  2,312        2,312        2,312        2,312        2,312       2,312          2,312
 R-squared                     0.336        0.336        0.336        0.338        0.336       0.337         0.349
   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
   a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. These results are
   for manufacturing industries only, since the controls are only available for these industries. All regressions
   use data covering each decade from 1851-1911 with differences taken over two decade periods. Details of the
   construction of these control variables are available in Appendix A.2.3.




    Another potential concern in the analysis is that changes in city coal use
may be correlated with changes in local agglomeration forces. To address
this issue, for each industry i in city c, I include controls for the change in
employment in industries in that city, weighted by the amount that other
industries buy from industry i, the amount that other industries supply to
industry i, the demographic similarity of the other industry’s workforces to the
workforce of industry i, and the occupational similarity of the other industry’s
workforces to the workforce of industry i. These controls are labeled IOout,
IOin, DEM, and OCC, respectively. The data used to construct these controls
are described in detail in Appendix A.2.3.
    Results obtained while including these controls are shown in Table 18.
These results are for a set of 23 industries for which the connections matrices
are available, with differences taken over two decades (similar results but with
stronger coal use effects are obtained when taking three-decade differences).
These results show that the basic relationship between rising local coal use

                                                    71
and city-industry growth continues to be negative and statistically significant
when these controls are included.
    It may seems surprising that industries do not appear to benefit from em-
ployment growth among their buyer and supplier industries. This is likely due
to the fact that growth in local buyers or suppliers comes with two offsetting
forces. While it means more local customers or suppliers, it also means greater
congestion in the city. This may explain why previous studies, such as Lee
(2015), do not find strong evidence of static agglomeration forces during this
period. It is important to recognize that these static agglomeration forces dif-
fer from the dynamic agglomeration forces studied by Hanlon & Miscio (2014).
I have also calculated additional results in which I include controls for the dy-
namic agglomeration forces documented in that study. The main results are
also robust to the inclusion of these controls.

Table 18: City-industry regression results with industry connections controls


                  DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)                      (5)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)           -2.135***    -2.149*** -2.149***        -2.179***               -2.093***
                            (0.743)      (0.725)     (0.718)        (0.719)                 (0.748)
 ∆Ln(P redCityEmp)           0.723        0.726       0.716          0.691                    0.762
                            (0.747)      (0.753)     (0.748)        (0.756)                 (0.757)
 ∆Ln(IOin)                   -0.184                                                          -0.196
                            (0.273)                                                         (0.282)
 ∆Ln(IOout)                               -0.113                                            -0.0985
                                         (0.331)                                            (0.343)
 ∆Ln(DEM )                                          -0.0194**                             -0.0193**
                                                    (0.00801)                             (0.00806)
 ∆Ln(OCC)                                                           0.00987                 0.0106
                                                                   (0.0658)                (0.0662)
 Constant                  1.794***     1.754***    1.735***       1.754***                1.788***
                            (0.297)      (0.311)     (0.308)        (0.310)                 (0.298)
 Ind-time effects             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes                      Yes
 Observations                3,549        3,549       3,549          3,549                   3,549
 R-squared                   0.260         0.260      0.260          0.262                   0.262
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
 a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. All regressions
 use data covering each decade from 1851-1911. ∆Ln(IOin) indicates the change in city employment in
 supplier industries, weighted by the share of industry i0 ’s inputs from that industry. ∆Ln(IOout) indicates
 the change in city employment in buyer industries, weighted by the share of industry i’s output that go to
 each industry. ∆Ln(DEM ) indicates the change in employment in other city industries weighted by the
 correlation between the demographics (age and gender) of the workforce of that industry and the workforce
 of industry i. ∆Ln(OCC) indicated the change in employment in other city industries weighted by the
 correlation between the occupations employed in that industry and the occupations employed in industry i.




   A related possibility is that the impact of coal use may be related to the
concentration of industries in a locality, which could also impact city-industry

                                                   72
growth. To explore this possibility, Table 19 describes results which include
the Herfindahl Index calculated over the employment shares of all city indus-
tries or just over manufacturing industries in the city at the beginning of each
difference period. The inclusion of the Herfindahl Index alone does not sub-
stantially affect the results for all industries. For manufacturing industries,
including the Herfindahl Index alone doesn’t substantially affect the results,
though the statistical significance of the results falls just below the 90% level
when all other controls are included. When looking across all industries, in-
creased concentration is associated with slower growth, while there is a weak
positive association between manufacturing industry concentration and em-
ployment growth in manufacturing industries.

Table 19: City-industry regression results with city Herfindahl index controls

               DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                                    All industries                          Manufacturing only
                                (1)                (2)              (3)                     (4)
  ∆Ln(P redCityP op)           0.110             -0.866           0.421                  -1.080*
                              (0.728)           (0.606)          (0.567)                 (0.639)
  ∆Ln(P redCoal)            -2.161***          -1.529**         -2.172***                 -1.019
                              (0.735)           (0.696)          (0.652)                 (0.653)
  City Herfindahl            -0.414**            -0.169           0.0578                   0.225
                              (0.205)           (0.207)          (0.121)                 (0.139)
  Ind.-time effects             Yes               Yes              Yes                      Yes
  Other controls                                  Yes                                       Yes
  Observations                 4,012       4,012 R-squared        0.358                    0.375
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries
  within a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. In
  Columns 1-2 the Herfindahl Index is calculated across all sectors in the economy. In Column 3-4 it is
  calculated across manufacturing industries only. The additional controls included are the number of
  air frost days in each city, rainfall in each city, patents in the city from 1852-1858, log city population
  at the beginning of each period, the log of city coal use at the beginning of each period, carboniferous
  rock deposits within 50km and a seaport indicator.




    We may also be worried that the workers who choose employment in heavily
coal-using industries are different in important ways than workers in other
industries. For example, we may worry that they accept exposure to higher
levels of pollution because they place a lower value on life, which may also make
them more prone to violence or crime. That, in turn, could affect growth
in other local industries. To help control for this potential issue, I exploit
mortality data giving the rate of deaths due to violence. This violence measure
will reflect both violent crime and accidents (including industrial accidents).
Because it includes industrial accidents, and because these accidents were more
common in mechanized industries, violence is related to the level of local coal
use. It has also been suggested that coal smoke may have increased violence

                                                     73
and crime because it reduced visibility. If the violence controls capture some
of this effect then that will generate a downward bias in the estimated impact
of pollution on cities.
    Table 20 looks at the impact of including these violence controls in re-
gressions taken over two-decade differences. Columns 1-3 look at all indus-
tries while Columns 4-6 focus on manufacturing industries only. Because
the violence data are only available through 1900, the study period here is
shorter than that used in the main regression results. Thus, for comparability,
Columns 1 and 4 include results estimated without including controls for vio-
lence. In Columns 2 and 5 I include controls for the level of violence in the first
decade of each period. More violent locations tend to experience slower growth
in city-industry employment. In Columns 3 and 6, I instead control for the
change in deaths due to violence across each period. Here I observe a positive
relationship between the change in violence and city-industry growth. This
likely reflects the fact that the violence measure includes industrial accidents,
which will be increasing in growing cities.




         Table 20: City-industry regression results with violence controls


               DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                              All industries                    Manufacturing industries
                        (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)               (6)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal)      -2.114**   -2.076**     -2.140** -3.558***  -3.624***         -3.626***
                      (0.962)    (0.964)      (0.989)  (0.795)    (0.805)           (0.846)

 ∆Ln(P redCityEmp)         0.548       0.626       0.589      1.842**     2.110***            1.920**
                          (0.974)     (1.030)     (1.016)     (0.731)      (0.772)            (0.763)

 Initial violence rate                -0.0630                              -0.122*
                                     (0.0646)                             (0.0637)
 ∆ Violence rate                                     0.108                                    0.0733
                                                    (0.167)                                   (0.195)
 Constant                 1.670***    1.673***     1.675***   2.469***     2.549***          2.496***
                           (0.398)     (0.404)      (0.403)    (0.408)      (0.423)           (0.427)
 Ind-time effects            Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes               Yes
 Observations               2,411       2,411        2,411      1,388        1,388             1,388
 R-squared                  0.392       0.393        0.393      0.345        0.348             0.346
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
 a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. All regressions
 use data covering each decade from 1851-1900, a period in which by-cause mortality data are consistently
 available. The initial violence rate variable is the age-standardized mortality rate due to violence in the
 districts corresponding to each city in the decade starting at year t − 20. The ∆ violence rate variable is
 the change in the age-standardized mortality rate due to violence in the districts corresponding to the city
 between the decade starting at year t − 20 and the decade starting at year t.




                                                   74
A.4.4    Heterogeneous effects of coal use

The results presented in the main text hide substantial underlying heterogene-
ity. To dig into some of the sources of these heterogeneous effects, I look at
how the impact of coal use varies depending on the importance of labor in
production. For manufacturing industries, I am able to calculate the ratio
of labor costs to output value. This allows me to look at whether coal use
has a stronger impact on industries where labor input costs are larger. Table
21 presents results obtained when I include the interaction between the labor
cost share and the city size and city coal use variables. In Columns 1-2, I
include the interaction between the coal use and city size variables with each
industry’s labor cost share. Instead of including industry-time effects, these
regressions include a control for the change in industry employment in all other
cities. This allows me to include the industry labor cost share as a separate
control. Consistent with the theoretical predictions, these results suggest that
the impact of local industrial coal use was stronger for more labor-intensive
industries. Columns 3-4 present a similar set of results, but with industry-time
fixed effects. Columns 5-6 include additional interactions with industry coal
use intensity, in order to show that these effects are not driven by variation
in industry coal use that is correlated with industry labor cost shares. There
is also some evidence that more coal-intensive industries were relatively less
affected by either rising local coal use or increasing city size.


A.4.5    The effect of coal use by major polluting industries

While the main analysis focuses on coal use as a city level variable, it is also
possible to look at the impact of coal use associated with particular industries.
This is useful because it can help us assess whether the results I observe are
being driven by one particular coal-using industry, which would be a cause for
concern. To implement this check, I calculate city level coal use coming from
each of the four most intensive coal using industries – Earthenware & Bricks,
Metal & Machinery, Mining, and Chemicals – as well as Textiles, which is a
major coal user due to the very large size of that industry.
   The results, in Table 22, show that the impact of coal use is fairly similar
across most of the major coal-using industries. The fact that the estimated
impact of coal use is similar across industries provides some evidence that these
impacts are not picking up the influence of other pollutants. This is because
we would expect the release of other pollutants that are correlated with coal
use to vary substantially across industries.

                                       75
      Table 21: Heterogeneous effects in more labor intensive industries


              DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two                decade differences)
                                (1)         (2)     (3)                   (4)       (5)               (6)
∆Ln(Li−ct )                  0.984***  0.975***
                             (0.0471)   (0.0485)
∆Ln(P redCoal)               -1.135**     -0.633  -0.812                 0.0638       -0.776          0.0686
                              (0.468)    (0.445) (1.045)                (1.076)      (1.117)         (1.139)
∆Ln(P redCoal)*Labor Shr.    -1.171**  -1.177**   -7.023                -7.331*       -7.182         -7.585*
                              (0.525)    (0.528) (4.400)                (4.403)      (4.446)         (4.446)
∆Ln(P redCoal)*Coal Use                                                             -0.00313       -0.000247
                                                                                    (0.0236)        (0.0237)
∆Ln(P rCityEmp)                      -0.541     -1.724***     -0.797    -2.326**      -1.001       -2.538***
                                    (0.461)      (0.531)     (0.881)     (0.952)     (0.912)         (0.963)
∆Ln(P rCityEmp)*Labor Shr.           0.933        0.905        5.920     6.154*        5.967          6.260*
                                    (1.278)      (1.282)     (3.688)     (3.682)     (3.701)         (3.689)
∆Ln(P rCityEM P )*Coal Use                                                           0.0148           0.0144
                                                                                    (0.0210)        (0.0210)
Industry Labor Cost Shr.             0.347        0.359
                                    (0.366)      (0.368)
Time effects                          Yes          Yes
Ind-time effects                                              Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes
Additional controls                               Yes                      Yes                         Yes
Observations                        2,312        2,312       2,312        2,312       2,312           2,312
R-squared                           0.263        0.275       0.270        0.278
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. All regressions
use data covering each decade from 1851-1911 with differences taken over two decade periods. These data
cover only the set of manufacturing industries for which labor cost share data are available. The additional
controls included are the number of air frost days in each city, rainfall in each city, patents in the city from
1852-1858, log city population at the beginning of the period, and log city coal use at the beginning of the
period.




                                                    76
    The main exception appears to be Chemicals, where the impact of coal use
per ton appears to be lower than for the others. This may be due in part to
measurement error, exacerbated by the fact that Chemicals is the smallest of
the industries studied here. Also, within the Chemicals industry coal was often
used as an input into other products, such as tar, rather than being burned for
fuel. As a result, when constructing coal use intensity values for this sector, it
is necessary to make an adjustment for coal used by the industry that was not
burned. A discussion of how this adjustment was done is available in Appendix
A.2.1. However, despite this adjustment, it may be the case that the amount
of coal use associated with the chemicals industry is greater than the actual
amount burned by chemical companies. This would cause downward bias in
the estimated impact of coal use in that sector, which may explain why the
impact of coal use in this industry appears to be lower than the impact in all
of the other industries studied in Table 22.

                     Table 22: Impact of coal use by using industry


                  DV: ∆ Log of city-industry employment (two decade differences)
                                                    (1)                               (2)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal) – Mining                       -2.296***                          -2.091***
                                                 (0.356)                           (0.314)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal) – Metals & Machinery             -2.258*                            -1.990
                                                 (1.281)                           (1.340)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal) – Textiles                     -2.108***                          -2.564***
                                                 (0.631)                           (0.667)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal) – Earthenware & Bricks          -2.115**                          -2.495***
                                                 (0.914)                           (0.957)
 ∆Ln(P redCoal) – Chemicals                       -0.470                            -0.424
                                                 (0.305)                           (0.322)
 ∆Ln(P redCityEmp)                             -0.768***                          -1.711***
                                                 (0.289)                           (0.327)
 Year effects                                      Yes                                Yes
 Additional controls                                                                  Yes
 Observations                                     4,012                             4,012
 R-squared                                        0.375                              0.392
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors, in parenthesis, allow correlation across industries within
 a city in a period and serial correlation within a city-industry across up to two decades. All regressions use
 data covering each decade from 1851-1911 with differences taken over two decade periods. The additional
 controls included are the number of air frost days in each city, rainfall in each city, patents in the city from
 1852-1858, log city population at the beginning of the period, and log city coal use at the beginning of the
 period.




A.4.6      Instrumental variables regressions

While the main analysis uses predicted values for the key explanatory vari-
ables, it is also possible to use these predicted values as instruments for pollu-

                                                     77
tion levels based on observed changes in city-industry employment. However,
obtaining sufficiently strong instruments requires a slightly different estimation
approach that focuses on changes in the local intensity of coal use per worker.
This is necessary because city-industry employment growth is impacted both
by congestion forces related to growing city population and by changes in city
amenities related to local pollution, but the growth in city population and
the growth in local pollution will also influence each other. Focusing on the
intensity of local coal use, using coal use per worker, helps get around this
issue because, by putting local population in the denominator, it washes out
congestion forces that impact all industries (including polluting industries)
in a similar way. Put another way, the predicted coal use values provide a
good instrument for changes in the intensity of local coal use, but have more
difficulty predicting changes in the level of coal use.
   Thus, for IV regressions I consider the following specification,

       ∆ ln(Lict ) = a0 + a1 ∆ ln(P rCityEM Pct ) + a2 ∆ ln(CoalP Wct ) + ξit + eict ,



where CoalP Wct reflects the amount of coal used per private sector worker in
the city. The first stage is,

     ∆ ln(CoalP Wct ) = b0 + b1 ln(P rCityEM Pct ) + b3 ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) + ξit + ict



where ∆ ln(P redCoalct ) is the excluded instrument.
    It is worth noting that changing the key dependent variable from the log of
coal use to the log of coal use per worker will not affect the estimated coefficient
on the coal use term in the main regression specification. The only impact
will be on the coefficient on the predicted city employment term as well as the
interpretation of the estimated coefficient on P rCityEM Pct . In particular,
when I include the log of coal use as a right hand side variable, the estimated
coefficient on P rCityEM Pct represents the impact that we would expect an
increase in employment in a completely clean industry in a city to have. In
contrast, when I use instead the log of coal use per worker as an explanatory
variable, the estimated coefficient on P rCityEM Pct represents the impact that
we would expect from an increase in overall employment, holding the intensity
of coal use in the city constant. Because increasing overall employment while
holding the intensity of coal use constant implies an increase in the overall
level of coal use in the city, we should expect the coefficient on P rCityEM Pct


                                             78
to be more negative when coal per worker is used as an explanatory variable
rather than coal use.
    Table 23 presents the IV results. I focus here on results based on man-
ufacturing industries. IV regressions that include all industries often do not
have strong enough first-stages to allow us to draw clear conclusions, reflecting
the fact, in non-manufacturing industries (which are less likely to be traded),
national industry growth rates do not do as good of a job predicting actual
city-industry employment growth.
    These results are estimated while clustering standard errors by city-industry,
to allow serial correlation, and by city-time, to allow correlated standard errors
across industries within the same city in the same year. This type of clustering
is somewhat more restrictive than the approach used in the main text, but is
easier to implement in IV regressions.
    Columns 1-2 present first-stage regression results. These show that pre-
dicted coal use is a strong predictor of actual city coal use intensity (coal
per worker), with F-statistics above ten in both specifications. Columns 3-4
present the IV results. These provide evidence of a negative relationship be-
tween local industrial coal use intensity and city-industry employment growth.
In general the estimated effects are somewhat smaller than those presented in
the main text. Note that the coefficients on the ∆Ln(P redCityEM P ) term
are substantially more negative, but it is important to recognize that the in-
terpretation of these coefficients has changed.




                                       79
Table 23: IV results for manufacturing industries and two decade differences

                            First-stage results                  IV results
                            DV: ∆ ln(CoalP Wct )        DV: ∆ Log of city-industry emp.
                              (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)
  ∆ ln(CoalP Wct )                                      -1.634**          -1.115*
                                                         (0.743)          (0.655)
  ∆Ln(P redCoal)            1.357***      1.264***
                             (0.412)       (0.390)
  ∆Ln(P redCityEM P )       -1.424***    -1.508***      -1.944***         -2.775***
                             (0.376)       (0.405)       (0.362)           (0.579)
  Ind-time effects             Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes
  Other controls                             Yes                             Yes
  F-stat on
  excluded inst.               10.88        10.48
  Observations                 2,312        2,312          2,312             2,312
      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors are clustered by city-year
      and city-industry. All regressions use data covering each decade from 1851-
      1911 with differences taken over two decade periods. The additional controls
      included are the number of air frost days in each city, rainfall in each city,
      patents in the city from 1852-1858, log city population at the beginning of each
      period, and the log of city coal use at the beginning of each period.




A.4.7    Permutation results

As an alternative approach to constructing confidence intervals, I have calcu-
lated results using the baseline specification including all analysis industries
and taking two-decade differences (Column 2 of Table 1) but with industry
coal use per worker values randomly reassigned across the 26 industries in the
database. These results were calculated for 1000 random matches of coal use
per worker values to industries. A histogram of the coefficients on the change
in local industrial coal use term obtained from these 1000 permutations is
presented in Figure 10.
    The coefficient obtained when applying the same approach to the true
data, -1.987, is also indicated on the histogram. Comparing this value to
the set of values obtained when randomly allocating the industry coal use
levels provides an alternative way of assessing the statistical significance of my
results. In particular, only 0.9 percent of the randomly generated coefficients
are more negative than the coefficient obtained using the true data, suggesting
a confidence level of 99.1%.

                                            80
                               Figure 10: Histogram




A.4.8    Specifics of the explanatory variables in the city-level anal-
         ysis

The key explanatory variables used in the city-level analysis are:
                                                            !                         !
                                  X                                     X
    ∆ ln(P rW orkpopct ) = ln          Lict−20 ∗ GRi−ct,t−20 − ln           Lict−20
                                   i                                    i


                                                        !                                 !
                          X                                      X
  ∆ ln(P rCoalct ) = ln        Lict−20 ∗ GRi−ct,t−20 ∗ θi − ln          Lict−20 ∗ θi
                           i                                        i


where GRi−ct,t−20 is the growth rate of industry i in all cities other than c over
the two-decade period.


A.4.9    Counterfactual city working populations

Table 24 describes how a ten percent reduction in the growth of coal use across
the 1851-1991 period impacts the change in private-sector employment in the
31 analysis cities. I use three alternative approaches to estimating the impact
of coal use. The first counterfactual uses a specification matching Column 2
of Table 1 but with each observation weighted by initial city-industry employ-
ment. The next counterfactual is based on estimates done at the city-industry

                                          81
level with industry-specific coal-use coefficients, also weighted by city-industry
employment in 1851. The last is based on the city-level estimates shown in
Column 1 of Table 3. The counterfactual estimates in Table 24 suggest that
slowing the growth of coal use by just 10% would have led to substantial in-
creases in employment in the analysis cities. The results suggest that these
cities could have employed between 400,000 and one million additional workers.
    A useful point to take away from these results is that the counterfactuals
estimated at the city-industry level allowing for heterogeneity in the effect of
coal use across industries and including industry-year controls (which will deal
with the adjustment factor) are similar to the results based on the city-level
estimates. This suggests that studies using a Bartik-style instrumentation
approach at the city-level and abstracting from industry heterogeneity are
likely to provide a reasonable approximation to the theoretically-consistent
estimates done at the city-industry level including a full set of industry-time
controls.

Table 24: Actual and counterfactual working population of the 31 analysis
cities




     See text for details.



A.4.10    Examining the channels

The estimated effect of coal use on real wages in each city, reported in Ta-
ble 5 in the main text, corresponds to the ψ parameter in the model. Using
these, together with assumptions about the production function parameters,
it is possible to calculate the ν parameter, which will then allow us to think
about the relative strength of the amenity and productivity channels implied

                                       82
by my estimates. In particular, abstracting from heterogeneity in the produc-
tion function parameters, the relationship between the ψ and ν parameters is
determined by,

                             −ψ(1 − β) − ν
                                           =X,                              (16)
                              1−α−β
where X is the estimated coefficient on the relationship between coal use and
city growth. From this equation, we can calculate ν given our estimates of X
and ψ for different assumptions on the production function parameters.
    In Table 25, I calculate the ν parameter for a variety of plausible values of
the production function parameters. I consider both the highest and lowest
estimates of ψ from Table 5 and estimates of the coal use effect on city-industry
employment growth of -1.2 and -1.5. We can see that in almost all cases the
ν parameter is larger than the estimated ψ, in some cases by an order of
magnitude. Moreover, note that the true effect of the amenity channel in this
model, relative to the productivity channel, depends not on ψ but on ψ(1 − β).
Thus, these results provide tentative evidence that the productivity channel
was likely to have been more important in generating the impact of coal use
on city employment than the amenity channel.




                                       83
Table 25: Calculating ν for a variety of production function parameters




                                  84
