                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHY DOES CAPITAL NO LONGER FLOW MORE TO THE INDUSTRIES WITH
                   THE BEST GROWTH OPPORTUNITIES?

                                            Dong Lee
                                            Han Shin
                                          René M. Stulz

                                       Working Paper 22924
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22924


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




Lee is from Korea University Business School, Shin is from School of Business at Yonsei
University, and Stulz is from the Fisher School of Business, Ohio State University, NBER, and
ECGI. We are grateful for comments from Heitor Almeida, Sergey Chernenko, Harry DeAngelo,
Andrei Gonçalves, Luke Taylor, Toni Whited, and participants at a seminar at Ohio State. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22924.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dong Lee, Han Shin, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Does Capital No Longer Flow More to the Industries with the Best Growth Opportunities?
Dong Lee, Han Shin, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 22924
December 2016
JEL No. E22,E44,G31,G35,L16

                                           ABSTRACT

With functionally efficient capital markets, we expect capital to flow more to the industries with
the best growth opportunities. As a result, these industries should invest more and see their assets
grow more relative to industries with the worst growth opportunities. We find that industries that
receive more funds have a higher industry Tobin’s q until the mid-1990s, but not since then.
Since industries with a higher funding rate grow more, there is a negative correlation not only
between an industry’s funding rate and industry q but also between capital expenditures and
industry q since the mid-1990s. We show that capital no longer flows more to the industries with
the best growth opportunities because, since the middle of the 1990s, firms in high q industries
increasingly repurchase shares rather than raise more funding from the capital markets.


Dong Lee                                         René M. Stulz
Korea University Business School                 The Ohio State University
523 Hyundai Motor Hall                           Fisher College of Business
Seoul, Korea 02841                               806A Fisher Hall
donglee@korea.ac.kr                              Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                 and NBER
Han Shin                                         stulz@cob.osu.edu
Yonsei University
School of Business
632 School of Business Bldg
Seoul, Korea 03722
hhanshin@gmail.com
1. Introduction

      In market economies, a critical role of capital markets is to allocate capital across industries and firms.

Tobin (1984) uses the concept of functional efficiency to describe capital markets that allocate capital to its

best use. With functionally efficient capital markets, we expect capital to flow towards the industries with

the best opportunities and away from the industries with the poorest opportunities. Bagehot, in 1873,

already observed that in England “capital runs as surely and instantly where it is most wanted, and where

there is most to be made of it, as water runs to find its level.”1 More recently, Wurgler (2000) provides

evidence that capital is allocated more efficiently across industries in countries with a more developed

financial sector. However, following the collapse of the telecoms and the dot.coms at the beginning of the

2000s and the global financial crisis more recently, many argue that financial markets are not very good at

allocating capital (e.g., Foroohar (2016)). Further, many studies in finance provide evidence of how

mispricing of a firm’s stock affects its level of investment through a financing channel, such as stock

issuance (see Baker and Wurgler (2013) for a survey of the literature).

      In this paper, we examine whether capital flows more to the industries with the best opportunities from

1971 to 2014. We call an industry’s funding rate the industry’s ratio of new capital provided by the capital

markets to assets. Assuming that a proxy for an industry’s Tobin’s q measures the industry’s growth

opportunities, we find that, until the middle of the 1990s, the industries with the highest funding rates were

industries with better growth opportunities relative to the lowest funding rate industries, as expected for

functionally efficient capital markets. After the middle of the 1990s, capital no longer flows more to the

industries with the best growth opportunities. From the middle of the 1990s until 2014, industries with the

lowest funding rates have better growth opportunities than the industries with the highest funding rates. We

show that this change is entirely due to high q firms that invest less after the middle of the 1990s and use

the resulting excess cash flow to repurchase shares. Without these firms, there is a positive correlation



1
    Bagehot’s quote is reported by Levine (1997), p. 695.



                                                            1
between an industry’s funding rate and its growth opportunities throughout the sample period rather than

only before the middle of the 1990s. We reach these conclusions using Tobin’s q as a measure of industry

growth opportunities, which is defined as the ratio of the market value of the assets of the industry divided

by their book value. As we rely on the use of medians and non-parametric tests, however, our conclusions

are less sensitive to Tobin’s q mismeasurement than typical parametric approaches. Nevertheless, we

confirm that our conclusions are robust using Tobin’s q estimates that account for intangibles and are not

an artifact of measurement error in Tobin’s q.

    To measure the rate at which capital flows to an industry, we sum the net long-term debt issuance and

net equity issuance at the industry level and divide it by the industry’s total assets. When the industry

funding rate is positive, the industry attracts capital. In a neo-classical world, new funds should flow

towards high q industries and away from low q industries. We call this the efficient capital allocation

hypothesis. As a result of these financing patterns, high q industries should grow faster than low q industries

and their q should fall as they take advantage of their growth opportunities. Industries that differ greatly in

their performance and valuations should therefore become more similar because of how capital markets

allocate funds. We call this the convergence hypothesis.

    We first examine how much variation there is in the extent to which industries use external funding.

We use the 48-industries classification from Fama and French (1997). For each year, from 1971 to 2014,

we rank industries with ten or more firms in Compustat according to their funding rate. We then compare

industries in the top quintile and the bottom quintile of that ratio. In a typical year, each industry in the

bottom quintile has a negative funding rate. For our sample, the median funding rate for the industries in

the bottom funding rate quintile is -2.1%. In other words, at the median, the industries in the bottom funding

rate quintile have a capital outflow rather than a capital inflow. In contrast, the industries in the top funding

rate quintile have a median inflow of 6.4%.

    With the efficient capital allocation hypothesis, we expect capital to flow more to industries with a

higher q than to industries with a lower q. With the whole sample, we find that this is not the case. The



                                                       2
median q of the industries in the top funding rate quintile is 1.33. This median q is not significantly different

from the median q of 1.29 for the industries in the bottom funding rate quintile. We expect the greater

inflow of resources to be associated with higher capital expenditures and higher asset growth for the most

funded industries in comparison to the least funded industries. We find that this is the case. The differences

in capital expenditures and asset growth between the two quintiles of industries are large. For capital

expenditures, the median ratio of capital expenditures to assets is 66% higher for the most highly funded

industries compared to the least funded industries. Asset growth of the most highly funded industries is

more than three times the asset growth of the least funded industries.

    Rather than focusing on the top and bottom quintile of the funding rate, we can investigate whether the

funding rate is correlated with industry q across all sample industries. The efficient capital allocation

hypothesis predicts a positive correlation. We find that the (Spearman rank) correlation is positive every

year but one from 1971 to 1995. Since 1995, the correlation is negative in 14 years and positive in four

years. This dramatic change is driven by the correlation between industry q and industry equity funding.

Since 1995, the correlation between q and equity funding is negative every year but two. From 1971 to

1995, it is negative only for six years. In contrast, the correlation between q and debt funding is typically

positive since 1995 as well as before.

    Given the change in regime that appears to take place in the middle of the 1990s, we split our sample

into two sub-periods. The first sub-period is from 1971 to the end of 1996 and the second from the end of

1996 to 2014. With this split, we find that in the first sub-period the allocation of capital is exactly what

one would expect from the efficient capital allocation hypothesis. During this sub-period, the median

Tobin’s q of the industries that are most highly funded is 17% higher than the Tobin’s q of the least funded

industries (1.30 versus 1.11) and the difference is significant at the 1% level. A significant q difference

emerges between the two groups of industries three years before the year when these industries are classified

as most-funded and least-funded. The q difference disappears in year 2 after the selection year.

Consequently, the evidence for q is also supportive of the convergence hypothesis before the end of 1996.



                                                       3
    After 1996, the pattern is opposite. The median Tobin’s q of the industries that are most- funded is 15%

lower than the Tobin’s q of the least funded industries (1.37 versus 1.58). The difference is significant at

the 5% level and is extremely persistent as it is significant for five years after industries are assigned to the

funding rate quintiles. Further, the difference five years after assignment is greater than in the year of

assignment, which directly contradicts the convergence hypothesis.

    The q theory of investment predicts that firms with a higher q invest more absent financial frictions. A

simple way to investigate this prediction at the industry level is to estimate the correlation between an

industry’s investment rate and its q. For the whole sample period, industries with a higher funding rate

invest more, whether or not these industries have a higher q than industries with a lower funding rate. It is

therefore not surprising that the change in the relation between industry funding rates and q that takes place

in the middle of the 1990s is associated with a change in the relation between industry investment and

industry q. Until 1996, industry investment increases with q as expected. After 1996, the correlation

between industry investment and industry q is negative almost every year.

    Further, the least funded industries not only have a high q but also a high cash flow. Industries that

reduce investment substantially but do not experience a drop in cash flow have a surplus of funds. On

average, however, these industries have a negative funding rate. Industries can have negative net funding

if they use their cash flow to return funds to investors. Consequently, the industries with a high q but a low

funding rate after 1996 are the industries with a large repurchase rate made possible by an excess of cash

flow over investment brought about by a decrease in investment.

    To further show the critical role of repurchases in our results, we construct yearly industry portfolios

without firms that repurchase their stock that year. After excluding repurchasing firms, we find that there

is no evidence of a change in the correlation between industry q and the industry funding rate after 1996.

Specifically, if we exclude repurchasing firms, the efficient capital allocation hypothesis is supported

throughout the sample period. Hence, if industry valuations are unbiased, the reason capital markets allocate




                                                       4
capital in a way that seems inefficient after 1996 is because of the firms that choose to devote funds to

repurchase shares instead of using those funds to invest.

    The existing literature shows, building on Wurgler (2000), that more developed financial markets

allocate capital more efficiently. He studies the responsiveness of industry investment to industry value

added across a large sample of countries and concludes that this responsiveness is much higher in countries

with high financial development. As a result, there is now a large literature that, following Rajan and

Zingales (1998), takes the U.S. capital allocation across industries as the benchmark for an efficient

allocation. The allocation of capital after 1996 in the U.S. is not consistent with the simple version of the

efficient capital allocation hypothesis we test. Hoberg and Phillips (2010) document the existence of booms

and busts at the industry level in the U.S. With their evidence, high valuations are followed by poor returns.

Their evidence is supportive of the view that at times industries misallocate capital because of potential

misvaluation. Though our evidence builds on theirs, the important difference is that we focus on how capital

markets allocate capital across industries and document a systematic change in that allocation after the mid-

1990s.

    One might be tempted to argue that a possible explanation for our evidence could be that the capital

market price signals are wrong after the mid-1990s, so that the financial markets ignore these signals when

they allocate capital. The problem with this explanation for our findings is that the firms that repurchase

are highly valued, a phenomenon noticed earlier in the literature, for instance by Dittmar and Dittmar (2004).

We would not expect firms to repurchase massive amounts of their stock if the market overvalues that stock.

Rather, we would expect such firms to use their over-priced equity to raise more capital and invest more

(see Stein (1996) for an analysis of the implications of misvaluation for capital budgeting and references)

or make more acquisitions (Shleifer and Vishny (2003)). Hence, our evidence is equally puzzling if

valuation signals are correct throughout our sample period or only before the middle of the 1990s.

    In a contemporaneous paper, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2016) show that investment falls in the early

2000s and explore possible explanations for this fall. They find strong support for two potential



                                                      5
explanations. The first explanation is that competition has decreased, which implies that firms invest less

than predicted by the q-theory of investment. The second explanation is a governance explanation, where

greater institutional ownership by quasi-index funds leads to greater payouts and less investment.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we explain our sample and data. Sections 3 and 4,

respectively, test the efficient capital allocation hypothesis and the convergence hypothesis. In Section 5,

we examine the equity and debt funding rates separately. Section 6 investigates the role of firms that

repurchase stock in our results. Section 7 concludes.



2. Data and funding rate

    We begin with all Compustat firms (in the February 2016 file) and then keep only U.S. firms, which

are identified by their ISO country code in Compustat. We also require firms to have a positive value for

total assets to be included in our sample in a given year. For industry classification, we first use the historical

SIC code in Compustat. If that information is missing, we seek the historical SIC code in CRSP. The

matching between Compustat and CRSP is based on the WRDS link table. If the CRSP historical SIC code

is also missing, we then use the header SIC code in Compustat. We drop firms that do not have any of those

SIC data items available, and also exclude firms whose SIC code is between 6000 and 6999 (financials) or

between 4900 and 4999 (utilities). Additionally, regulated industries, as identified by Barclay and Smith

(1995), are excluded from the sample.2 The remaining firms are assigned to one of the Fama and French 48

industries. Companies that do not belong to any of those 48 industry groups are dropped from the sample.

Finally, we require an industry group to have at least 10 firms in a given year.

    Our selection criteria give us 205,622 firm-year observations and 1,736 industry-year observations

during our study period of 1971-2014 (fiscal years). Table 1 presents summary statistics for our sample.

Column (2) shows the number of firms each year, which averages to 4,673 sample firms per year. The



2
 Those industries are railroads (SIC 4011) and trucking industry (SIC 4210 or 4213) up to 1980, airline industry (SIC
4512) up to 1978, and telecommunications industry (SIC 4812 or 4813) up to 1982.


                                                         6
number of industries with at least 10 usable firms does not change much over time as it ranges between 37

and 41 during the sample period (Column (3)).

       Our key variable is the funding raised in external capital markets. Equity funding during a year is

computed as the sale of common stock and preferred stock minus the purchase of common and preferred

stock. Debt funding is the issuance of long-term debt minus the reduction in long-term debt. When any of

those funding data items are missing, we treat them as zero.3 Total funding is the sum of equity and debt

funding. The funding rate in a given year is the ratio of the total funds raised during the year to the

beginning-of-year total assets. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised

by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of the total assets of the firms in the industry at

the start of the year.

       The literature uses two different approaches to estimate net equity issuance. One approach is the one

we use. The other approach is to use the change in book value of equity. In contrast to the change in book

value of equity, the net sale measure allows us to consider equity sales and equity repurchases separately.

Equity repurchases are an essential part of our analysis. The net sale measure is similar to the measure used

by Jermann and Quadrini (2012), which is a measure of the exchange of equity for cash. Hence, it is the

correct measure for our focus on capital flows to firms. The change in book value measure is an all-

encompassing measure (Fama and French (2005), Covas and den Haan (2011)) which includes any equity

issuance, whether for cash or for other consideration. The change in book value measure is the right measure

to consider in a study of capital structure, as it incorporates all changes in equity that affect leverage. Our

focus is not on leverage but on capital flows. Nevertheless, we show that our main conclusion holds if we

use the change in book value measure.

       Columns (4) through (10) of Table 1 report summary statistics for the industry funding rates. The top

row is for the entire sample period (i.e., across the 1,736 industry-year observations) and the other rows

give year-by-year statistics. The average funding rate across industries and years is 1.8%. This funding rate


3
    We obtain similar results if we do not use variables with missing observations instead of setting them to zero.


                                                             7
varies substantially over time. The lowest mean is -0.6% in 2005 and the highest is 4.9% in 1986. Looking

at differences across years, the funding rate in the 2000s is noticeably lower than in earlier years. First, after

2001, the funding rate never exceeds 1% while before that only three years have a funding rate below this

level. Second, the funding rate averages 2.5% and is never negative before 2002 but it is negative seven

years since with an average of only 0.2%. Finally, the 25th funding rate percentile is negative only in 40%

of the years before 1999, but it is negative in every year since then.

    The last two columns, (11) and (12), show the number of industries with a negative funding rate (called

the rationed industries for short) and their proportion in the sample. Only 32.6% of the industry years in the

dataset have a negative funding rate. Of all years in the sample, 2011 is the year with the highest fraction

of industries with negative net funding (69.2%). There is no evidence that the fraction of industries with a

negative funding rate is higher in periods of low growth. For instance, 27.5% of the industries have a

negative or zero funding rate in 1997, which is a good year for the economy as well as for the stock market.

In contrast, only 2.6% of the industries have a negative or zero funding rate in 1980, which is a recession

year.

    Table 2 shows the frequency of positive and negative funding rates by industry. We also rank industries

into quintiles by funding rates and report how often a given industry belongs to the top or bottom funding

quintiles. Though we do not show this number in the table, the average over the sample period of the median

funding rate for industries in the bottom funding rate quintile is -2.1% and 6.4% for the top funding rate

quintile. The composition of the top and bottom quintiles changes substantially over time. For instance, of

the 43 industries in the sample, all but three industries are in the bottom funding quintile at least twice.

Moreover, even though almost all industries are at least once in the top quintile of financing rates, only 11

industries belong to it more than ten times.




                                                        8
3. Do the industries with a high funding rate have higher growth opportunities?

    Our test of whether the market allocates resources efficiently is whether industries that receive more

capital have better growth opportunities. For this test, we compare industries with the highest and lowest

funding rates. To insure that we have substantial differences in funding rates between the comparison

subsamples and that these comparison subsamples are of similar size, we choose to compare the industries

in the top quintile of funding rates with the industries in the bottom quintile of funding rates. We call

industries in the top quintile of funding rates the high-funded industries and the ones in the bottom quintile

the low-funded industries.

    Figure 1 shows the median industry q for the high-funded industries and the low-funded industries for

our sample period. The industry q is measured at the end of the year that precedes the funding year. It is

immediately clear that a substantial change takes place in the mid-1990s. Before the mid-1990s, the median

industry q for the low-funded industries is lower than the median industry q for the high-funded industries.

After the mid-1990s, it is almost always the case that the median industry q of the low-funded industries is

higher than the median industry q of the high-funded industries.

    In Table 3, we take a closer look at the industry q differences between low-funded and high-funded

industries over our sample period. With functionally efficient capital markets, we expect this difference to

be negative. Strikingly, this difference is positive in 19 years. Out of these 19 years, 14 are after 1996, so

that after 1996 14 year out of 18 or almost 80% of the years have a positive difference between the q of

low-funded and high-funded industries. Before 1997, almost all years have a negative difference as

expected as only 5 out of 26 years have a positive difference, or slightly less than 20%. It is possible for

noise to induce a positive q gap between low- and high-funded industries. To investigate this possibility,

we check whether in the years that the difference is positive we can reject that it is zero or negative. In 9 of

the 14 years after 1996, we can reject the hypothesis that the difference is zero or negative using the

Wilcoxon test (at the 10% level). Moreover, these separate tests do not even take into account the striking

fact that the negative q gap clusters in the years after the mid-1990s.


                                                       9
    A different approach to investigating the relation between an industry’s funding rate and its q is to

estimate the correlation between industry q and the industry funding rate. We would expect that correlation

to be positive. Figure 2 plots the Spearman rank correlation for each year in our sample period. The results

are supportive of the existence of a sharp change around the middle of the 1990s. Specifically, the

correlation is positive every sample year until 1995 but one, which is 1990. After 1996, the correlation is

negative almost every year. Using Newey-West t-statistics with two lags, the average correlation before

1997 is significantly positive at the 1% level on average and the average correlation after 1996 is

significantly negative at the same level of significance. A concern might be that capital markets react more

slowly to data about q, so that the relevant q is a lagged q. We investigate the correlations shown in Figure

2 lagging q by one or by two years. The pattern documented in Figure 2 stays the same.

    In summary, the relation between an industry’s q and its funding rate changes drastically around the

middle of the 1990s. In the 25 sample years before 1996, the high-funded industries (top funding rate

quintile) tend to have a higher q than the low-funded industries (bottom funding rate quintile). Further, there

is a positive correlation between industry q and the funding rate across all sample industries. After 1996,

the opposite occurs: the high-funded industries have a lower q than the low-funded industries and the cross-

industry correlation between industry q and the industry funding rate is negative.

    One might be tempted to argue that such a change is due to the fact that our sample period includes the

period in the late 1990s and early 2000s when valuations are extremely high and often considered to be

unrelated to fundamentals. However, this explanation does not work in that the highest negative correlations

between industry q and industry funding rate in absolute value are, in order, in 2014, 2013, 2005, and 2008.

All these years are far removed from the high valuation years of the late 1990s and early 2000s. When we

look at the differences in industry q between the high-funded quintile and the low-funded quintile, the

difference in 1999, the highest-valuation year, is only ranked fifth.

    Another potential concern with our results is that intangible assets have become more important for

American firms and book assets do not account for intangible assets acquired organically. Peters and Taylor



                                                      10
(2016) show that Tobin’s q can be estimated accounting for intangible assets. We use their approach to

incorporate intangibles in Tobin’s q estimates. They define the q ratio without intangibles as the ratio of the

market value of equity plus the book value of long-term and short-term debt minus the book value of current

assets to the book value of property, plant, and equipment. The q ratio with intangibles is similarly defined,

except that the denominator additionally includes the value of intangible assets, which we obtain from

Peters and Taylor (2016). Figure 3 shows the annual (Spearman rank) correlation between the total funding

rate and Tobin’s q for the two definitions of Tobin’s q. Accounting for intangibles changes the sign of the

correlation in 10 years. Most of these changes are after 1996, but in five cases the correlation becomes

positive and in three it becomes negative. Overall, using their approach to account for intangibles in

estimating Tobin’s q does not change our conclusions as the correlation between Tobin’s q and the total

funding rate is negative in 11 years after 1996 when we account for intangibles and one year before.

    A final issue is whether our results differ if we use the change in equity book value as our measure of

equity issuance. We believe that our net sales equity issuance measure is more appropriate for our purpose.

However, if we use the change in book value measure, we find that from 1971 to 1996, the correlation

between the total funding rate and equity q is zero or positive 18 times and negative eight times, so that 69%

of the observations are non-negative. It is notable that six of the first seven observations are negative, so

that from 1978 to 1996, only two observations are negative. From 1997 to 2014, the correlation is positive

five years and negative 13 years, so that only 28% of observations are positive.



4. Testing the convergence hypothesis

    With functionally efficient capital markets, we expect low-funded industries to have a lower q than

high-funded industries. Because of the funding difference, the high-funded industries grow more than the

low-funded industries, so that eventually the Tobin’s q of the industries converge. In this section, we

investigate the dynamics of the Tobin’s q and other characteristics of high-funded industries and low-

funded industries. In particular, we explore how an industry’s characteristics change around the time when


                                                      11
it is included either in the low-funded industry group or the high-funded industry group. We perform the

analysis separately for each sub-period. Given the sharp difference between the first and the second sub-

periods, there is no point in showing results for the whole sample period.

    For this examination, we use an event study approach where year 0 is the year when an industry is

either in the top or the bottom quintile of industry funding rates. More precisely, for each year t, we rank

the funding rate of industries and assign them to quintiles. For the top and bottom quintiles, we show

industry characteristics from year t-5 to t+5 by computing the median value of each of the 11 years within

the funding quintiles and report the average of these medians. By using medians, we reduce the impact of

outliers and of mismeasurement. We also report the test results based on the median of the medians. Since

we want data to be available both for t-5 and t+5, we cannot assign industries to quintiles for every sample

year. Instead, the first assignment year is 1976 and the last is 2009. We examine first the evolution of

industry characteristics around the assignment year for assignment years from 1976 to 1996. We then show

results for assignment years from 1997 to 2009.



4.1. Dynamics of industry characteristics around assignment years before 1997

    Panel A of Table 4 shows the evolution of industry characteristics around the assignment year for

assignments until 1996. For each characteristic, we show its evolution from year -5 before assignment to

year +5 after assignment for the low-funded industries and the high-funded industries. The first

characteristic shown is the industry funding rate. Not surprisingly, there is a large difference in the funding

rate between low-funded industries and high-funded industries. The funding rate difference between low-

funded industries and high-funded industries is negative and significant from -5 to +5, but the difference

follows a u shape. At t-5, the difference is -1.4%. The difference becomes more negative and peaks in

absolute value at -8.9% in the assignment year. After that year, the difference falls in absolute value so that

it is -1.1% in year +5.




                                                      12
    To examine whether there is industry q convergence, we show in Panel A of Table 4 the evolution of

industry q for the low-funded and high-funded quintiles. As expected, the industry q of high-funded

industries is higher in the year of assignment than the industry q of the low-funded industries. Specifically,

industry q for the low-funded group in year 0 is 1.11 and industry q for the highly-funded group is 1.30.

The difference is 0.19, so that the industry q of the high-funded group is 18% higher than the industry q of

the low-funded group. The q difference is no longer significant after year +1 and is trivially small in year

+5 (-0.02). Consequently, the industry q difference eventually converges to 0, which supports the

convergence hypothesis. However, surprisingly, this convergence is achieved through an increase in the

Tobin’s q of the low-funded industries that is not accompanied by a decrease in the Tobin’s q of the high-

funded industries.

    We consider next three measures of industry growth. We would expect higher q industries to invest

more, to experience more growth in the number of firms, and to have more asset growth. However, as the

high-funded industries receive more funds, the marginal productivity of investment should fall, so that their

growth should become more similar to the growth of the low-funded industries. We find strong evidence

in support of this convergence hypothesis for asset growth and moderate support for growth in the number

of firms and for the capital expenditures ratio.

    Elaborating on capital expenditures, we find that low-funded industries have capital expenditures of

6.8% of assets in year 0. This is the smallest rate of capital expenditures for these industries from -5 to +5.

In contrast, the high-funded industries have capital expenditures of 11.9% of assets in year 0 and this is the

highest rate of capital expenditures for these industries over the event window. The difference in capital

expenditures between low and high-funded industries is always negative and significant, displaying

moderate convergence with the absolute difference decreasing from 5.1% in year 0 to 2.3% by year +5.

    Turning to the change in the number of firms, we see that the high-funded industries experience a

greater increase in the number of firms than the low-funded industries. The difference is large and

significant in years 0 and +1 (respectively -3.4% and -5.4%), but it decreases substantially after and is only



                                                      13
-0.9% by year +4. However, it increases back to -3% in year +5, which suggests that there is only moderate

convergence for the growth in the number of firms.

    Finally, we turn to the growth in assets. The asset growth differential between high-funded and low-

funded industries is extremely large (-14.2%) in year 0, but that difference is to a large extent driven by

their mechanical difference in external funding in year 0. By year +1, the difference is still large (-7.6%)

and not mechanical. However, we see that the asset growth rate decreases sharply, reaching an insignificant

-2.6% by year +5.

    A concern is that low-funded industries cannot invest because they are financially constrained and

cannot raise funds. This does not appear to be the case. Low-funded industries have a significantly higher

dividend payout rate in the year of assignment than the high-funded industries. Consequently, low-funded

industries could invest more by reducing their dividend payout to the level of the high-funded industries,

or even lower.

    Using operating income as a criterion, we find that the high-funded industries are most profitable in the

year of assignment. In contrast, the low-funded industries are least profitable in year t-2. The profitability

of the high-funded industries follows an inverted u-shape so that the difference in profitability between

low-funded industries and high-funded industries is only significant in years -3 to 0. This evolution of

profitability is consistent with q-theory in that the profitability rate should fall as firms invest more.

    Lastly, we look at cash flow. Perhaps not surprisingly given that they are more profitable, the high-

funded industries have higher cash flow in the year of assignment than the low-funded industries. However,

the difference is 0.7% of assets. Such a difference is small compared to the 5.1% difference in capital

expenditures or the 14.2% difference in asset growth. It follows that this difference in cash flow cannot

come close to fund the difference in capital expenditures or in asset growth. Surprisingly, however, low-

funded industries have significantly lower cash flow than high-funded industries until year 0, but not after.

After year 0, low-funded industries have higher cash flow than high-funded industries, but the difference is

only significant in year +3. This result is reminiscent of the result in Hoberg and Phillips (2010) that



                                                       14
industries with high valuations and high financing have lower operating cash flow subsequently than

industries with low valuations and low financing in competitive industries.



4.2. Dynamics of industry characteristics around assignment years from 1997 to 2009

    We already know that, though low-funded industries have a lower q than high-funded industries until

1996, this is not the case after 1996. We now show how industry characteristics evolve in event time for

assignment years after 1996. These results are presented in Table 4, Panel B.

    As in Panel A, there is an extremely large difference in the funding rate between low and high-funded

industries (-9.1% here). As before, the difference follows a u shape around the assignment year. Here, the

difference is only significant from -2 to +4. In other words, funding rates converge. Surprisingly, however,

we find that industry qs do not converge for assignment years after 1996. In fact, low-funded industries

have a higher q than high-funded industries every year from t-5 to t+5. The q difference in the assignment

year is one of the smallest, as it is 0.21 in the assignment year but 0.29 in year -5 and 0.28 in year +5.

    Turning to our measures of industry growth, we find first that even though high-funded industries have

higher capital expenditures than low-funded ones, the difference is much smaller than in Panel A. In Panel

A, the low and high-funded industries have capital expenditures of 6.8% and 11.9%, respectively, in the

year of assignment (difference of 5.1%). Turning to Panel B, capital expenditures are lower both for low-

funded (4.3%) and high-funded (6.2%) industries, but the drop is much sharper for the high-funded

industries, which leads to a differential of only 1.9% in capital expenditures. In year +5, the high-funded

industries invest 0.5% more than the low-funded ones (a difference that is significant at the 5% level).

Hence, though convergence has not occurred by year +5, the difference is smaller in year +5 than in years

0 to +4.

    As shown by Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2016), the number of listed firms falls sharply after 1996. It

is therefore not surprising that in Panel B the number of firms falls for both low-funded industries and high-

funded industries. Except in years -1 and -2, the difference between the low-funded and high-funded



                                                      15
industries is not significant. For years -1 and -2, the high-funded industries experience a slower rate of

decrease in the number of firms.

    With regard to asset growth, we find that asset growth of high-funded industries is much higher than

asset growth of low-funded industries in the assignment year. As for capital expenditures, asset growth is

generally lower in Panel B than in Panel A. Moreover, even though low funded industries grow 12.6% less

in the assignment year, the difference quickly deteriorates and inverts with low-funded industries growing

more than high-funded ones after year +1 (with +3 and +5 as statistically significant years). It follows from

this that we have strong evidence of convergence for asset growth. This convergence is expected in Panel

A but is surprising in Panel B since qs do not converge.

    As in Panel A, the low-funded industries pay more in dividends than the high-funded ones, but the

profitability evidence is quite different from Panel A. In Panel A, the high-funded industries are more

profitable than the low-funded ones while in Panel B, there is no difference in profitability in the year of

assignment and there is no year where the high-funded industries are significantly more profitable than the

low-funded industries. Instead, every year after year 0, the low-funded industries are more profitable than

the high-funded industries. Looking at cash flows, we find a similar result. There is no year where the high-

funded industries have higher cash flow than the low-funded ones, but the low-funded industries have

significantly higher cash flow than the high-funded ones from year 0 to year +5.



4.3. A paradox

    After 1996, industry characteristics and their dynamics are opposite from what we expect: paradoxically,

the low-funded industries have a higher q than the high-funded ones. Despite having a higher q, the low-

funded industries invest less and qs do not converge, so that, five years after assignment, the low-funded

industries still have a higher q than the high-funded industries. Figure 4 shows that, after 1996, industry

capital expenditures do not increase with industry q as they do before. In that figure, we report the Spearman




                                                     16
rank correlation between capital expenditures and q for each year in our sample. This correlation is negative

in only two years before 1996, but after that it is negative in all but three years.

    To better understand the corporate investment pattern after the mid-1990s, it is useful to look at the

aggregate level of investment over time. Figure 5 shows that, after 1996, U.S. public firms invest less

relative to cash flow. Specifically, net investment tracks aggregate cash flow well until roughly 2000 and

after that, a positive gap emerges between cash flow and net investment. (Net investment, defined as in

Frank and Goyal (2003), is capital expenditures plus increase in investments plus acquisitions plus other

use of funds minus sale of PPE and sale of investments.) As shown in Table 4, this gap shows up differently

for the low-funded industries and the high-funded industries. The cash flow of high-funded industries is

similar in the two sub-periods, while the cash flow of low-funded industries increases slightly in the second

sub-period. For both high and low-funded industries, capital expenditures fall sharply. Consequently, unlike

the pre-1997 period when the cash flow of low-funded industries is not enough to fund their capital

expenditures, those industries have excess cash flows after the end of 1996. To be more precise, the cash

flow of low-funded industries in the year of assignment is 7.4%, but their capital expenditures are only

4.3%. In other words, these industries could fund all their capital expenditures and would have excess cash

flow of 3.1% of assets. These industries pay dividends of 1.5% of assets, so that after paying dividends,

they still have an excess cash flow of 1.6%.

    To further examine the relation between an industry’s funding rate, its q, and its cash flow, we estimate

regressions using all industry-years. We cluster the standard errors by industry and year and demean all

variables by year to control for year fixed effects. We then regress the funding rate on industry q, cash flow

measures, and capital expenditure measures. In Panel A of Table 5, we show the estimates for the whole

period. We find that industry q is not significant in any of our regressions. In the first regression, we regress

the funding rate on industry q, concurrent cash flow, and lagged cash flow. Concurrent cash flow has a

significant negative coefficient and lagged cash flow has a significant positive coefficient. Perhaps not

surprisingly, when we add concurrent capital expenditures, the coefficient is positive and significant. Lastly,



                                                       17
to examine whether firms raise funds in anticipation of capital expenditures, we add lead capital

expenditures, which have an insignificant coefficient.

    Panel B provides estimates for the first sub-period. Industry q is positive and significant. This result is

consistent with our quintile analysis. The other coefficients and their significance are consistent with the

results of Panel A. However, when we turn to Panel C, q is never significant and the lagged cash flow also

becomes insignificant.

    The above analysis confirms our puzzle: after 1996, the industries that generate more cash flows and

also have higher qs no longer raise more funds from capital markets and invest more than other industries.

Surprisingly, the low-funded industries have a higher q after 1996 than the high-funded industries before,

since their q in the assignment year is 1.58 versus 1.30 for the high-funded firms before 1997. Yet, during

the assignment year, these low-funded industries have capital expenditures of 4.3% while the high-funded

industries before 1997 have capital expenditures of 11.9% despite their substantially lower q. An obvious

related question is what these firms do with the excess cash. The fact that low-funded industries have a

negative funding rate after 1996 provides a clue. To have a negative funding rate, an industry has to buy

back equity or reduce its debt. In the next section, we investigate whether low-funded industries reduce

their debt or reduce their equity when their funding rate is negative.

    A concern with the regressions in Table 5 is that Tobin’s q is estimated with error. It could be that error

in estimation of Tobin’s q changed in the 1990s. Note that concerns about Tobin’s q estimation error are

attenuated because we use industry q and the earlier analysis employs the median q within the industry

funding quintiles. Proceeding this way means that our results are not influenced by extremely high values

of q within an industry. Nevertheless, as a further check, we re-estimate the first regression using Erickson,

Jiang, and Whited’s (2014) higher-order cumulant estimators that account for errors in the measurement of

Tobin’s q but do not tabulate the results. With this approach, we reach the same conclusions as when we

use OLS. To be precise, for the first sub-period, the coefficients on industry q are significantly positive as

with OLS, albeit their magnitude is higher. In contrast, for the second sub-period, the coefficients on



                                                      18
industry q are negative. With OLS, the coefficient on industry q is not significant. With the cumulant

estimators, the coefficient on industry q is insignificant when the highest moment is the third or the fourth,

but it is significantly negative when the highest moment is the fifth. It is clear that the relation between

industry funding rate and q ratio differs between the two sub-periods.



5. Debt versus equity funding rates

    We have seen that there is a sharp change in the relation between the industry funding rate and industry

q in the middle of the 1990s. Before then, the capital markets funnel funds to the industries with the best

growth opportunities. After the middle of the 1990s, it does not appear to work that way. This change is

accompanied by a sharp increase in the fraction of industries with negative net funding. Before 1997, 22%

of the industries on average have negative net funding; after, it is 47% of industries.

    Negative funding in debt markets means a reduction in debt, so that for given assets, book leverage

falls. However, such a reduction in leverage could result from firms being unable to roll over debt rather

than from a decision to reduce debt. Negative funding in equity markets cannot result from constraints in

raising equity. Instead, negative funding in equity markets represents voluntary payouts.4 Negative funding

in equity markets consists of repurchases and the literature emphasizes that the benefit of repurchases over

dividends is their flexibility (Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach (2000)). To understand the change in

how industries are funded by capital markets, it is important to understand whether the negative net funding

is due to debt reduction or to repurchases.

     Figure 6 shows the debt and equity funding for the aggregate corporate sector represented by our

sample of industries. Until the middle of the 1990s, total external funding, composed of equity and long-

term debt, is rather stable, with the exception of decreases in debt funding around recessions. Net equity

funding is smaller than net debt funding in almost all years. However, after the middle of the 1990s, debt


4
  A concern could be that our approach treats dividends differently from repurchases. Though we do not report the
results, our inferences about the correlation between funding and Tobin’s q are unchanged if we treat dividends like
repurchases.


                                                        19
funding increases sharply and becomes much more volatile. Simultaneously, net equity funding becomes

negative after a peak in 2000. During the 2000s, net debt funding and net equity funding are almost mirror

images and net corporate funding is negative but small until the last three years of our sample when it turns

positive again. Ma (2016) shows that firms buy back equity when debt is cheap, so that firms issue debt to

finance buybacks. Such capital structure arbitrage by firms can help explain this negative comovement of

equity issuance and debt issuance (alternatively, a positive comovement between equity repurchases and

debt issuance).

    In Table 6, we show the median equity and debt funding rates for the low and high-funded industries.

The table is constructed as follows. Each year, we rank total funding rates and assign industries to quintiles.

We then calculate the median equity funding rate for the low and high-funded quintiles. We do the same

for debt. Table 6 reveals a dramatic change in net equity funding for the low-funded industries. Before 1997,

the average net equity median funding rate for the industries in the lowest quintile of net funding is -0.4%.

After 1996, it is -2.6%. In some years, the negative net equity funding rate of the low-funded industries is

especially large. For instance, in 2006 and 2014, the median net equity funding rate of the low-funded

industries is -5.1%. There is no such evolution for median net debt funding. Before the end of 1996, median

net debt funding for the low-funded industries is -1%. After the end of 1996, it is -0.7%. In other words,

the low-funded industries reduce debt less and equity much more after the end of 1996 compared to before.

    The phenomenon of the negative correlation between the funding rate and the industry q is due to a

change in the relationship between equity funding and industry q. This is made clear when we look at

correlations separately for equity funding and debt funding in Figure 7.5 The correlation between the equity

funding rate and industry q is positive almost every year before 1995, but after the end of 1996, there is

only one year where the correlation between equity funding and industry q is positive, namely in 2000.

Every year after 2000, the correlation is negative and in 8 years it exceeds 0.5 in absolute value. In contrast,


5
  Our inferences are not materially affected if we use the Peters and Taylor (2016) adjustment of Tobin’s q for
intangibles. During the period after 1996, taking into account intangibles does not change the sign of the correlation
between industry funding rate and q, except for one year (1997).


                                                         20
the correlation between the net debt funding rate and industry q is almost always positive. Over the whole

sample, there are 10 years when it is negative. There is, however, a higher frequency of negative correlations

after 1996, as 7 of those negative correlations are after 1996.

    Another way to illustrate the role of equity funding in our results is to rank industries by equity funding

and to rank them separately by debt funding. We already know that when we rank industries by their total

funding rate, high-funded industries have a higher industry q than low-funded industries before 1997 and

the opposite holds after. However, as shown in Figure 8, this result is driven by industries that have the

lowest equity funding rate. Low-funded industries for long-term debt almost always have a lower industry

q than high-funded industries for long-term debt. Turning to equity funding, the low-funded industries have

a lower industry q most years until the mid-1990s. After 2000, the q difference between low- and high-

funded industries switches sign and a large positive industry q gap develops between these two types of

industries.



6. Can repurchases help explain the puzzle?

    After the middle of the 1990s, the industries that have low funding are industries that repurchase equity

and have a high industry q. Before the middle of the 1990s, this is not the case. The magnitude of

repurchases changes fairly dramatically in the mid-1990s. Dittmar and Dittmar (2004) point out that 1997

is the first year when the dollar amount of repurchases exceeds the dollar amount of dividends. DeAngelo,

DeAngelo, and Skinner (2008) show that repurchases stay above dividends afterwards for their sample

period. Important accounting changes help explain the growth in repurchases. First, in 1995, through FASB

123, the treatment of stock option compensation is clarified in such a way that firms are not required to use

the fair value of options granted, which makes granting options more attractive to them. Second, in 1997,

through FASB 127, firms are required to report diluted EPS, so that granting options decreases EPS unless




                                                      21
the firm repurchases shares to offset the dilution. These developments make both option compensation more

attractive and repurchases more valuable in managing reported earnings.6

    Figure 9 shows the evolution of total dollar repurchases for the industries in our sample and compares

total dollar repurchases to the excess of cash flow over net investment. The figure shows that dollar

repurchases take off in the mid-1990s. Early in the 2000s, cash flow in excess of investment increases

sharply, so that cash flow in excess of investment mostly exceeds repurchases. The dotted line in the figure

tracks the total of repurchases and changes in cash holdings. After the increase in net cash flow over

investment in the early 2000s, the sum of repurchases and changes in cash holdings tracks cash flow in

excess of net investment. Cash flow in excess of net investment increases because dollar cash flow increases

much more than dollar net investment – from 2000 to 2014, cash flow almost doubles while capital

expenditures increase by roughly a quarter.

    Another way to look at the relationships among cash flow, investment, and repurchases is to compute

the ratio of capital expenditures to operating cash flow for repurchasers and non-repurchasers (not

tabulated). For repurchasers as a whole, this ratio is 1.18 during the first sub-period and 0.68 during the

second sub-period. In contrast, for non-repurchasers, the ratio is 1.39 in the first sub-period and 1.30 in the

second. It follows that repurchasers have an excess of cash flow over capital expenditures in the second

sub-period.

    We now show that without the equity repurchasers, there is no change in how capital markets allocate

funds throughout our sample period. In other words, the reason that the industries with the highest funding

rate do not have a higher industry q than the industries with the lowest funding rate is that the low-funded

industries have high cash flows but low capital expenditures and they use the resulting excess cash flow to

repurchase equity.




6
  Bens, Nagar, Skinner, and Wong (2003) analyze the role of repurchases in managing earnings and provide additional
references.


                                                        22
    We first estimate the correlations between the total funding rate and industry q excluding from each

industry firms that repurchase equity for the years in which they repurchase equity.7 When we do that, as

shown in Table 7, we find that the correlation is positive every year but three. The exceptions are 1973,

1997, and 2013. We next repeat this calculation using the equity funding rate. All observations but two are

positive. Finally, we turn to the debt funding rate. For the debt funding rate, eight observations are negative.

It follows that the negative relation between industry q and the industry funding rate we observe after 1996

does not hold if we exclude the firms that repurchase equity. The consistently positive relation between

industry q and the industry funding rate, without repurchasers, is confirmed in the regression setting as well.

As shown in Table 8, the industry q is significantly and positively related to the industry funding rate

throughout the entire sample period, provided that repurchasers are excluded from the sample.

    Given that there is a positive relation between the funding rate and industry q when we exclude

repurchasers, we expect a positive correlation between the repurchase amount and industry q. We show that

correlation in Figure 10. As can be seen in that figure, the correlation is not consistently positive before the

middle of the 1990s. After the middle of the 1990s, the correlation is consistently positive and much larger

than in any year before. Hence, high q firms repurchase more, which leads them to have a lower funding

rate.

    It follows from our analysis that the paradox that industry funding is negatively related to industry q in

the second sub-period but not the first can be explained by the fact that repurchasers in the second sub-

period are high q firms with excess cash flow over investment. Many observers have the view that firms

that repurchase at times reduce their investment so that they can repurchase—i.e., repurchases lead firms

to under-invest (Lazonick (2014)). Recently, Almeida, Fons, and Kronlund (2016) find support for the view

that share repurchases that increase earnings per share are associated with a decrease in investment and they

conclude that their evidence suggests that “managers are willing to trade off investments and employment



7
  An alternative approach is to compute the funding rate by setting it to zero for repurchasers and including the
repurchasers in the estimate of the industry q. The results are similar with this alternative approach.


                                                       23
for stock repurchases that allow them to meet analyst EPS forecasts.” We have no basis to reach conclusions

about causation with our evidence. Our evidence points to the fact, however, that the industries with

negative net funding, which are industries with high repurchases, are industries with a high q, high cash

flow, and low capital expenditures after the middle of the 1990s. The resulting excess cash flow enables

these industries to repurchase equity on net as they are not using all of that cash flow to invest.

    Our evidence shows that the allocation of capital seems more functionally efficient when repurchasers

are omitted. However, removing share repurchasing firms from the sample does not help with the

convergence hypothesis, since the exclusion of repurchasers provides results supportive of the convergence

hypothesis in the second sub-period, but not in the first. Also, removing share repurchasers from the sample

does not help with the correlation of capex with Tobin’s q. Though we do not report the results in a figure,

the correlation of Tobin’s q and capex after 1996 is not materially different when we remove the

repurchasers. Further, when we estimate a regression of capex on industry q and concurrent cash flow (not

tabulated), the coefficient on q is significantly negative in the second sub-period with all firms and

insignificantly negative when we remove repurchasers.



7. Conclusion

    In this paper, we show that there is a dramatic change in how capital markets allocate capital across

industries in the mid-1990s in the U.S. Before the mid-1990s, industries that attract the most capital per

dollar of assets are industries with better growth opportunities (measured by the industry’s Tobin’s q) than

the industries that attract the least capital per dollar of assets. If capital markets’ price signals are correct

and capital markets are functionally efficient, industries that can make the best use of capital have a higher

industry q than those that cannot make such a use. Consequently, before the mid-1990s, capital markets

appear to be functionally efficient. After the mid-1990s, it is no longer true that capital markets appear to

be functionally efficient if functional efficiency means that capital flows more to industries with a higher




                                                       24
Tobin’s q. Specifically, after the mid-1990s, there is a negative (Spearman rank) correlation between

industry funding flows and industry qs.

    The negative correlation between industry funding flows and industry qs after the middle of the 1990s

does not exist if we remove the firms that repurchase shares from the sample. It is striking that repurchases

are large in industries that have a high q. We would expect high q industries to invest more and hence

require more funding. This is not the case after the middle of the 1990s. Industries that have the lowest

funding rates have high qs but they invest less than the industries with the highest funding rates that have

lower qs. The lowest-funded industries also invest less than their own cash flow, so that they have funds to

repurchase equity. The q-theory of investment fails completely after the mid-1990s at the industry level,

while it does not before.

    Whether capital flows more towards industries with the best growth opportunities depends both on the

efficiency of capital markets and on the policies of firms. If firms do not want to raise funds, more efficient

capital markets will not make these firms want to raise funds. Hence, the outcome we document depends

both on how capital markets allocate resources and on the decision of firms. Of course, things are even

more complicated because capital markets set incentives for firms. For instance, if capital markets penalize

firms for some types of investments, they may choose not to invest and repurchase their shares instead. Our

study cannot establish causality. It only shows how the allocation of capital has changed dramatically and

that repurchases play a critical role in this change.

    There are several possible explanations for our results that future research should investigate. It is

important to note, however, that any explanation has to explain why there was a change in the 1990s that

has persisted to now. To start with, there has been growing concern about short-termism incentives for

managers (see, for instance, Foroohar (2016) for a discussion of this concern). It is possible that incentives

for managers changed in some high q industries so that they do not want to invest to such an extent that

they have to raise external funds. They are reluctant to do so because they believe that their share price does

not benefit when they do so. They can have other reasons not to invest more. In particular, they may be



                                                        25
leery to access outside markets as such access involves monitoring. Alternatively, there could be a decrease

in competition so that high qs may reflect rents so that investing more for such firms could lead to lower

prices and lower profits. It is also possible that firms have high qs because of repurchases, so that the high

qs may not indicate to managers that they have valuable investment opportunities. Finally, since the 1990s,

some industries may have high qs because of past investments that have high future cash flows, but firms

in these industries may not be able to find investments that have similar future cash flows.

    It is also important to note that after the mid-1990s, R&D expenditures and investments in other

intangibles have been especially important for U.S. firms (see Kahle and Stulz (2016)). As a result, firms

correspond less and less to the simplistic model of manufacturing firms that invest mostly in capital

expenditures and experience decreasing returns to scale as they invest more, leading their q to fall. Related

to this concern is the fact that it is well-known that q is measured with error. We have taken many steps to

reduce the importance of measurement error, but we can’t exclude that such error may affect some of our

results. It seems unlikely, however, that measurement error changed drastically in the second half of the

1990s, which is what would be required to explain our results.




                                                     26
References

Almeida, H., V. Fos, and M. Kronlund, 2016. The real effects of share repurchases. Journal of Financial
Economics 119, 168-185.

Baker, M., and J. Wurgler, 2013. Behavioral corporate finance: An updated survey. Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, editors, Elsevier, 357-424.

Barclay, M., and C. Smith, 1995. The maturity structure of corporate debt. Journal of Finance 50(2), 609-
631.

Bens, D.A., V. Nagar, D.J. Skinner, and M.H.F. Wong. 2003. Employee stock options, EPS dilution, and
stock repurchases. Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 51-90.

Covas, F., and W.J. den Haan, 2011. The cyclical behavior of debt and equity finance. American
Economic Review 101, 877-899.

DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D.J. Skinner, 2008. Corporate payout policy. Foundations and Trends
in Finance 3, 95-287.

Dittmar, A.K., and R.F. Dittmar, 2004. Stock repurchase waves: An explanation of the trends in aggregate
payout policy. Working paper. University of Michigan.

Doidge, C., G.A. Karolyi, and R.M. Stulz, 2016. The U.S. listing gap. Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.

Erickson, T., C. Jiang, and T. Whited, 2014. Minimum distance estimation of the errors-in-variables
model using linear cumulant equations. Journal of Econometrics 1983, 211-221.

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1997. Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial Economics 43, pp.153-
193.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2005. Financing decisions: Who issues stock? Journal of
Financial Economics 76, 549-582.

Foroohar, R., 2016. Makers and takers: The rise of finance and the fall of American business. Crown
Business.

Frank, M.Z., and V.K. Goyal, 2003. Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure. Journal of
Financial Economics 67, 217-248.

Guetiérrez, G., and T. Philippon, 2016, Investment-less growth: An empirical investigation, unpublished
working paper.

Hoberg, G., and G. Phillips, 2010. Real and financial industry booms and busts. Journal of Finance 65(1),
45-86.

Jagannathan M., C.P. Stephens, and M.S. Weisbach, 2000. Financial flexibility and the choice between
dividends and stock repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 57, 355-384.



                                                   27
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini, 2012, Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks, American Economic
Review 102, 238-271.

Kahle, K.M., and R.M. Stulz, 2016. Is the American public corporation in trouble? Unpublished working
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lazonick, W., 2014. Profits without prosperity. Harvard Business Review 92(9), 46-55.

Levine, R., 1997. Financial development and economic growth: Views and agenda. Journal of Economic
Literature, 35, pp.688-726.

Ma, Y., 2016. Non-financial firms as cross-market arbitrageurs. Unpublished working paper. Harvard
University.

Ozbas, O., and D. Scharfstein, 2010. Evidence on the dark side of internal capital markets. Review of
Financial Studies 23(2), 581-59.

Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales, 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88(3),
pp.559-586.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 2003. Stock market driven acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 70,
295-312.

Stein, J., 1996. Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world. Journal of Business, 69(4), pp.429-455.

Tobin, J., 1984. On the efficiency of the financial system. Lloyd’s Bank Review 153(July), 1-15.

Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of financial economics, 58(1),
pp.187-214.




                                                     28
Appendix

Variable definitions

variable                definition

                        (SSTK - PRSTKC + DLTIS - DLTR)/AT, where AT is lagged by one year. If any of the
funding rate (total)
                        four variables in the numerator is missing, then we treat it as zero.

                        (SSTK - PRSTKC)/AT, where AT is lagged by one year. If any of the two variables in the
funding rate (equity)
                        numerator is missing, then we treat it as zero.

                        (DLTIS - DLTR)/AT, where AT is lagged by one year. If any of the two variables in the
funding rate (debt)
                        numerator is missing, then we treat it as zero.

                        (AT - (CEQ + TXDITC) + (CRSP per-share price*number of shares outstanding)) / AT,
q
                        all at the end of the previous year

capital expenditure     CAPX /AT, where AT is lagged by one year


change in # of firms    percentage change in the number of firms in a given industry


cash dividend           (DVC + DVP)/AT, where AT is lagged by one year


change in asset         percentage change in AT of a given industry


operating income        OIBDP/AT, where AT is lagged by one year


cash flows              (OIBDP - XINT - TXT - DVC)/AT, all at the end of previous year


                        CAPX + IVCH + AQC + FUSEO – SPPE – SIV (for reporting format codes 1 to 3)
net investment
                        CAPX + IVCH + AQC – SPPE – SIV – IVSTCH – IVACO (for reporting format code 7)




                                                               29
Table 1. Industry funding rate
U.S. firms from 1971 to 2014 with a positive value for total assets in Compustat (in February 2016) are
assigned to one of the Fama and French’s 48 industries or dropped if such an assignment is not possible.
Regulated industries, as identified by Barclay and Smith (1995), are excluded from the sample. An industry
group is required to have at least 10 firms in a given year. Equity funding during a year is computed as the
sale of common stock and preferred stock minus the purchase of common and preferred stock. Debt funding
is the issuance of long-term debt minus the reduction of long-term debt. The funding rate of an industry is
the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of
those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. An industry with a negative funding rate is called a “rationed”
industry.




                                                        30
  (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)     (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)     (9)        (10)     (11)      (12)

                                            summary statistics of industry funding rate                       # of     % of
                 # of      # of
  year                                                                                                  industries industries
            companies industries    mean          std      min            q1   median         q3     max rationed rationed


all years    205,622      1,736     1.8%    5.3%        -12.1%      -0.6%       1.2%    3.4% 117.7%           566     32.6%

   1971        1,809           37    4.1%    6.2%        -2.8%       1.7%       2.8%    4.0% 38.1%              2      5.4%
   1972        2,375           39    3.0%    3.3%        -0.8%       1.0%       2.2%    3.2% 18.4%              2      5.1%
   1973        2,744           39    2.2%    2.5%        -2.2%       0.7%       1.5%    3.4%   8.6%             5     12.8%
   1974        2,949           39    2.8%    2.6%        -2.5%       1.2%       2.7%    4.3%   9.8%             4     10.3%
   1975        2,923           40    1.5%    2.9%        -3.9%      -0.9%       1.6%    3.2% 10.3%             13     32.5%
   1976        2,907           40    0.9%    2.1%        -3.8%       0.0%       0.6%    1.7%   8.8%            10     25.0%
   1977        2,857           39    2.2%    2.4%        -3.2%       0.5%       1.9%    3.2% 11.3%              6     15.4%
   1978        2,841           39    3.0%    4.4%        -0.6%       0.7%       2.2%    3.8% 26.3%              5     12.8%
   1979        2,894           38    3.6%    3.2%        -0.1%       1.5%       2.8%    4.6% 14.0%              1      2.6%
   1980        2,975           38    4.1%    5.7%        -0.1%       1.3%       2.9%    4.2% 34.2%              1      2.6%
   1981        3,262           38    3.7%    4.9%        -0.6%       0.7%       2.9%    3.9% 20.8%              3      7.9%
   1982        3,330           38    3.0%    4.6%        -0.8%       0.5%       1.9%    3.7% 25.9%              7     18.4%
   1983        3,717           38    2.9%    5.4%        -2.1%      -0.2%       1.2%    4.2% 25.3%             13     34.2%
   1984        3,934           38    1.7%    3.8%        -4.6%      -0.8%       1.2%    3.0% 13.0%             16     42.1%
   1985        4,049           39    3.3%    5.0%        -6.2%       1.0%       2.1%    5.6% 20.2%              6     15.4%
   1986        4,276           39    4.9%    5.9%        -2.9%       1.2%       3.7%    6.5% 26.7%              6     15.4%
   1987        5,784           40    4.0%   10.8%       -10.6%      -1.8%       1.6%    5.5% 54.3%             16     40.0%
   1988        5,579           39    0.7%    4.5%       -12.1%      -2.5%       1.0%    3.1% 11.1%             15     38.5%
   1989        5,439           39    1.6%    4.4%        -9.2%      -0.7%       1.0%    3.1% 17.4%             14     35.9%
   1990        5,439           39    0.3%    2.7%        -9.4%      -0.7%       0.7%    2.0%   5.2%            15     38.5%
   1991        5,525           39    1.4%    3.3%        -3.8%      -0.5%       0.6%    2.7% 16.1%             12     30.8%
   1992        5,831           40    1.4%    3.3%        -8.8%      -0.1%       1.2%    2.4% 12.5%             13     32.5%
   1993        6,121           40    1.4%    2.8%        -6.2%      -0.1%       1.2%    3.3%   8.8%            11     27.5%
   1994        6,419           39    1.9%    4.2%        -5.7%      -0.5%       1.3%    2.9% 17.0%             12     30.8%
   1995        7,128           41    2.8%    4.3%        -8.0%       0.2%       2.7%    4.9% 11.4%              8     19.5%
   1996        7,277           41    3.6%    5.7%        -5.9%       0.5%       1.8%    7.2% 22.0%             10     24.4%
   1997        7,078           40    3.3%    6.1%        -8.4%      -0.4%       1.6%    6.1% 25.2%             11     27.5%
   1998        7,170           40    3.2%    4.1%        -5.1%       0.8%       2.4%    5.3% 14.7%              6     15.0%
   1999        7,083           40    3.0%    3.7%        -4.4%       0.5%       2.6%    4.4% 11.5%              6     15.0%
   2000        6,750           40    2.1%    4.7%        -6.1%      -1.2%       1.0%    5.2% 17.9%             17     42.5%
   2001        6,262           40    1.4%    3.4%        -7.2%      -0.4%       1.0%    4.2%   7.9%            13     32.5%
   2002        5,865           39   -0.3%    2.9%        -9.6%      -2.3%      -0.1%    1.3%   5.6%            20     51.3%
   2003        5,571           41    0.5%    3.4%        -5.0%      -1.7%       0.0%    1.4%   9.2%            20     48.8%
   2004        5,365           41    0.1%    4.1%        -6.0%      -2.5%      -0.5%    1.2% 13.3%             24     58.5%
   2005        5,139           41   -0.6%    4.0%        -7.5%      -2.7%      -1.1%    0.9% 15.7%             25     61.0%
   2006        4,883           41   -0.1%    3.5%        -5.7%      -2.6%      -0.6%    1.9% 10.9%             25     61.0%
   2007        4,646           41    2.6%   19.0%       -10.2%      -3.2%      -0.6%    2.2% 117.7%            23     56.1%
   2008        4,398           40   -0.1%    4.1%        -9.7%      -2.5%      -0.5%    2.3% 15.6%             23     57.5%
   2009        4,267           40   -0.1%    3.6%        -4.7%      -2.7%      -1.1%    1.4% 14.4%             24     60.0%
   2010        4,200           40   -0.3%    3.8%        -7.0%      -2.4%      -1.0%    1.1% 13.5%             24     60.0%
   2011        4,163           39   -0.2%    4.3%        -6.2%      -1.8%      -1.1%    0.8% 22.0%             27     69.2%
   2012        4,245           40    0.7%    2.6%        -5.8%      -0.9%       0.3%    2.4%   6.2%            17     42.5%
   2013        4,246           40    0.5%    2.9%        -3.9%      -2.1%       0.3%    2.8%   8.6%            19     47.5%
   2014        3,907           38    0.1%    3.2%        -8.2%      -2.2%       0.6%    2.2%   6.5%            16     42.1%




                                                               31
Table 2. Funding patterns by industry from 1971 to 2014
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. Financials and utilities are excluded from the sample, as
well as the regulated industries, as identified by Barclay and Smith (1995). The funding rate of an industry
is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of
those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. Industries that are “rationed” or “funded” are, respectively,
those that have a negative or positive funding rate. Each year, sample industries are also sorted into quintiles
based on their total funding rates. “Low-funded” and “high-funded” quintiles are, respectively, the group
of industries that are least and most funded during the year.
                                                                                           # of years in # of years in
 industry                                            # of years   # of years # of years
          industry description                                                            "low-funded" "high-funded"
   code                                              in sample      rationed    funded
                                                                                                quintile      quintile
     1    Agriculture                                       43           15         28              11             10
     2    Food Products                                     44           18         26              12              3
     3    Candy & Soda                                      38           15         23               5              6
     4    Beer & Liquor                                     42           24         18              22              4
     5    Tobacco Products                                  11            2          9               2              1
     6    Recreation                                        44           15         29               8              7
     7    Entertainment                                     44            5         39               3             20
     8    Printing and Publishing                           44           19         25              10              4
     9    Consumer Goods                                    44           23         21              13              1
    10    Apparel                                           44           22         22              15              0
    11    Healthcare                                        44           10         34               5             24
    12    Medical Equipment                                 44            9         35               0             12
    13    Pharmaceutical Products                           44           14         30               8              8
    14    Chemicals                                         44           16         28              11              7
    15    Rubber and Plastic Products                       44           16         28              11              8
    16    Textiles                                          43           21         22              13              3
    17    Construction Materials                            44           14         30               3              4
    18    Construction                                      44           14         30              10             19
    19    Steel Works Etc                                   44           10         34               9              8
    20    Fabricated Products                               40           14         26              10             11
    21    Machinery                                         44           11         33               6              7
    22    Electrical Equipment                              44           13         31              11              3
    23    Automobiles and Trucks                            44            9         35               7              6
    24    Aircraft                                          44           23         21              16              4
    25    Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment                  31           13         18               8              6
    26    Defense                                           26           20          6              17              2
    27    Precious Metals                                   36            8         28               7             22
    28    Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining          44            8         36               5             16
    29    Coal                                              18            3         15               3              9
    30    Petroleum and Natural Gas                         44           14         30               4              4
    32    Communication                                     44            8         36               0             15
    33    Personal Services                                 44           15         29               3             17
    34    Business Services                                 44           12         32               4             17
    35    Computers                                         44           18         26               8              2
    36    Electronic Equipment                              44           12         32               4              8
    37    Measuring and Control Equipment                   44            6         38               4              5
    38    Business Supplies                                 44           14         30              10              8
    39    Shipping Containers                               44           13         31               8              8
    40    Transportation                                    44           13         31               6              6
    41    Wholesale                                         44            6         38               0              5
    42    Retail                                            44           15         29               6              1
    43    Restaraunts, Hotels, Motels                       44           16         28              12             13



                                                             32
Table 3. Median industry q of bottom and top funding quintiles from 1971 to 2014
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity
and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets
at the start of the year. The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets, all at the
end of the previous year. Within an industry, each variable is summed across companies and then the ratio
is computed for the industry.




                                                        33
                 median industry q for industry funding quintiles
                                                               p-val for      p-val for
year   "low-funded" "high-funded"    difference                 positive      nonzero
          quintile      quintile  ("low" - "high")          difference (1- difference (2-
                                                          sided Wilcoxon) sided Wilcoxon)
1971      1.01              1.19             -0.17               .            (0.371)
1972      1.11              1.33             -0.22               .            (0.325)
1973      1.24              1.30             -0.05               .            (0.524)
1974      0.93              1.25             -0.32               .            (0.056)
1975      0.92              0.89              0.02            (0.282)         (0.564)
1976      0.92              1.07             -0.15               .            (0.270)
1977      1.13              1.12              0.01            (0.477)         (0.954)
1978      1.00              1.06             -0.07               .            (0.452)
1979      0.86              0.93             -0.07               .            (0.125)
1980      1.03              1.07             -0.04               .            (0.609)
1981      1.02              1.35             -0.32               .            (0.055)
1982      0.98              1.34             -0.36               .            (0.074)
1983      1.00              1.49             -0.49               .            (0.015)
1984      1.19              1.48             -0.29               .            (0.125)
1985      1.10              1.53             -0.43               .            (0.013)
1986      1.13              1.54             -0.40               .            (0.325)
1987      1.23              1.43             -0.20               .            (0.189)
1988      1.15              1.14              0.00            (0.431)         (0.862)
1989      0.93              1.28             -0.36               .            (0.452)
1990      1.22              1.19              0.02            (0.301)         (0.603)
1991      1.05              1.18             -0.13               .            (0.524)
1992      1.12              1.41             -0.29               .            (0.189)
1993      1.15              1.35             -0.20               .            (0.372)
1994      1.21              1.52             -0.31               .            (0.224)
1995      1.43              1.37              0.05            (0.500)         (1.000)
1996      1.42              1.43             -0.01               .            (1.000)
1997      1.59              1.23              0.36            (0.026)         (0.052)
1998      1.68              1.36              0.32            (0.135)         (0.270)
1999      1.77              1.27              0.49            (0.064)         (0.128)
2000      1.32              1.62             -0.30               .            (0.128)
2001      1.11              1.43             -0.32               .            (0.431)
2002      1.23              1.33             -0.10               .            (0.603)
2003      1.61              1.14              0.47            (0.002)         (0.004)
2004      1.71              1.32              0.39            (0.095)         (0.189)
2005      1.67              1.36              0.30            (0.004)         (0.007)
2006      1.82              1.32              0.50            (0.052)         (0.104)
2007      1.87              1.60              0.27            (0.318)         (0.637)
2008      1.99              1.49              0.50            (0.016)         (0.031)
2009      1.19              1.38             -0.19               .            (0.495)
2010      1.56              1.40              0.16            (0.318)         (0.637)
2011      1.79              1.69              0.10            (0.431)         (0.862)
2012      1.59              1.28              0.31            (0.215)         (0.431)
2013      1.72              1.22              0.50            (0.003)         (0.005)
2014      2.13              1.23              0.90            (0.001)         (0.002)




                                        34
Table 4. 11-year event window
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity
and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets
at the start of the year. The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets, all at
the end of the previous year. Within an industry, each characteristic is summed across companies and then
the ratio is computed for the industry. Each year we compute the median value of a given characteristic in
the top (i.e., “high-funded”) or the bottom (i.e., “low-funded”) funding quintile, and also compute the
median value of the characteristic for the preceding and subsequent five years. Year 0 is the assignment
year. Assignment years are from 1976 to 2009 to allow for five years before and after assignment years.
We compute the average for each of those 11 median values for the period considered and test the difference
in mean between high-funded and low-funded industry quintiles (“p-val: mean diff”). We also report the
tests for the difference in median between the two quintiles (“p-val: median diff”). Change in # of firms is
the percentage change in the number of firms during year t. Variables normalized by total assets of the
industry.




                                                      35
Panel A. 11-year event window for the 1st sub-period (1976-1996 funding years)
   year                                                                          year
            "low-              "high-             "low"   (p-val: (p-val:                 "low-          "high-                "low"   (p-val: (p-val:
 relative                                                                      relative
          funded"     (p-val) funded" (p-val)    minus     mean median                  funded" (p-val) funded"     (p-val)   minus     mean median
    to                                                                            to
           quintile            quintile          "high"     diff)   diff)                quintile        quintile             "high"     diff)   diff)
 funding                                                                      funding
total funding rate                                                            q ratio
    -5      1.6%      (0.01)   3.0%    (0.00)    -1.4%    (0.029)   (0.005)       -5      1.13    (0.00) 1.23       (0.00)    -0.10    (0.116)   (0.097)
    -4      1.3%      (0.00)   3.1%    (0.00)    -1.8%    (0.002)   (0.002)       -4      1.15    (0.00) 1.19       (0.00)    -0.04    (0.468)   (0.247)
    -3      1.0%      (0.00)   3.0%    (0.00)    -2.1%    <.0001    (0.000)       -3      1.11    (0.00) 1.22       (0.00)    -0.11    (0.027)   (0.033)
    -2      0.9%      (0.00)   3.5%    (0.00)    -2.6%    <.0001    (0.000)       -2      1.10    (0.00) 1.26       (0.00)    -0.16    (0.002)   (0.007)
    -1      0.3%      (0.28)   3.6%    (0.00)    -3.3%    <.0001    (0.000)       -1      1.10    (0.00) 1.27       (0.00)    -0.16    (0.003)   (0.008)
     0     -1.5%      (0.00)   7.4%    (0.00)    -8.9%    <.0001    (0.000)        0      1.11    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    -0.19    (0.001)   (0.002)
     1      0.0%      (0.98)   4.4%    (0.00)    -4.4%    <.0001    (0.000)        1      1.17    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    -0.13    (0.026)   (0.025)
     2      0.7%      (0.02)   4.0%    (0.00)    -3.4%    <.0001    (0.000)        2      1.21    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    -0.09    (0.161)   (0.138)
     3      1.3%      (0.00)   3.7%    (0.00)    -2.4%    (0.001)   (0.001)        3      1.28    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    -0.02    (0.793)   (0.687)
     4      1.5%      (0.00)   3.1%    (0.00)    -1.6%    (0.010)   (0.009)        4      1.30    (0.00) 1.31       (0.00)    -0.01    (0.878)   (0.841)
     5      1.5%      (0.00)   2.6%    (0.00)    -1.1%    (0.028)   (0.037)        5      1.32    (0.00) 1.34       (0.00)    -0.02    (0.760)   (0.960)

capital expenditure                                                           change in # of firms
   -5      8.1% (0.00)         10.2%   (0.00)    -2.2%    (0.001)   (0.002)      -5      4.4% (0.05)       8.3%     (0.01)    -3.9%    (0.272)   (0.113)
   -4      8.0% (0.00)         9.9%    (0.00)    -1.9%    (0.007)   (0.004)      -4      4.7% (0.05)       5.5%     (0.03)    -0.8%    (0.811)   (0.724)
   -3      7.6% (0.00)         10.9%   (0.00)    -3.2%    <.0001    (0.000)      -3      1.4% (0.51)       5.6%     (0.01)    -4.2%    (0.145)   (0.028)
   -2      7.4% (0.00)         10.9%   (0.00)    -3.5%    <.0001    (0.000)      -2      2.3% (0.26)       4.2%     (0.03)    -2.0%    (0.462)   (0.261)
   -1      7.0% (0.00)         11.1%   (0.00)    -4.1%    <.0001    (0.000)      -1      2.3% (0.29)       5.7%     (0.00)    -3.4%    (0.215)   (0.022)
    0      6.8% (0.00)         11.9%   (0.00)    -5.1%    <.0001    (0.000)      0       1.9% (0.31)       5.2%     (0.01)    -3.4%    (0.190)   (0.021)
    1      7.1% (0.00)         11.3%   (0.00)    -4.1%    <.0001    (0.000)      1       1.6% (0.41)       6.9%     (0.01)    -5.4%    (0.090)   (0.019)
    2      7.5% (0.00)         10.6%   (0.00)    -3.1%    <.0001    (0.000)      2       2.5% (0.11)       4.6%     (0.01)    -2.1%    (0.357)   (0.124)
    3      7.5% (0.00)         10.3%   (0.00)    -2.8%    (0.000)   (0.000)      3       2.8% (0.14)       4.2%     (0.01)    -1.4%    (0.550)   (0.332)
    4      7.3% (0.00)         9.8%    (0.00)    -2.5%    (0.001)   (0.001)      4       2.9% (0.21)       3.8%     (0.04)    -0.9%    (0.753)   (0.326)
    5      7.0% (0.00)         9.4%    (0.00)    -2.3%    (0.000)   (0.000)      5       1.9% (0.32)       4.8%     (0.02)    -3.0%    (0.271)   (0.066)

change in asset                                                               cash dividend
   -5     12.8%       (0.00)   14.6%   (0.00)    -1.8%    (0.400)   (0.268)      -5      2.2%     (0.00)   1.8%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.040)   (0.070)
   -4     12.3%       (0.00)   14.6%   (0.00)    -2.3%    (0.290)   (0.182)      -4      2.2%     (0.00)   1.8%     (0.00)    0.4%     (0.008)   (0.016)
   -3     10.1%       (0.00)   14.6%   (0.00)    -4.5%    (0.009)   (0.008)      -3      2.2%     (0.00)   1.9%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.039)   (0.037)
   -2      9.3%       (0.00)   17.4%   (0.00)    -8.1%    (0.001)   (0.000)      -2      2.2%     (0.00)   2.0%     (0.00)    0.2%     (0.334)   (0.097)
   -1      8.6%       (0.00)   16.7%   (0.00)    -8.1%    <.0001    (0.000)      -1      2.1%     (0.00)   1.9%     (0.00)    0.2%     (0.142)   (0.200)
    0      7.9%       (0.00)   22.1%   (0.00)   -14.2%    <.0001    (0.000)      0       2.2%     (0.00)   1.9%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.069)   (0.047)
    1      9.6%       (0.00)   17.2%   (0.00)    -7.6%    (0.006)   (0.001)      1       2.2%     (0.00)   1.7%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.002)   (0.002)
    2     12.0%       (0.00)   15.5%   (0.00)    -3.5%    (0.112)   (0.056)      2       2.2%     (0.00)   1.7%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.001)   (0.001)
    3     11.5%       (0.00)   14.3%   (0.00)    -2.8%    (0.226)   (0.237)      3       2.3%     (0.00)   1.7%     (0.00)    0.7%     <.0001    (0.000)
    4     11.1%       (0.00)   14.2%   (0.00)    -3.1%    (0.157)   (0.047)      4       2.1%     (0.00)   1.6%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.003)   (0.003)
    5     11.1%       (0.00)   13.7%   (0.00)    -2.6%    (0.309)   (0.125)      5       2.1%     (0.00)   1.7%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.020)   (0.024)

operating income                                                              cash flows
   -5      16.8%      (0.00)   17.2%   (0.00)    -0.4%    (0.629)   (0.782)      -5        6.2%   (0.00)   6.8%     (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.061)   (0.125)
   -4      16.6%      (0.00)   16.7%   (0.00)    -0.1%    (0.901)   (0.960)      -4        6.2%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.084)   (0.083)
   -3      16.2%      (0.00)   17.6%   (0.00)    -1.4%    (0.078)   (0.191)      -3        6.1%   (0.00)   6.8%     (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.038)   (0.031)
   -2      15.6%      (0.00)   18.4%   (0.00)    -2.8%    (0.001)   (0.002)      -2        6.0%   (0.00)   7.1%     (0.00)    -1.1%    (0.001)   (0.001)
   -1      16.2%      (0.00)   18.3%   (0.00)    -2.2%    (0.003)   (0.004)      -1        6.1%   (0.00)   7.2%     (0.00)    -1.1%    (0.001)   (0.002)
    0      16.5%      (0.00)   18.7%   (0.00)    -2.2%    (0.002)   (0.003)      0         6.6%   (0.00)   7.2%     (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.029)   (0.102)
    1      16.6%      (0.00)   17.6%   (0.00)    -0.9%    (0.170)   (0.291)      1         6.8%   (0.00)   6.7%     (0.00)     0.0%    (0.908)   (0.651)
    2      16.7%      (0.00)   16.9%   (0.00)    -0.2%    (0.775)   (0.633)      2         7.0%   (0.00)   6.8%     (0.00)     0.2%    (0.497)   (0.706)
    3      17.2%      (0.00)   16.6%   (0.00)     0.6%    (0.386)   (0.615)      3         7.2%   (0.00)   6.6%     (0.00)     0.6%    (0.056)   (0.056)
    4      16.4%      (0.00)   16.7%   (0.00)    -0.3%    (0.627)   (0.466)      4         7.2%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)     0.3%    (0.282)   (0.302)
    5      16.5%      (0.00)   16.3%   (0.00)     0.2%    (0.747)   (0.801)      5         7.0%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)     0.0%    (0.935)   (0.763)




                                                                       36
Table 4. cont.
Panel B. 11-year analysis for the 2nd sub-period (1997-2009 funding years)
   year                                                                          year
            "low-              "high-             "low"   (p-val: (p-val:                 "low-          "high-                "low"   (p-val: (p-val:
 relative                                                                      relative
          funded"     (p-val) funded" (p-val)    minus     mean median                  funded" (p-val) funded"     (p-val)   minus     mean median
    to                                                                            to
           quintile            quintile          "high"     diff)   diff)                quintile        quintile             "high"     diff)   diff)
 funding                                                                      funding
total funding rate                                                            q ratio
    -5      1.3%      (0.08)   1.7%    (0.01)    -0.4%    (0.622)   (0.412)       -5      1.57    (0.00) 1.28       (0.00)    0.29     (0.003)   (0.004)
    -4      0.7%      (0.28)   2.0%    (0.00)    -1.3%    (0.106)   (0.031)       -4      1.58    (0.00) 1.28       (0.00)    0.30     (0.005)   (0.004)
    -3      0.7%      (0.18)   2.1%    (0.01)    -1.4%    (0.105)   (0.200)       -3      1.55    (0.00) 1.32       (0.00)    0.22     (0.022)   (0.012)
    -2     -0.3%      (0.43)   2.8%    (0.00)    -3.2%    (0.000)   (0.000)       -2      1.59    (0.00) 1.35       (0.00)    0.23     (0.015)   (0.021)
    -1     -1.1%      (0.02)   3.4%    (0.00)    -4.5%    <.0001    (0.000)       -1      1.59    (0.00) 1.40       (0.00)    0.19     (0.066)   (0.091)
     0     -3.2%      (0.00)   5.9%    (0.00)    -9.1%    <.0001    (0.000)        0      1.58    (0.00) 1.37       (0.00)    0.21     (0.027)   (0.058)
     1     -1.0%      (0.05)   2.3%    (0.00)    -3.3%    <.0001    (0.000)        1      1.56    (0.00) 1.32       (0.00)    0.25     (0.019)   (0.046)
     2     -0.8%      (0.16)   1.1%    (0.01)    -1.9%    (0.005)   (0.009)        2      1.55    (0.00) 1.35       (0.00)    0.21     (0.044)   (0.040)
     3     -0.9%      (0.05)   0.1%    (0.65)    -1.0%    (0.054)   (0.124)        3      1.57    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    0.26     (0.002)   (0.005)
     4     -0.9%      (0.02)   0.3%    (0.36)    -1.2%    (0.014)   (0.027)        4      1.55    (0.00) 1.30       (0.00)    0.25     (0.008)   (0.024)
     5     -0.9%      (0.08)   0.0%    (0.98)    -0.9%    (0.172)   (0.200)        5      1.59    (0.00) 1.31       (0.00)    0.28     (0.003)   (0.007)

capital expenditure                                                           change in # of firms
   -5      5.9% (0.00)         6.3%    (0.00)    -0.4%    (0.567)   (0.608)      -5      -2.1% (0.16)      -1.4%    (0.34)    -0.6%    (0.755)   (0.538)
   -4      5.5% (0.00)         6.2%    (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.325)   (0.305)      -4      -3.9% (0.01)      -1.9%    (0.31)    -2.0%    (0.366)   (0.473)
   -3      5.2% (0.00)         6.1%    (0.00)    -0.8%    (0.237)   (0.330)      -3      -3.0% (0.04)      -2.7%    (0.13)    -0.3%    (0.893)   (0.798)
   -2      4.8% (0.00)         6.5%    (0.00)    -1.7%    (0.016)   (0.016)      -2      -4.6% (0.01)      -1.2%    (0.26)    -3.4%    (0.064)   (0.012)
   -1      4.6% (0.00)         6.2%    (0.00)    -1.5%    (0.011)   (0.014)      -1      -5.6% (0.00)      -3.5%    (0.00)    -2.1%    (0.102)   (0.040)
    0      4.3% (0.00)         6.2%    (0.00)    -1.9%    (0.005)   (0.006)      0       -3.9% (0.00)      -3.4%    (0.00)    -0.5%    (0.747)   (0.837)
    1      4.3% (0.00)         5.2%    (0.00)    -0.9%    (0.053)   (0.065)      1       -5.0% (0.00)      -3.8%    (0.00)    -1.2%    (0.240)   (0.166)
    2      4.2% (0.00)         4.8%    (0.00)    -0.7%    (0.082)   (0.091)      2       -4.7% (0.00)      -4.4%    (0.00)    -0.3%    (0.767)   (0.959)
    3      4.0% (0.00)         4.7%    (0.00)    -0.6%    (0.104)   (0.124)      3       -3.5% (0.00)      -4.8%    (0.00)     1.3%    (0.282)   (0.281)
    4      3.9% (0.00)         4.5%    (0.00)    -0.5%    (0.090)   (0.051)      4       -3.3% (0.01)      -4.3%    (0.00)     1.0%    (0.509)   (0.720)
    5      3.9% (0.00)         4.4%    (0.00)    -0.5%    (0.093)   (0.036)      5       -3.4% (0.00)      -5.0%    (0.00)     1.6%    (0.279)   (0.218)

change in asset                                                               cash dividend
   -5      8.4%       (0.00)   10.1%   (0.00)    -1.8%    (0.300)   (0.305)      -5      1.6%     (0.00)   1.3%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.203)   (0.259)
   -4      9.6%       (0.00)   11.4%   (0.00)    -1.8%    (0.378)   (0.218)      -4      1.6%     (0.00)   1.3%     (0.00)    0.4%     (0.047)   (0.124)
   -3      8.9%       (0.00)   11.7%   (0.00)    -2.8%    (0.117)   (0.305)      -3      1.6%     (0.00)   1.2%     (0.00)    0.4%     (0.028)   (0.027)
   -2      7.9%       (0.00)   12.1%   (0.00)    -4.2%    (0.035)   (0.040)      -2      1.6%     (0.00)   1.3%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.182)   (0.238)
   -1      5.8%       (0.00)   12.0%   (0.00)    -6.1%    (0.011)   (0.016)      -1      1.5%     (0.00)   1.3%     (0.00)    0.2%     (0.379)   (0.330)
    0      3.7%       (0.00)   16.3%   (0.00)   -12.6%    (0.001)   (0.000)      0       1.5%     (0.00)   1.2%     (0.00)    0.3%     (0.070)   (0.073)
    1      6.6%       (0.00)   8.7%    (0.00)    -2.1%    (0.280)   (0.238)      1       1.7%     (0.00)   1.1%     (0.00)    0.6%     (0.001)   (0.001)
    2      7.1%       (0.00)   7.0%    (0.00)     0.1%    (0.950)   (1.000)      2       1.8%     (0.00)   1.1%     (0.00)    0.7%     (0.003)   (0.004)
    3      8.2%       (0.00)   5.2%    (0.00)     3.0%    (0.036)   (0.065)      3       1.7%     (0.00)   1.2%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.028)   (0.012)
    4      7.6%       (0.00)   6.1%    (0.00)     1.5%    (0.354)   (0.383)      4       1.9%     (0.00)   1.3%     (0.00)    0.7%     (0.005)   (0.008)
    5      8.1%       (0.00)   5.3%    (0.00)     2.8%    (0.045)   (0.065)      5       2.1%     (0.00)   1.4%     (0.00)    0.7%     (0.003)   (0.005)

operating income                                                              cash flows
   -5      15.0%      (0.00)   14.8%   (0.00)     0.2%    (0.837)   (0.538)      -5        7.7%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)    0.7%     (0.122)   (0.124)
   -4      15.1%      (0.00)   14.6%   (0.00)     0.5%    (0.496)   (0.238)      -4        7.5%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)    0.6%     (0.224)   (0.238)
   -3      14.5%      (0.00)   14.7%   (0.00)    -0.3%    (0.728)   (0.758)      -3        7.3%   (0.00)   7.1%     (0.00)    0.1%     (0.672)   (0.505)
   -2      14.9%      (0.00)   15.1%   (0.00)    -0.2%    (0.784)   (0.798)      -2        7.4%   (0.00)   7.2%     (0.00)    0.2%     (0.507)   (0.505)
   -1      14.3%      (0.00)   14.3%   (0.00)     0.0%    (0.956)   (0.918)      -1        7.4%   (0.00)   6.9%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.121)   (0.166)
    0      14.7%      (0.00)   13.8%   (0.00)     0.8%    (0.256)   (0.330)      0         7.4%   (0.00)   6.8%     (0.00)    0.7%     (0.016)   (0.024)
    1      14.8%      (0.00)   13.0%   (0.00)     1.9%    (0.010)   (0.018)      1         7.8%   (0.00)   6.4%     (0.00)    1.4%     (0.000)   (0.001)
    2      15.4%      (0.00)   13.2%   (0.00)     2.2%    (0.002)   (0.003)      2         7.7%   (0.00)   6.7%     (0.00)    1.0%     (0.005)   (0.003)
    3      14.7%      (0.00)   13.1%   (0.00)     1.7%    (0.003)   (0.002)      3         8.0%   (0.00)   7.2%     (0.00)    0.8%     (0.028)   (0.031)
    4      14.5%      (0.00)   13.3%   (0.00)     1.1%    (0.016)   (0.031)      4         7.9%   (0.00)   7.0%     (0.00)    0.8%     (0.001)   (0.004)
    5      14.6%      (0.00)   13.1%   (0.00)     1.5%    (0.005)   (0.005)      5         7.7%   (0.00)   7.2%     (0.00)    0.5%     (0.064)   (0.073)




                                                                      37
Table 5. Panel regressions of industry total funding rate on industry q
The sample period is from 1971 to 2014. The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding
rate of an industry is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year,
divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. The industry q is the ratio of market
value of assets to book value of assets, all at the end of the previous year. Within an industry, each
characteristic is summed across companies and then the ratio is computed for the industry. To control for
year fixed-effects, all variables are de-meaned by year-specific averages. Intercept is in the regressions but
not reported below. P-values in parentheses are based on two-way cluster-robust standard errors (i.e.,
industry and year).

Panel A. Entire sample period (1971-2014)
                            dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors               Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)

industry q             0.004 (0.480)      0.006 (0.189)        0.005   (0.246)
concurrent cashflow   -0.602 (0.000)     -0.735 (0.000)       -0.716   (0.000)
lagged cashflow        0.454 (0.000)      0.309 (0.000)        0.314   (0.000)
lagged capex                                                  -0.079   (0.487)
concurrent capex                          0.532 (0.000)        0.654 (0.018)
lead capex                                                    -0.083 (0.648)

# observations              1736                1736                1666
R
    2                       5.5%                18.9%               18.7%


Panel B. First sub-period (1971-1996)
                            dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors               Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)

industry q             0.014 (0.085)      0.010 (0.015)        0.009   (0.029)
concurrent cashflow   -0.725 (0.006)     -0.887 (0.000)       -0.852   (0.000)
lagged cashflow        0.527 (0.000)      0.381 (0.011)        0.353   (0.005)
lagged capex                                                   0.041   (0.574)
concurrent capex                          0.537 (0.000)        0.381 (0.017)
lead capex                                                     0.118 (0.346)

# observations              1015                1015                 993
    2
R                           11.7%               32.3%               33.1%




                                                            38
Panel C. Second sub-period (1997-2014)
                            dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors               Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)        Est. (p-val)

industry q            -0.003 (0.607)      0.002 (0.738)        0.000   (0.933)
concurrent cashflow   -0.414 (0.004)     -0.495 (0.001)       -0.485   (0.002)
lagged cashflow        0.342 (0.032)      0.204 (0.056)        0.248   (0.107)
lagged capex                                                  -0.809   (0.084)
concurrent capex                          0.514 (0.021)        2.400 (0.030)
lead capex                                                    -1.239 (0.028)

# observations              721                 721                  673
    2
R                           2.0%                8.5%                18.5%




                                                            39
Table 6. Median industry total, equity, and debt funding rate of low- and high-funded industry
quintiles
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity
and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total
assets at the start of the year. The equity (debt) funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity (debt)
raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of
the year. The quintiles are identified each year, based on the total (i.e., equity + debt) funding rate.

                    median total funding rate                      median equity funding rate                      median debt funding rate
                                p-val for: p-val for:                           p-val for: p-val for:                          p-val for: p-val for:
  year    low-        high-                              low-         high-                              low-        high-
                                low>high low=high                               low>high low=high                              low>high low=high
         funded      funded                             funded       funded                             funded      funded
                                 (1-sided  (2-sided                              (1-sided  (2-sided                             (1-sided  (2-sided
         quintile    quintile                           quintile     quintile                           quintile    quintile
                                Wilcoxon) Wilcoxon)                             Wilcoxon) Wilcoxon)                            Wilcoxon) Wilcoxon)
  1971    0.6%        7.5%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.8%         2.6%       (0.020)    (0.041)     -0.6%        5.7%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1972    0.4%        6.5%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.2%         2.1%       (0.009)    (0.018)     -0.7%        4.7%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1973   -0.1%        6.4%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.4%         0.1%       (0.006)    (0.013)      0.1%        5.5%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1974   -0.5%        6.0%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.0%         0.1%       (0.112)    (0.224)     -0.5%        5.2%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1975   -2.0%        4.8%       (0.000)    (0.001)      0.1%         0.6%       (0.042)    (0.083)     -2.4%        4.2%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1976   -1.3%        3.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)      0.1%         0.9%       (0.007)    (0.014)     -1.2%        3.1%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1977   -0.3%        4.6%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.1%         0.7%       (0.016)    (0.032)     -0.4%        3.5%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1978   -0.1%        6.6%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.0%         0.9%       (0.006)    (0.013)     -0.1%        4.4%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1979    0.3%        7.7%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.0%         0.7%       (0.125)    (0.250)      0.5%        7.4%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1980    0.5%        6.7%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.3%         2.5%       (0.004)    (0.007)      0.4%        5.2%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1981    0.1%       11.5%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.0%         5.8%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.0%        2.9%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1982   -0.4%        8.2%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.0%         4.7%       (0.004)    (0.007)     -0.6%        4.6%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1983   -1.3%        8.8%       (0.001)    (0.002)      0.3%         4.8%       (0.001)    (0.002)     -2.1%        4.4%       (0.002)    (0.003)
  1984   -1.7%        7.9%       (0.001)    (0.002)     -0.9%         0.5%       (0.125)    (0.250)     -1.1%        6.8%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1985   -0.9%        8.7%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.3%         2.7%       (0.009)    (0.018)     -0.2%        7.2%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1986   -1.2%       11.7%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -2.5%         4.5%       (0.002)    (0.005)      0.1%        8.5%       (0.005)    (0.009)
  1987   -4.4%       12.4%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.1%         2.6%       (0.005)    (0.010)     -3.2%        9.6%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1988   -5.0%        5.7%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -1.3%         0.3%       (0.074)    (0.148)     -2.4%        6.3%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1989   -2.5%        5.6%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.3%        -0.3%       (0.262)    (0.524)     -2.9%        5.8%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1990   -3.0%        3.4%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.5%        -0.4%       (0.262)    (0.524)     -2.2%        3.1%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1991   -1.5%        4.9%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.4%         2.4%       (0.009)    (0.018)     -2.4%        2.0%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1992   -0.7%        4.8%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -0.7%         2.7%       (0.020)    (0.041)     -1.1%        2.8%       (0.007)    (0.014)
  1993   -1.8%        4.3%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -0.1%         2.1%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -1.0%        2.1%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  1994   -2.9%        7.1%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -0.6%         2.4%       (0.006)    (0.013)     -1.7%        5.5%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  1995   -1.9%        8.7%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -1.2%         2.2%       (0.007)    (0.014)     -0.7%        7.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1996   -2.3%       12.1%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.4%         3.0%       (0.001)    (0.002)     -0.6%        7.8%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1997   -1.8%       10.6%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.5%         1.4%       (0.001)    (0.003)     -0.2%       10.2%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1998   -1.4%        7.8%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -1.8%         0.1%       (0.007)    (0.014)      1.1%        7.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  1999   -1.1%        8.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -3.0%         2.3%       (0.002)    (0.004)      1.5%        6.1%       (0.001)    (0.003)
  2000   -2.3%        7.2%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -0.8%         3.3%       (0.033)    (0.066)     -2.0%        5.2%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  2001   -2.7%        5.7%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -0.2%         0.2%       (0.186)    (0.372)     -2.3%        4.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  2002   -3.2%        3.0%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.4%         0.1%          .       (0.685)     -4.2%        2.7%       (0.003)    (0.007)
  2003   -3.2%        6.7%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -1.5%        -0.1%       (0.002)    (0.004)     -1.5%        4.1%       (0.007)    (0.014)
  2004   -4.0%        5.1%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.2%         1.7%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -1.3%        3.4%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  2005   -4.5%        3.2%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.8%         0.0%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -1.9%        3.8%       (0.001)    (0.003)
  2006   -4.0%        4.3%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -5.1%         1.6%       (0.000)    (0.001)      0.7%        3.5%       (0.020)    (0.041)
  2007   -5.7%        7.3%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -4.5%        -0.7%       (0.009)    (0.018)     -1.3%        8.0%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  2008   -4.0%        4.0%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -4.3%        -0.2%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.0%        5.1%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  2009   -3.5%        4.0%       (0.000)    (0.001)      0.0%         2.1%       (0.005)    (0.010)     -3.5%        2.5%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  2010   -4.2%        3.0%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -3.2%        -0.6%       (0.064)    (0.128)     -0.8%        5.0%       (0.001)    (0.001)
  2011   -3.7%        2.8%       (0.001)    (0.001)     -4.4%        -1.3%       (0.003)    (0.007)      0.5%        4.4%       (0.001)    (0.002)
  2012   -2.0%        4.3%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -2.0%        -0.3%       (0.012)    (0.024)      0.6%        4.8%       (0.000)    (0.001)
  2013   -3.1%        4.3%       (0.000)    (0.001)     -3.1%         0.6%       (0.001)    (0.001)      0.4%        4.6%       (0.001)    (0.003)
  2014   -4.3%        3.8%       (0.001)    (0.002)     -5.1%        -0.7%       (0.001)    (0.002)      1.1%        4.5%       (0.015)    (0.030)




                                                                        40
Table 7. Year-by-year Spearman correlation between industry q and industry funding rate, without
repurchasers
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity
and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets
at the start of the year. The equity (debt) funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity (debt) raised by
the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year.
The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets, all at the end of the previous
year. We exclude stock repurchasers from the sample and the ranking-based correlation coefficient is
estimated every year across those repurchaser-free industries.




                                                       41
                            Spearman correlation between industry q and:
year
       total funding rate   p-value      equity funding rate p-value       debt funding rate   p-value
1971         0.116          (0.494)           0.115          (0.496)            0.041          (0.809)
1972         0.150          (0.363)           0.394          (0.013)            0.034          (0.837)
1973        -0.037          (0.823)           0.265          (0.103)           -0.131          (0.425)
1974         0.349          (0.029)           0.258          (0.113)            0.296          (0.067)
1975         0.242          (0.132)           0.620          <.0001             0.101          (0.534)
1976         0.085          (0.602)           0.086          (0.597)            0.112          (0.491)
1977         0.167          (0.311)           -0.069         (0.677)            0.145          (0.377)
1978         0.237          (0.147)           0.081          (0.622)            0.259          (0.112)
1979         0.110          (0.509)           0.016          (0.926)            0.140          (0.401)
1980         0.321          (0.050)           0.282          (0.086)            0.264          (0.109)
1981         0.451          (0.005)           0.421          (0.009)            0.191          (0.250)
1982         0.285          (0.083)           0.515          (0.001)            0.074          (0.659)
1983         0.560          (0.000)           0.512          (0.001)            0.356          (0.029)
1984         0.417          (0.009)           0.479          (0.002)            0.340          (0.037)
1985         0.481          (0.002)           0.509          (0.001)            0.419          (0.008)
1986         0.373          (0.019)           0.453          (0.004)            0.116          (0.481)
1987         0.200          (0.216)           0.216          (0.181)            0.128          (0.430)
1988         0.364          (0.023)           0.372          (0.020)            0.315          (0.051)
1989         0.357          (0.026)           0.384          (0.016)            0.247          (0.130)
1990         0.152          (0.354)           0.527          (0.001)            0.015          (0.930)
1991         0.273          (0.092)           0.278          (0.086)            0.058          (0.726)
1992         0.476          (0.002)           0.433          (0.005)            0.176          (0.277)
1993         0.541          (0.000)           0.444          (0.004)            0.338          (0.033)
1994         0.463          (0.003)           0.593          <.0001             0.356          (0.026)
1995         0.244          (0.124)           0.410          (0.008)           -0.039          (0.807)
1996         0.433          (0.005)           0.598          <.0001             0.098          (0.542)
1997        -0.003          (0.985)           0.337          (0.033)           -0.210          (0.193)
1998         0.188          (0.245)           0.417          (0.008)            0.007          (0.967)
1999         0.010          (0.952)           0.351          (0.026)           -0.202          (0.212)
2000         0.592          <.0001            0.620          <.0001             0.405          (0.010)
2001         0.312          (0.050)           0.324          (0.042)            0.171          (0.290)
2002         0.242          (0.138)           0.490          (0.002)            0.133          (0.419)
2003         0.498          (0.001)           0.485          (0.001)            0.210          (0.189)
2004         0.220          (0.167)           0.456          (0.003)           -0.133          (0.407)
2005         0.225          (0.157)           0.330          (0.035)            0.119          (0.459)
2006         0.318          (0.043)           0.333          (0.034)            0.250          (0.115)
2007         0.434          (0.005)           0.339          (0.030)            0.390          (0.012)
2008         0.111          (0.497)           0.418          (0.007)            0.020          (0.905)
2009         0.360          (0.022)           0.294          (0.065)            0.236          (0.143)
2010         0.015          (0.927)           0.189          (0.244)           -0.048          (0.767)
2011         0.066          (0.692)           0.284          (0.080)            0.020          (0.904)
2012         0.013          (0.935)           0.059          (0.718)            0.081          (0.621)
2013        -0.035          (0.832)           -0.013         (0.935)           -0.044          (0.787)
2014         0.064          (0.705)           0.202          (0.224)           -0.122          (0.465)




                                               42
Table 8. Panel regressions of industry total funding rate on industry q – without repurchasers
This table shows the panel regressions of the industry total funding rate on industry q and control
variables, with repurchasers omitted in the years in which they repurchase equity. All other specifications
are the same as those in Table 5.

Panel A. Entire sample period (1971~2014)
                      dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors                  Est. (p-val)            Est. (p-val)           Est. (p-val)

industry q               0.038 (0.000)           0.036 (0.000)           0.030   (0.000)
concurrent cashflow     -0.559 (0.019)          -0.813 (0.025)          -0.597   (0.000)
lagged cashflow          0.518 (0.044)           0.270 (0.115)           0.224   (0.023)
lagged capex                                                            -0.051   (0.531)
concurrent capex                                 0.910 (0.066)          0.575 (0.004)
lead capex                                                              -0.091 (0.333)

# observations                1736                    1736                   1666
    2
R                             2.8%                    9.5%                   15.2%


Panel B. First sub-period (1971~1996)
                      dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors                  Est. (p-val)            Est. (p-val)           Est. (p-val)

industry q               0.043 (0.011)           0.030 (0.056)           0.023   (0.007)
concurrent cashflow     -0.741 (0.085)          -1.185 (0.106)          -0.719   (0.000)
lagged cashflow          0.633 (0.169)           0.323 (0.331)           0.180   (0.317)
lagged capex                                                             0.046   (0.533)
concurrent capex                                 1.214 (0.124)          0.420 (0.006)
lead capex                                                              0.028 (0.797)

# observations                1015                    1015                    993
    2
R                             2.2%                    10.3%                  20.3%


Panel C. Second sub-period (1997~2014)
                      dependent variable: industry total funding rate
regressors                  Est. (p-val)            Est. (p-val)           Est. (p-val)

industry q               0.035 (0.003)           0.037 (0.001)           0.036   (0.002)
concurrent cashflow     -0.316 (0.099)          -0.393 (0.029)          -0.431   (0.007)
lagged cashflow          0.325 (0.095)           0.176 (0.320)           0.263   (0.142)
lagged capex                                                            -0.221   (0.190)
concurrent capex                                 0.504 (0.006)          0.867 (0.065)
lead capex                                                              -0.267 (0.197)

# observations                721                      721                    673
    2
R                             7.2%                    12.8%                  14.8%




                                                             43
Figure 1. Median industry q of “low-funded” and “high-funded” industry quintiles from 1971 to
2014
Each year, the Fama-French 48 industries for which we have data are sorted into quintiles based on their
funding rates. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s
firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. The “low-
funded” and “high-funded” quintiles are, respectively, the quintiles of industries that are the least and most
funded during the year. The industry q is the ratio of the market value of assets of the industry (i.e., book
value of assets – book value of equity + market value of equity) to the book value of assets of the industry
at the end of the previous year.



     industry q                  "low-funded" quintile               "high-funded" quintile
    2.30

    2.10

    1.90

    1.70

    1.50

    1.30

    1.10

    0.90

    0.70

    0.50
             1972

             1974

             1976

             1978

             1980




             1989

             1991

             1993

             1995

             1997

             1999

             2001




             2010

             2012

             2014
             1971

             1973

             1975

             1977

             1979

             1981
             1982
             1983
             1984
             1985
             1986
             1987
             1988

             1990

             1992

             1994

             1996

             1998

             2000

             2002
             2003
             2004
             2005
             2006
             2007
             2008
             2009

             2011

             2013




                                                      44
Figure 2. Year-by-year Spearman correlation between industry q and industry total funding rate
from 1971 to 2014
Each year, the Fama-French 48 industries for which we have data are sorted into quintiles based on their
funding rates. The funding rate of an industry is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s
firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. The industry q
is the ratio of the market value of assets of the industry (i.e., book value of assets – book value of equity +
market value of equity) to the book value of assets of the industry at the end of the previous year. The
correlation coefficient is estimated every year across sample industries.

    Spearman Correlation
    0.600



    0.400



    0.200



    0.000



   -0.200



   -0.400



   -0.600
             1973




             1979




             1985
             1986




             1991
             1992




             1997
             1998




             2004




             2010
             1971
             1972

             1974
             1975
             1976
             1977
             1978

             1980
             1981
             1982
             1983
             1984



             1987
             1988
             1989
             1990



             1993
             1994
             1995
             1996



             1999
             2000
             2001
             2002
             2003

             2005
             2006
             2007
             2008
             2009

             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014




                                                      45
Figure 3. Year-by-year Spearman correlation between alternative industry q ratios and industry
funding rate (total, equity, or debt) from 1971 to 2014
The sample period is from 1971 to 2014. The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The funding
rate of an industry is the sum of all equity and debt funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year,
divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. Conventional q is the ratio of the
market value of equity plus the book value of long-term and short-term debt minus the book value of current
assets to the book value of property, plant, and equipment. PT q is similarly defined, except that the
denominator additionally includes the value of intangible assets, which we obtain from Peters and Taylor
(2016). The correlation coefficient between each of the two q ratios and the industry funding rate is
estimated every year across sample industries.




                                                    46
Figure 4. Year-by-year Spearman correlation between industry q and industry capital expenditures
from 1971 to 2014
Each year, the Fama-French 48 industries for which we have data are sorted into quintiles based on their
funding rates. Capital expenditures of an industry are the sum of all capital expenditures spent by the
industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total assets at the start of the year. The
industry q is the ratio of the market value of assets of the industry (i.e., book value of assets – book value
of equity + market value of equity) to the book value of assets of the industry at the end of the previous
year. The correlation coefficient is estimated every year across sample industries.

    Spearman Correlation
    0.600




    0.400




    0.200




    0.000




   -0.200




   -0.400
             1972
             1973




             1980
             1981




             1989
             1990




             1997
             1998
             1999




             2006
             2007
             1971



             1974
             1975
             1976
             1977
             1978
             1979



             1982
             1983
             1984
             1985
             1986
             1987
             1988



             1991
             1992
             1993
             1994
             1995
             1996




             2000
             2001
             2002
             2003
             2004
             2005



             2008
             2009
             2010
             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014




                                                      47
Figure 5. Aggregate corporate cash flows, net investment, and external funding from 1971 to 2014
This figure shows the decomposition of corporate total external funding into cash dividends, changes in
net working capital, net investment, and internal cash flows (after tax and interests), based on Frank and
Goyal’s (2003) method.Net investment is capital expenditures plus increase in investments plus
acquisitions plus other use of funds minus sale of PPE and sale of investments.

                                                                                     Cash Dividends                                                                                                                       Net Investment
  in 1967 billion $                                                                  ∆ Working Capital                                                                                                                    Cash Flows
 250                                                                                 deficit (total external funding)


 200




 150




 100




  50




   -




 -50
                                                         1978
                                                                1979




                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                        1987




                                                                                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                                                                       1996




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2013
        1971
               1972
                      1973
                             1974
                                    1975
                                           1976
                                                  1977



                                                                       1980
                                                                              1981
                                                                                     1982
                                                                                            1983
                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                          1985



                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                                                      1989
                                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                                    1991
                                                                                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                                                                                         1994



                                                                                                                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2011



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2014




                                                                                                                                                              48
Figure 6. Decomposition of aggregate external funding into equity and debt funds
This figure shows the decomposition of aggregate corporate total external funding into equity funding and
debt funding.

  in 1967 billion $
                                                                                          total funding                                                  equity funding                                                     debt funding
 80.00


 60.00


 40.00


 20.00


  0.00


-20.00


-40.00


-60.00
                                      1975




                                                                                1981




                                                                                                                          1987




                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                                    1993




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1999




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2010
          1971
                 1972
                        1973
                               1974


                                             1976
                                                    1977
                                                           1978
                                                                  1979
                                                                         1980


                                                                                       1982
                                                                                              1983
                                                                                                     1984
                                                                                                            1985
                                                                                                                   1986


                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                        1989
                                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                                      1991



                                                                                                                                                                           1994
                                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                1997



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2003


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2014




                                                                                                                                                             49
Figure 7. Year-by-year Spearman correlation between industry q and industry equity or debt
funding rate from 1971 to 2014
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The equity (debt) funding rate of an industry is the sum
of all equity (debt) raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of those firms’ total
assets at the start of the year. The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets,
all at the end of the previous year. The figures below show the ranking-based correlation coefficient
between industry q-ratio and industry equity (top panel) or debt (bottom panel) funding rate. The coefficient
is estimated every year across sample industries.

    Spearman Correlation
    0.600                        industry q ratio and industry equity funding rate

    0.400



    0.200



    0.000



    -0.200



    -0.400



    -0.600
             1971




             1975




             1979




             1983




             1987
             1988




             1992




             1996




             2000




             2004




             2009




             2013
             1972
             1973
             1974

             1976
             1977
             1978

             1980
             1981
             1982

             1984
             1985
             1986



             1989
             1990
             1991

             1993
             1994
             1995

             1997
             1998
             1999

             2001
             2002
             2003

             2005
             2006
             2007
             2008

             2010
             2011
             2012

             2014
    Spearman Correlation
    0.600                         industry q ratio and industry debt funding rate

    0.400



    0.200



    0.000



    -0.200



    -0.400



    -0.600
             1974




             1978




             1983




             1987




             1991




             1995




             2000




             2004




             2008




             2012
             1971
             1972
             1973

             1975
             1976
             1977

             1979
             1980
             1981
             1982

             1984
             1985
             1986

             1988
             1989
             1990

             1992
             1993
             1994

             1996
             1997
             1998
             1999

             2001
             2002
             2003

             2005
             2006
             2007

             2009
             2010
             2011

             2013
             2014




                                                       50
Figure 8. Median industry q ratio of “low-equity (debt) funded” and “high-equity (debt) funded”
industry quintiles from 1971 to 2014
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The equity (debt) funding rate of an industry is the sum
of all equity (debt) funds raised by the industry’s firms during the year, divided by the sum of the firms’
total assets at the start of the year. The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to book value of
assets, all at the end of the previous year. The figures below show the median industry q of the “low-equity
(debt) funded” and “high-equity (debt) funded” industry quintiles. Each year, sample industries are sorted
into quintiles based on their equity (debt) funding rates, and the “low-equity (debt) funded” and “high-
equity (debt) funded” quintiles are, respectively, the group of industries that are least and most funded by
equity (debt) during the year.


      industry q              "low-equity funded" quintile              "high-equity funded" quintile
        2.50

        2.30

        2.10

        1.90

        1.70

        1.50

        1.30

        1.10

        0.90

        0.70

        0.50
                   1971
                   1972




                   1979
                   1980
                   1981




                   1987
                   1988
                   1989




                   1995
                   1996
                   1997




                   2004
                   2005




                   2012
                   2013
                   1973
                   1974
                   1975
                   1976
                   1977
                   1978



                   1982
                   1983
                   1984
                   1985
                   1986



                   1990
                   1991
                   1992
                   1993
                   1994



                   1998
                   1999
                   2000
                   2001
                   2002
                   2003


                   2006
                   2007
                   2008
                   2009
                   2010
                   2011


                   2014
      industry q                  "low-debt funded" quintile             "high-debt funded" quintile
       2.50

       2.30

       2.10

       1.90

       1.70

       1.50

       1.30

       1.10

       0.90

       0.70

       0.50
                   1971




                   1978
                   1979




                   1986
                   1987
                   1988




                   1994
                   1995
                   1996




                   2002
                   2003
                   2004




                   2011
                   2012
                   1972
                   1973
                   1974
                   1975
                   1976
                   1977


                   1980
                   1981
                   1982
                   1983
                   1984
                   1985



                   1989
                   1990
                   1991
                   1992
                   1993



                   1997
                   1998
                   1999
                   2000
                   2001



                   2005
                   2006
                   2007
                   2008
                   2009
                   2010


                   2013
                   2014




                                                      51
Figure 9. Dollar repurchases versus dollar excess of cash flow over net investment from 1971 to
2014
Each year, we add across the firms in our sample the dollar amount of repurchases, the dollar amount of
excess of cash flow over net investment, and the dollar amount of repurchases plus the dollar amount of
change in cash.


                                                                  Cash Flow-Net Investment gap
  in billion dollars
                                                                  repurchases
 700
                                                                  repurchases + change in cash holdings
 600


 500


 400


 300


 200


 100


    -


 -100


 -200
                                                                 1979
                                                                 1980
                                                                 1981
                                                                 1982




                                                                 1996
                                                                 1997
                                                                 1998
                                                                 1999




                                                                 2012
                                                                 2013
                                                                 2014
         1971
                1972
                       1973
                              1974
                                     1975
                                            1976
                                                   1977
                                                          1978




                                                                 1983
                                                                 1984
                                                                 1985
                                                                 1986
                                                                 1987
                                                                 1988
                                                                 1989
                                                                 1990
                                                                 1991
                                                                 1992
                                                                 1993
                                                                 1994
                                                                 1995




                                                                 2000
                                                                 2001
                                                                 2002
                                                                 2003
                                                                 2004
                                                                 2005
                                                                 2006
                                                                 2007
                                                                 2008
                                                                 2009
                                                                 2010
                                                                 2011




                                                                        52
Figure 10. Year-by-year Spearman correlation of industry q with industry repurchases from 1971 to
2014
The industries are the Fama-French 48 industries. The industry q is the ratio of market value of assets to
book value of assets, all at the end of the previous year. Within an industry, repurchases are summed across
companies within an industry each year.

   Spearman Correlation
   0.600




    0.400




    0.200




    0.000




   -0.200




   -0.400
            1971
            1972
            1973
            1974
            1975
            1976
            1977
            1978
            1979
            1980
            1981
            1982
            1983
            1984
            1985
            1986
            1987
            1988
            1989
            1990
            1991
            1992
            1993
            1994
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2003
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
            2014




                                                    53
