                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        RECENT FLATTENING IN THE HIGHER EDUCATION WAGE PREMIUM:
               POLARIZATION, SKILL DOWNGRADING, OR BOTH?

                                       Robert G. Valletta

                                      Working Paper 22935
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22935


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




Prepared for presentation at the NBER Conference on Research in Income and Wealth,
“Education, Skills, and Technical Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth,” Bethesda,
Maryland, October 16-17, 2015. The author thanks David Autor for his highly constructive and
detailed discussant comments, the editors of this volume (Chuck Hulten and Valerie Ramey) for
their guidance with revisions, and participants in this conference and also the May 2016 Society
of Labor Economists annual meetings for additional helpful comments. He also thanks Catherine
van der List for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Robert G. Valletta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium: Polarization, Skill Downgrading,
or Both?
Robert G. Valletta
NBER Working Paper No. 22935
December 2016
JEL No. I23,J24,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

Wage gaps between workers with a college or graduate degree and those with only a high school
degree rose rapidly in the United States during the 1980s. Since then, the rate of growth in these
wage gaps has progressively slowed, and though the gaps remain large, they were essentially
unchanged between 2010 and 2015. I assess this flattening over time in higher education wage
premiums with reference to two related explanations for changing U.S. employment patterns: (i) a
shift away from middle-skilled occupations driven largely by technological change
(“polarization”); and (ii) a general weakening in the demand for advanced cognitive skills (“skill
downgrading”). Analyses of wage and employment data from the U.S. Current Population Survey
suggest that both factors have contributed to the flattening of higher education wage premiums.


Robert G. Valletta
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market St.
San Francisco, CA 94105
rob.valletta@sf.frb.org
                  Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium:
                          Polarization, Skill Downgrading, or Both?


1. Introduction

       Holding a four-year college degree confers a distinct advantage to workers in the U.S.

labor market. The wage gaps between college-educated working adults and those with a high

school degree—higher education wage premiums—are large and have grown substantially over

the past 35 years. This gap may have been bolstered by technological advances in the workplace,

notably the growing reliance on computers and related technologies, because the skills that are

needed to master and apply these technologies are often acquired through or associated with

higher education (Krueger 1993; Autor, Katz, and Krueger 1998; Autor, Levy, and Murnane

2003; Acemoglu and Autor 2011).

       The expansion of the higher education wage premium has not been completely uniform

over time, however, with rapid growth in the 1980s followed by progressively slower growth

(“flattening”). During the years 2000 through 2010, the wage premium for college-educated

workers rose by only a small amount. Most recently, from 2010 to 2015, the wage premium for

those with college and graduate degrees was largely unchanged, suggesting that the factors

propelling its earlier rise have disappeared.

       While the wage advantage associated with higher education remains large, the lack of

growth in recent years represents a departure from the earlier pattern. This change may have

important implications for the value of higher education as an individual and social investment

and consequences for economic growth as well. Despite the voluminous literature on returns to

education, little attention has been paid to slower growth in the college wage premium and

differences between these higher education groups (Lindley and Machin 2014 is an exception).




                                            Page 2 of 45
       In this paper, I assess and attempt to explain the stalling of the higher education wage

premium and its variation across the college-only and graduate degree groups. I focus on two

primary, related explanations for changing returns to higher education.

       The first potential explanation is labor market “polarization” (Acemoglu and Autor

2011). This theory emphasizes a shift away from middle-skilled occupations driven largely by

technological change. It provides a broad, cohesive explanation for changes in employment

patterns in the United States and other advanced economies in recent decades. Polarization may

account for the slowdown in the college wage premium through a shift in the occupational

distribution of college graduates towards jobs that are being displaced by automation

technologies and related factors (such as outsourcing and rising trade). At the same time, rising

demand for the cognitive skills possessed by graduate degree holders may help maintain and

expand their wage advantage relative to those holding a four-year college degree only (Lindley

and Machin 2014)

       I will refer to the second broad potential explanation for the flattening of higher education

wage premiums as “skill downgrading,” based on the recent work of Beaudry, Green, and Sand

(BGS 2016). They emphasize a general weakening since the year 2000 in the demand for

cognitive tasks in the workplace, reflecting a maturation in the information technology (IT)

revolution and consequent slowdown in workplace IT investments. Skill downgrading in their

framework refers to the process by which weaker demand for advanced cognitive skills cascades

down the skill distribution as highly skilled workers, such as those possessing advanced degrees,

increasingly compete with and replace lower-skilled workers in occupations that rely less heavily

on advanced cognitive skills.




                                           Page 3 of 45
         I begin my empirical assessment in the next section by establishing the basic facts

regarding changes in educational attainment and the higher education wage premiums,

distinguishing between individuals with a four-year college degree and those with graduate

degrees. The analyses throughout are based primarily on data from the Current Population

Survey (CPS) monthly earnings files (monthly outgoing rotation groups, or MORG), which

cover the period 1979-2015. I also conduct selected parallel analyses using the CPS Annual

Social and Economic Supplement files (March CPS ASEC), which at the time of this writing

provide earnings data through 2014. Standard wage regressions that adjust for changing

workforce composition pin down the flattening of the higher education wage premiums noted

above.

         To help interpret these empirical findings, I then discuss the polarization and skill

downgrading arguments in more detail. Observed occupational employment shifts indicate the

potential importance of polarization for the flattening of the college wage premium. The BGS

skill downgrading narrative takes polarization as its starting point but emphasizes different

dynamics over time, with weaker demand for cognitive skills arising as a consequence of a

slowdown in technology investment.

         To assess the effects of polarization and skill downgrading on higher education wage

premiums, I examine changing premiums within and between the broad occupation categories

that are used to identify the extent of polarization. The results of these analyses suggest that

polarization and skill downgrading have both contributed to the flattening of the wage premium

for individuals with a four-year college degree or post-graduate degree. Consistent with the

polarization story, the flattening in the wage premium is partly explained by shifting employment

and relative wages across broad occupational groups, mainly for those with a college degree but




                                             Page 4 of 45
no graduate degree. However, a substantial contribution also comes from the slowdown in the

wage premium within broad occupation categories, consistent with skill downgrading and

heightened competition between educational groups for similar jobs. In the Conclusion, I discuss

the implications of these findings for future research on the returns to higher education and its

role in economic growth.



2. Changes in the higher education wage premium

         The wage premium earned by individuals with higher educational attainment is

commonly attributed to the more extensive skills that they possess (Card 1999, Goldin and Katz

2008). To save space, I will not review the voluminous and well-known literature on estimating

and interpreting the returns to education but will instead turn directly to updated estimates of the

returns to higher educational attainment (college degrees and above).

2.1 Data and descriptive statistics
         Because the data and processing procedures I use are well-known, I describe them only

briefly here, with additional details relegated to Appendix A. The primary data used are from the

CPS MORG files, compiled by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and

currently covering the years 1979-2015. These files contain data for the quarter sample of the

monthly CPS that receives survey questions regarding earnings and related variables in currently

held jobs. I also use the complete monthly CPS files for selected tabulations that do not involve

wages.

         The data handling and processing procedures largely follow those detailed in Lemieux

(2006b, 2010). These include elimination of observations with imputed values of earnings or

hours and adjustments for changing top-codes. I use hourly wages as my earnings measure,

either reported directly by hourly workers or formed as usual weekly earnings divided by usual


                                            Page 5 of 45
weekly hours worked for salaried workers. All wage and earnings variables are deflated by the

annual average value of the GDP deflator for personal consumption expenditures (and expressed

in 2015 terms for ease of interpretation). For all of the analyses in this paper, the samples are

restricted to wage and salary workers age 25-64 (with farming and resource occupations

excluded).

        The basis for the measurement of educational attainment in the CPS switched in 1992

from the highest grade attained and completed to the highest degree received. I formed

educational categories that are largely consistent over time following the guidance of Jaeger

(1997).1 Individuals with a graduate degree, along with information about the type of degree, are

directly identified beginning in 1992. Graduate degree holders prior to 1992 are identified as

those reporting at least 18 years of completed education. I code individuals who report 17 years

of completed schooling in the pre-1992 period as possessing a 4-year college degree but not a

graduate degree.2

        For comparison purposes, I also use data from the March CPS files to estimate changes in

the higher education earnings premium. Compared with the MORG data, which provides

information on earnings in the current reference week, the March CPS data refer to earnings in

the complete prior calendar year. Following standard practice, I restrict the March CPS sample to

full-time, full-year workers and use weekly earnings (annual labor earnings divided by weeks

worked) as the earnings measure, once again dropping observations with imputed earnings or

1
 Relative to Jaeger (1997), in the 1992-forward data I include individuals who report 12 years of
schooling but no diploma in the “no degree” group rather than the “high school degree” group, to be
consistent with the emphasis on degree attainment beginning in 1992.
2
 Lindley and Machin (2014) take a similar approach, which groups individuals who drop out of a
graduate program after one year or complete a one-year Master’s degree program with those who
complete a four-year college degree only. This approach generates a slight discontinuity in the relative
college/graduate shares in 1992, but the discontinuity is larger if instead such individuals are treated as
having a graduate degree.


                                                Page 6 of 45
hours and adjusting for changing top-codes (e.g., Autor, Katz, and Kearney 2008). These files

are currently available through 2015. Since the data refer to the prior calendar year, the reference

period for the March data ends one year earlier than the MORG data (2014 rather than 2015).

       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for employment shares (Panel A) and average real

wages (Panel B) by educational attainment, calculated using the full monthly CPS files for the

employment shares and the MORG files for the wage data. These are provided for 10-year

intervals that largely span the sample frame. The table also lists statistics for selected other years,

including the year that the education variables changed (1992) to bridge the gap in definitions,

and a listing for the final data year (2015).

       Panel A of Table 1 illustrates the well-known, steady decline in the employment share of

individuals whose educational attainment is a high school degree or less accompanied by a

steady rise in the share of individuals possessing a four-year college degree or graduate degree.

As of 2015, nearly 40 percent of employed individuals age 25-64 held a college degree, and one

in seven held a graduate degree, accounting for slightly more than a third of employed college

graduates. Master’s degrees (which include MBAs) account for most of the level and change in

the fraction holding graduate degrees, along with a large proportional increase for the small share

of doctoral degrees.

       Panel B of Table 1 illustrates the large wage gaps between the educational attainment

groups, with the spread in real wages between the graduate degree group and those with less than

a high school degree widening approximately from a factor of two to a factor of three over the

sample frame. Average real wages changed little over the sample frame for those with a high

school degree or less. For those with at least some college education, average real wages rose

somewhat between 1980 and 2000, with larger increases evident for those with higher




                                                Page 7 of 45
educational attainment. Between 2000 and 2010, only holders of graduate degrees saw any

meaningful increase in real wages. Between 2010 and 2015, real wages were flat to down

slightly for all groups. The gap in average real wages between individuals with a four-year

college degree or graduate degree and high school graduates rose from 40-67 percent in 1980 to

72-120 percent as of 2015.

2.2 Composition-adjusted estimates of wage gaps

        To assess the changing wage premium associated with higher educational attainment, I

estimate standard log wage equations of the following form (where i indexes individuals):


                lnWi = Xi  + Si Γ + εi,                                                           (1)


Xi represents a set of demographic controls and Si represents educational attainment. This

equation is estimated separately for each year using the MORG and March CPS data as

described above. The control variables in the vector X include dummy variables for seven age

groups (e.g., 30-34, etc., with 25-29 omitted), three racial/ethnic groups, gender, marital status,

gender*marital status, and geographic location (nine Census divisions). These controls adjust for

the changing composition of the estimation sample, so that the results for the education

categories reflect the average wage premium associated with educational attainment for an

individual with a fixed set of other demographic characteristics.3

        Our interest centers on the estimated vector of coefficients (Γ) on a set of dummy

variables representing discrete categories of educational attainment (S). Table 2 lists the

numerical results for selected years, while Figure 1 displays the results for the complete sample


3
  The results reported below are very similar when this set of control variables is replaced by complete
interactions between four decadal age categories, four race/ethnic categories, the two genders, and marital
status (married spouse present or not), for a total of 64 demographic cells.


                                               Page 8 of 45
period of 1979 through 2015. For both displays, Panel A lists the results for the MORG data,

while Panel B lists the results for the March CPS. The results are expressed in natural log terms.

These conditional wage gaps are displayed for three educational groupings: the broad group of

all workers with at least a four-year college degree, and the two sub-groups consisting of those

with a four-year degree only (“college only”) and those who hold a post-graduate degree as well.

The results for the “college degree or higher” group are based on regressions that are estimated

separately from the one used to estimate the returns for the two sub-groups (as indicated by the

horizontal line breaks in the table). The higher education wage premiums are first expressed

relative to the wages of high school graduates. In addition, separate estimates are provided for

those holding a graduate degree. These are based on the restricted sample of individuals who

have at least a college degree, hence they represent the graduate wage premium relative to the

wages of the college only group (displayed separately in Figure 2).

       The estimates in Table 2 and Figure 1 show that the wage premiums for higher education

generally have been rising over time. However, both data sets shows that the growth has slowed

in recent decades, with the slowdown for the graduate group lagging behind that for the college-

only group. The rate of growth in the college-only wage premium was cut approximately in half

between the 1980s and 1990s and then slowed virtually to a standstill after 2000. It rose about 2-

2.5 log points through 2010 and then was unchanged between 2010 and 2015.

       For the graduate degree group, the slowdown over time is most evident based on the

results for the college or higher sample. These are displayed at the bottom of both panels in

Table 2 and also in Figure 2, where the results for the MORG and March data sets are directly

compared. The estimated wage premiums are very similar in the two data sources, with

somewhat greater annual volatility evident in the March data for the college-only sample in




                                           Page 9 of 45
Figure 2 due to its smaller sample. Relative to the college-only group, individuals with a

graduate degree saw consistent wage premium gains of about 4-5 log points in each of the

decades from the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. During this timeframe, their wage advantage over

college-only workers grew steadily, reaching nearly 25 log points by 2010. However, since 2010,

the graduate degree premium is down slightly in both data sources (through 2015 in the MORG

data and 2014 in the March data).

2.3 Robustness checks and disaggregation by age and gender

        One potential concern with respect to these results is the possibility that they reflect

underlying changes in employment conditions among narrow worker groups or industries. Such

narrow changes may be independent of the broad occupational changes and shifting labor market

competition related to polarization and skill downgrading (which are analyzed and discussed

below, in Section 4). One such narrow group is teachers, who constitute a substantial but

declining share of employed college graduates.4 Excluding educator and librarian occupations

from the regressions raises the estimated higher education wage premiums by 2-4 log points in

general. However, the pattern over time is unchanged relative to the full sample results, with

progressive flattening in the wage premiums and no change from 2010 forward.

        It is also important to consider the potential influence of changing conditions in key

industries that employ large numbers of college graduates. One such industry is the financial

sector, for which the housing bust and financial crisis tied to the Great Recession of 2007-09

destroyed a disproportionate number of jobs. Many finance sector jobs are highly paid, and their

disappearance may have affected the higher education wage premium. However, exclusion of

workers employed in the financial, insurance, and real estate sectors from the regression analysis

4
  Among workers with at least a four-year college degree in the MORG data, the fraction of educators and
librarians declined by a third over my sample frame, from 24 percent in 1979 to about 16 percent in 2015.


                                             Page 10 of 45
has virtually no impact on the estimate wage premiums and their pattern over time.5 Similarly,

BGS (2016) highlight the role of the business and management services industries for their

findings, emphasizing substantial employment changes for young college graduates in this

sector. Exclusion of individuals employed in these industries does not affect the estimated

college-only wage premium. It does raise the level of the graduate school wage premium,

suggesting a relatively low value for graduate degrees in this industry. Nonetheless, the pattern

of the higher education wage premiums over time, as reflected in the results from Table 2 and

Figure 1, is unaffected.

        It is also instructive to examine the higher education wage premium decomposed by age

group and gender. Analyses of employment and wage patterns for the college educated often

highlight younger workers, who are likely to experience the most immediate effects of changing

employment conditions across educational attainment groups (e.g., BGS 2014). Figure 3

parallels Figure 1 (Panel A, MORG) but displays wage premiums for the youngest decadal age

group in my sample (age 25-34) in Panel A and an older group (age 45-54) in Panel B.6 For

younger workers, movements in the wage premiums over time largely parallel those for the

complete sample in Figure 1, with large gains in the 1980s followed by slower gains in the 1990s

and 2000s and no change since 2010. By contrast, for older workers the college-only premium

was largely flat in the 1990s, perhaps because this group did not readily adapt to the new

information technologies introduced during that decade. The college-only premium for older

workers picked up in the 2000s, although like the graduate degree premium it has been flat since

5
 Separate analyses by broad industry, also noted in Section 4, show that the higher education wage
premiums within the finance sector broadly track the patterns evident for the overall economy.
6
 The underlying regressions used to produce the results in Figure 3 are identical to those used for Table 1
and Figure 1, except the samples are restricted to the indicated age groups and the age category controls
are adjusted accordingly. I use age 45-54 rather than the oldest group in my sample, age 55-64, to
minimize the influence of partial retirement decisions on relative earnings over time.


                                              Page 11 of 45
2010. Comparison across the two panels in Figure 3 also indicates that the higher education wage

premiums are larger for older than for younger workers, by about 5-10 log points on average.

This likely arises due to important interaction or reinforcing effects between higher education

and the subsequent acquisition of on-the-job skills that raise wages as workers age.

       Given the well-known increase in the attainment of higher education for women relative

to men, it is also informative to examine the wage premiums by gender. These are displayed in

Figure 4 (Panel A for men, Panel B for women). The series represent the composition-adjusted

higher education wage premiums by gender; as such, they reflect relative wages within gender

group and hence should not be interpreted as capturing wage differences between men and

women. The higher education wage premiums are larger for women than for men, although the

gap has closed over time, especially for graduate degrees. The pattern over time for both genders

is similar to that for the overall sample in Figure 1 (Panel A), with a flattening of the wage

premiums over time and essentially no change since 2010.

2.4 Summing up: higher education wage premiums over time

       The results presented in this section indicate general flattening in the wage premiums

associated with four-year college and graduate degrees. The sharp increases observed in the

1980s have been followed by much slower gains. Since the year 2000, the wage premium

associated with a four-year college degree has changed little. By contrast, from 2000-2010, the

wage premium for holders of graduate degrees relative to those with four-year college degrees

continued to grow at its previous pace, contributing to increasing “convexification” in the returns

to higher education (Lemieux 2006a, Lindley and Machin 2014). Since 2010, however, wage

premiums for both groups have sputtered. They remain large but were essentially unchanged for




                                            Page 12 of 45
the college-only group and down slightly for holders of graduate degrees. These patterns indicate

that the factors propelling earlier increases in the returns to higher education have dissipated.

       Because of the significant time required for individual investments in higher education—

four years or more—the flatter wage premiums may reflect a delayed response of the supply of

college-educated individuals to earlier increases in demand (Acemoglu and Autor 2011, Autor

2014). However, given the relatively consistent increase over time in the college-educated

employment share listed in Table 1 (Panel A), factors on the demand side that affect relative

productivity and employers’ preference for workers with higher education merit further

consideration.



3. Potential explanations: polarization and skill downgrading

       The slower growth and eventual flattening in the wage premium for higher education

documented in the preceding section raises the possibility that the factors propelling rising wage

premiums for highly skilled workers have dissipated. Past accounts of rising wage premiums for

skilled workers generally revolved around the skill-biased technological change (SBTC)

explanation of labor market developments. Under SBTC, rising reliance on sophisticated

workplace technologies boosts the employment and wages of workers, mainly the highly

educated, whose skills enable them to apply those technologies (e.g., Bound and Johnson 1992,

Autor, Katz, and Krueger 1999). Recent research has pointed to factors that may alter or offset

this process. I focus on two broad explanations: labor market polarization and skill downgrading.

3.1 Polarization and skill downgrading: the basics
       The “polarization” hypothesis is a leading explanation for recent employment

developments in the United States and other advanced countries (Goos and Manning 2007,

Acemoglu and Autor 2011, Autor 2015, Goos, Manning, and Salomons 2014). This is a


                                            Page 13 of 45
refinement of the SBTC story that accounts for excess employment growth in the top and bottom

portions of the wage distribution, with erosion in the middle.

       In the polarization framework, evolving workplace technologies undermine demand for

“routine” jobs, in which workers are readily substituted by computer-intensive capital equipment

and processes. They include white-collar office jobs (e.g., bookkeeping and clerical work),

termed “routine cognitive” jobs, and blue-collar occupations that involve repetitive production or

monitoring activities, termed “routine manual” jobs. These routine jobs are concentrated toward

the middle of the wage and skill distribution. By contrast, workers in high-wage “nonroutine

cognitive” (or “abstract”) jobs tend to be complements with computer-based technologies, while

low-wage service workers in “nonroutine manual” jobs are neither substitutes nor complements

with computer-based technologies. Polarization arising from changes in domestic production

technologies may be reinforced by related changes in overseas technologies, through the impact

of offshoring and import competition (see e.g. Autor, Dorn, and Hanson 2013).

       Beaudry et al. (BGS 2016) provide a related but alternative framework for understanding

changing occupation employment patterns over the past few decades. They rely on a basic

variant of the polarization hypothesis as their starting point, but they emphasize a slowdown in

IT investments that has undermined the demand for cognitive skills since the year 2000. In their

narrative, weaker demand for cognitive skills and the consequent impact on highly skilled

workers has cascaded down the skill distribution, undermining the demand for lesser skilled

workers as well. They refer to this process as “skill downgrading,” which contrasts with the

opposite pattern of “skill upgrading” that occurs during the initial period of accelerating IT

investments.




                                           Page 14 of 45
       The similarities and contrasts between the polarization and BGS skill downgrading

scenarios can be readily summarized with reference to the production functions and associated

objective functions that underlie the two models. In a basic model of polarization, firms rely on

cognitive and routine task inputs supplied by workers for production, combined with inputs of

computer capital (see for example Autor et al. 2003).7 The firm aims to maximize profits π by

choosing appropriate input combinations given its production function F:



                max π       p∗     Ω,   ,   ,         Ω                                (2)
                  ,   ,




where p is the price of the firm’s output, Ω is a form of technological (computer) capital with

per-unit rental rate r, Lc and Lr are inputs of cognitive and routine labor with wage rates wc and

wr, and θ is a technology parameter that shifts the level of output for a given set of inputs

(assumed constant in this basic version of the model, but allowed to change in the BGS variant

below). The production function F(∙) is assumed to reflect constant returns to scale and hence

diminishing marginal productivity for individual inputs.

       Production efficiency requires hiring labor inputs up to the point where each inputs’

marginal product equals its market wage or rental rate. Importantly, Autor et al. (2003) assume

that computer capital is perfectly substitutable with routine labor inputs, implying

complementarity between computers and cognitive (nonroutine) labor in their setting. In this

framework, as the price of computer capital falls, production shifts toward greater reliance on

cognitive labor inputs and less on routine labor inputs, with corresponding reductions in the


7
 This representation is adapted from Autor et al. (2003), modified to be broadly consistent with the
notation and framework in BGS (2016). Nonroutine manual jobs are largely ignored here, for simplicity
and because they have limited relevance for college-educated workers.


                                                Page 15 of 45
relative wage paid for routine labor inputs. Because routine tasks are common among many jobs

toward the middle of the wage distribution, polarization will tend to erode or “hollow out”

middle-class jobs and wages.

       BGS extend the basic polarization model by incorporating the key feature that cognitive

labor inputs create a stock of organizational capital for firms, which enables them to develop and

utilize new technologies. This is captured in the following modification of equation 2, which is a

discrete-time version of the objective function from equation (1) in BGS (2016).



                       max π     p∗     Ω,    ,                                      (3)
                         ,


                                        . . ∆Ω               Ω



Relative to the production function in equation (2), Ω in equation (3) represents intangible

“organizational capital” rather than tangible computer capital. In this modified framework,

cognitive labor inputs do not directly affect current production but instead contribute to output

through the accumulation of organizational capital (which depreciates at the rate δ). The first-

order conditions for production efficiency are similar to the basic polarization model from

equation (2).

       This modified model is distinguished by its dynamic properties in response to a

technological shift, or change in θ. BGS assume that an increase or improvement in the

technology factor θ raises the productivity of the organizational capital accumulated through the

use of cognitive labor inputs but has no direct effect on the productivity of routine labor inputs.

These model features generate a “boom-bust cycle” in the demand for cognitive tasks and overall

labor demand in response to technological improvement. In particular, the dynamics of the



                                             Page 16 of 45
model predict that the stock of cognitive tasks/skills grows during the boom, as the economy

adjusts to the need for additional organizational capital to manage the new technology. Once the

level of organizational capital becomes sufficiently large for appropriate use of the new

technology, the demand for cognitive tasks declines as their use is shifted from expanding

organizational capital to maintaining it by offsetting depreciation (similar to the pattern in

existing models of technology diffusion and capital investment).

        The BGS model can predict the strong growth in demand and wages for workers in jobs

that rely heavily on cognitive tasks/skills up to the year 2000—the boom phase—followed by a

decline thereafter—the bust phase. The demand reversal during the bust phase causes high-

skilled workers to move down the occupational ladder and replace lower-skill workers, pushing

the latter group further down the occupational ladder (“skill downgrading”) and perhaps out of

the labor market entirely.8

3.2 Descriptive evidence

        Broad empirical evidence suggests that polarization and skill downgrading are both

contributing to changing employment patterns and hence may be affecting higher education

wage premiums.

        Patterns of occupational job growth in recent decades confirm the relevance of the

polarization narrative. Labor demand and job growth have been relatively rapid in the high-wage

nonroutine cognitive and low-wage nonroutine manual categories, with the middle-wage routine

jobs experiencing downward pressure. This pattern can be seen in Figure 5, which displays

annual rates of job growth for the four broad polarization categories over four sub-periods


8
 As BGS note in their Introduction: “In this maturity stage, having a college degree is only partly about
obtaining access to high-paying managerial and technology jobs—it is also about beating out less
educated workers for barista and clerical-type jobs.”


                                              Page 17 of 45
(classified using the broad occupational scheme from Acemoglu and Autor 2011; see Appendix

B for the correspondence).9 The figure shows substantial growth in the 1980s followed by a

slowdown in the 1990s for all groups (reflecting in part the impact of the early 1990s

recession).10 Polarization is evident in the 1990s, reflected in a sharper slowdown for the routine

vs. the nonroutine categories. This process appeared to accelerate after the year 2000, with

substantial gains for nonroutine jobs and substantial net losses for routine jobs, particularly

during the Great Recession of 2007-09 and the subsequent recovery.11

        Polarization will differentially affect highly educated and less educated groups due to

their very different occupational distributions. Figure 6 shows the shares of the college-only and

graduate degree groups in the nonroutine cognitive (Panel A) and routine cognitive (Panel B)

categories. Workers with at least a college degree account for a large and rising share of

nonroutine cognitive jobs, reaching nearly 70 percent by 2014 (Panel A). Underlying this pattern

is a significant rise in the share of nonroutine cognitive jobs held by individuals possessing a

graduate degree, with little change in the share from the college-only group. This pattern is

consistent with rising demand for the most highly educated individuals in jobs that require

extensive nonroutine cognitive skills. The college-only group share also has grown in the routine

cognitive category (Panel B), commensurate with their rising share of the overall workforce.

9
 Autor (2015) relabeled the nonroutine categories and collapsed the two routine categories into a single
one. I maintain the original four-group categorization based on the cognitive/manual and
routine/nonroutine distinctions due to the preponderance of college graduates in each of the cognitive
categories.
10
  The start year of 1983 was dictated by the availability of official BLS occupational employment data
beginning in that year, and the change between 1999 and 2000 is omitted to eliminate the influence of a
discontinuity in occupational category definitions.
11
  The differential growth rates across the broad occupational categories have generated significant
changes in their employment shares over time. Nonroutine cognitive jobs are the largest category: their
share rose from about 30 percent to slightly over 40 percent of all jobs during the sample frame. The share
of routine jobs declined from nearly 60 percent to about 45 percent. The share of nonroutine manual jobs
rose from about 12 to about 15 percent, mostly since the year 2000.


                                              Page 18 of 45
        Figure 7 reverses the Figure 6 calculations by displaying the share of nonroutine

cognitive jobs within the college-only and graduate degree groups. Among the college-only

group, the fraction employed in nonroutine cognitive jobs declined between 2000 and 2015, from

about 68 to 64 percent. By contrast, the share of graduate degree holders employed in nonroutine

cognitive jobs has been largely stable at about 90 percent in recent years, while their overall

workforce share has grown.

        These tabulations suggest that polarization may be an important factor underlying the

rising relative return to post-graduate education. As discussed by Autor (2015), the wage impacts

of polarization depend not only on skill/technology complementarity, but also on: (i) the

demand elasticity for products and services that rely heavily on the different skill/task groups;

(ii) labor supply elasticity for the different skill/task groups. In regard to nonroutine cognitive

jobs, both factors imply that workers in these jobs are likely to see their wages rise in response to

rising reliance on computer and automation technologies (assuming that their skills are

complementary with computers). Demand for their output is relatively elastic, and an inelastic

supply response due to the time required for acquiring additional education implies that the

supply of such workers does not respond quickly to rising demand. As such, ongoing

polarization should put upward pressures on the relative wages of individuals employed in

nonroutine cognitive jobs, most of whom have college or graduate degrees.12

        As discussed above, the BGS “skill downgrading” alternative takes polarization as its

starting point but emphasizes a more general decline in demand for cognitive skills, which may

affect all educational attainment groups. BGS present evidence to support the claim that the

12
  Based on these considerations, Autor (2014) notes that while polarization is likely to lower wages of
workers in routine skill/task occupations, wages for workers in nonroutine manual jobs are likely to be
relatively unaffected by polarization, despite the favorable polarization effects on employment for that
group.


                                              Page 19 of 45
demand for cognitive and technological skills in the U.S. labor market has weakened since the

year 2000. They focus on broad patterns in employment across occupational and educational

attainment groups, distinguishing between jobs that are intensive in cognitive versus routine or

manual skills. The patterns in employment growth that they document are consistent with a

reversal in the demand for cognitive skills, notably a slowdown in the relative rate of

employment growth for occupations that are toward the top end of the wage distribution. They

also use a more detailed identification scheme for cognitive task intensive jobs and confirm the

shift out of such jobs by college graduates implied by my Figure 7 (see their Figure 10).

          One key element of the BGS framework and predictions is a pickup followed by a

decline in technological advance, which generates the boom-bust cycle for cognitive

employment and eventual skill downgrading in their model. This assumption is strongly

supported by patterns in U.S. productivity growth in recent decades, depicted in Figure 8.13 The

growth in output per worker measured by productivity gains generally reflects improvements in

production technologies. Figure 8 shows a sharp productivity acceleration from 1995-2004,

which corresponds roughly to the period of diffusion for new IT technologies that motivated the

BGS model.14 This was followed by an even more pronounced downshift in productivity growth.

Productivity gains were especially slow from 2010-forward, the period during which the wage

premium for higher education was flat or down (as discussed in Section 2 earlier). This

correspondence suggests that the BGS narrative of a technology slowdown is relevant for

understanding the recent pattern in the higher education wage premium.


13
     I thank my colleague John Fernald for his advice with this display.
14
  BGS focus on the year 2000 as a dividing line for the slowdown in demand for cognitive skills.
However, it is likely that firms’ ability to utilize new organizational capital associated with the IT
revolution, and hence increase measured productivity, continued for a time after investment in that capital
and corresponding rapid expansion of cognitive jobs largely came to an end.


                                                 Page 20 of 45
        BGS note that their model has limited implications for relative wages across skill groups.

They also note, however, that a simple parametrization of their model generates the slowdown in

wage growth across the skill spectrum observed during the “bust” phase, consistent with the

observed slowdown in real wages beginning in the year 2000 (see my Table 1, Panel A).15 The

skill downgrading narrative also can explain the recent elevated level of “underemployment” of

young college graduates, defined as the tendency for them to work in jobs that do not strictly

require a college degree (see Abel and Deitz 2016, forthcoming in this volume).



4. Wage effects of polarization and skill downgrading

        The confluence of polarization and skill downgrading influences on the labor market in

recent years has been noted by others. Autor (2015), Lindley and Machin (2014), and BGS

(2016) all provide a balanced, informed discussion and interpretation of labor market

developments from 2000 forward and acknowledge the possibility that polarization and skill

downgrading may both be playing a role. Each may have contributed to the flattening of the

higher education wage premiums documented in Section 2.

        No sharp dividing lines between the two explanations are readily apparent. However,

some insight can be gleaned by examining the wage premium patterns within and across the four

broad occupation groups used in the polarization typology. The preceding analyses indicated

complex changes in the employment and wage patterns of highly educated individuals across the

broad polarization occupation grouping in recent years. A within-between analysis is a relatively

straightforward means for combining these changes into a single set of summary results.


15
  The slowdown in real wage growth for all educational groups displayed in Table 1 is maintained when
the data are adjusted for the same individual characteristics as used for the regression analyses in Tables 2
and 3 (using a re-weighting methodology).


                                               Page 21 of 45
        This analysis begins with the same wage regressions as reported in Section 2, but with

separate regressions run for each of the four broad occupational groups from the polarization

typology. Let γ represent a higher education wage premium (college or more, college only, or

graduate degree) estimated for a specific year based on equation (1) and reported in Table 2. The

overall premium estimate can be decomposed as follows:



                                                                                                    (4)


                                              ∗




where j subscripts the four broad occupation groups in the polarization typology, the γj’s are

occupation-specific estimates of the higher education premium, and the weights wj are set equal

to the share of each occupation group in total employment.

        The within component in equation (4) is defined as the employment-weighted sum of the

estimated occupation-specific wage premiums. It represents the higher education wage premium

conditional on occupational skill/task group. It can be interpreted as the competitive advantage

enjoyed by individuals with higher educational attainment when competing directly with less-

educated individuals for similar jobs (within the broad polarization occupational groupings). As

such, changes in the within component likely reflect a BGS skill downgrading effect, which

causes enhanced competition across educational groups for similar jobs. The between component

is obtained as the difference between the total estimate and the within component.16 It does not


16
   Note that the total effect corresponds to the full-sample estimates from Table 2. For example, the first
total effect listed in column 1 of Table 3, 0.270, corresponds to the college-only estimate from column 1
of Panel A in Table 2.


                                               Page 22 of 45
have a precise interpretation in the context of the polarization and skill downgrading narratives: a

relative increase in the shares of college-educated workers in routine jobs could reflect ongoing

polarization in the distribution of jobs or the process of skill downgrading. However, it is

informative nonetheless to assess whether the changes in the wage premium are associated with

shifts in the occupational distribution of employment by education group.

        I conduct this analysis by first estimating higher education wage premiums within each of

the four broad polarization occupation groups, which provide the inputs into equation (4) above.

The regressions are otherwise identical to those reported in Table 2. Table 3 lists the regressions

results, focusing on the college-only premium (measured relative to high school graduates) and

the graduate degree premium (measured relative to the college-only group), with results for the

same set of years as Table 2 listed. The panel immediately below the regressions lists the

decomposition of the “total” effect into “within” and “between” components.

        The regression results in Table 3 indicate that the higher education wage premiums are

widely dispersed and their changes over time have been relatively consistent across the

occupation groups. The exception is routine manual jobs, in which the higher education wage

premium is relatively small for both education groups: the college-only premium is about half its

size relative to the estimates for the other three groups, and the graduate premium is not

statistically different from zero.

        These patterns imply that increases in the total effect over time have been primarily

driven by changes in the within component, with limited movement in the between component.

This is confirmed by the results listed in Table 3 for selected years and displayed in Figure 9 for

the complete sample frame. The within component, representing a competitive advantage to

higher education within broad occupation groups, accounts for virtually all of the increase in the




                                           Page 23 of 45
higher education wage premiums over time. However, the between component contributed to a

slight increase in the wage premiums for both higher education groups up to the year 2000,

indicating on ongoing shift toward higher paid cognitive jobs for college-educated workers.

        Our primary goal is to understand and interpret the changes in the within and between

components since the year 2000. For the college-only group, the within component continued to

rise after the year 2000 at nearly the same rate as in the 1990s, rising by about 3.5 log points

through 2010 and another 1.0 points through 2015. However, this was offset by a decline in the

between component of about 2 log points from 2000 through 2015. This suggests that despite the

increase in the college-only group’s competitive advantage over lesser educated individuals

within broad occupational groups, their overall wage advantage has been eroded slightly by a

shift toward routine jobs. This is consistent with polarization or skill downgrading.

        For the graduate degree group, the between effect did not decline after 2000, indicating

that their occupational distribution has not shifted away from highly paid cognitive jobs.

However, between 2010 and 2015, the wage gap between graduate degree holders and the

college-only group within the same broad occupations fell by about 2 log points, suggesting that

the direct competitive edge afforded by graduate training may be eroding. This erosion of the

within effect for the graduate group suggests that skill downgrading may be playing an

increasingly important role at the top of the skill distribution.

        These results are robust to alternative definitions for the four broad occupations groups,

including re-organization of the routine and non-routine manual categories and separate

treatment of selected services industries.17 I also investigated alternative decompositions based

on industry rather than occupation categories. These analyses indicated that the level and

17
  I thank my discussant David Autor for emphasizing the importance of investigating alternative
occupational groupings, based on his recent research (e.g., Autor and Dorn 2013).


                                             Page 24 of 45
changes in higher education wage premiums are almost entirely determined within industries,

with virtually no contribution coming from differences or changes over time in the wage

premium and higher education shares across industries.

       Overall, the results suggest rising competition between education groups for increasingly

scarce well-paid jobs. Some of this is reflected in the movement of individuals holding only a

college degree into routine jobs, consistent with polarization or skill downgrading, and some is

reflected in the wage advantage of those with graduate degrees over the college-only group

within broad occupations, suggesting skill downgrading.



5. Discussion and conclusions

       I have documented a flattening in the U.S. higher education wage premium over the last

few decades. In particular, after rising substantially in the 1980s, growth in the wage gap

between individuals with a four-year college or graduate degree and those with a high school

degree slowed progressively. The gaps have changed little since the year 2000, and they were

flat to down during the period 2010-2015. These patterns suggest that the previously growing

complementarity between highly educated labor and new production technologies, especially

those that rely on computers and related organizational capital, may be leveling off.

       I investigated these patterns with reference to two related explanations for changing U.S.

employment patterns: (i) a shift away from middle-skilled occupations driven largely by

technological change (“polarization;” e.g., Acemoglu and Autor 2011); and (ii) a general

weakening in the demand for advanced cognitive skills that cascades down the skill distribution

(“skill downgrading;” Beaudry, Green, and Sand 2016). Descriptive evidence and comparison of

the higher education wage premiums within and between broad occupational groups suggests




                                           Page 25 of 45
that both factors have played a role in the flattening of the overall premiums. Occupational

employment shifts have held down the college-only premium somewhat since the year 2000,

suggesting that college-educated workers are increasingly sliding down into routine jobs. This is

consistent with polarization or skill downgrading. More recently, since 2010, the wage gap

between graduate degree holders and the college-only group within the same broad occupations

has declined somewhat, suggesting that graduate training may be providing less of a competitive

edge than it has in the past. This suggests that skill downgrading may be playing an increasingly

important role at the top of the skill distribution. Overall, the results suggest rising competition

between education groups for increasingly scarce well-paid jobs.

       These findings should not be interpreted as suggesting that college and graduate training

are no longer sound financial investments, from an individual or social perspective. Recent

analyses indicate that relative to financing costs, higher education yields positive net returns for

most individuals who complete college (Abel and Deitz 2014, Autor 2014, Daly and Cao 2015).

On the other hand, it is important to note that the wage premiums to higher education are likely

to vary substantially across individuals. Although higher education may be financially

advantageous on average, the flattening of returns as costs have continued to rise suggests that

college may be an unfavorable financial investment for rising numbers of individuals. In these

circumstance, individual variation in returns looms as an increasingly important issue for future

research.

       I have focused on demand-side factors propelling the relative wages of college graduates,

but supply-side factors may be important as well (Acemoglu and Autor 2011, Autor 2014).

Sorting out the relative contributions of a demand slowdown and supply speed-up may be a

worthwhile endeavor for future research. Related to overall supply trends, the composition of the




                                            Page 26 of 45
college-educated workforce may have shifted in important ways. For-profit college attendance

has expanded rapidly since the year 2000, and subsequent wage increases appear limited, even

for those who complete four-year undergraduate and graduate degrees at for-profit institutions

(Cellini and Turner 2016). This may be holding down the returns to college estimated from the

population of employed college graduates.

       With these caveats in mind, I will conclude by nothing that my findings raise the

possibility of an eroding relationship between technological advance and the returns to

investment in higher education. If this interpretation proves to be correct and durable, it has

potentially important implications for this volume’s primary themes. Human capital has been a

key engine of growth in developing and advanced economies alike. Slower growth in the returns

to higher education suggest that this connection may be fraying, raising the possibility of

continued slow growth ahead.




                                            Page 27 of 45
References

Abel, Jaison R., and Richard Deitz. 2014. “Do the Benefits of College Still Outweigh the Costs?”
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 20(3).
       https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/current_issues/ci20-3.pdf

Abel, Jaison R., and Richard Deitz. 2016. “Underemployment in the Early Careers of College
       Graduates Following the Great Recession.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
       New York. Forthcoming in this volume.

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
     Employment and Earnings.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of
     Labor Economics, Volume 4b: 1043-1171. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.

Autor, David H. 2014. “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the ‘Other
       99 Percent.’" Science 344 (6186, May 23): 843-851.

Autor, David H. 2015. “Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth.” Federal
       Reserve Bank of St. Louis: Economic Policy Proceedings, Reevaluating Labor Market
       Dynamics: 129–177. http://economics.mit.edu/files/9835

Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. “The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
       Polarization of the US Labor Market.” American Economic Review 103(5): 1553–1597.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor
       Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review
       103(6): 2121–2168.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. “Computing Inequality: Have
       Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (4, Nov.):
       1169-1214.

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of Recent
       Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       118 (4, Nov.): 1279-1333.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2014. “The Declining Fortunes of the
      Young Since 2000.” American Economic Review 104(5, May): 381–86.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2016. “The Great Reversal in the
      Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks.” Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1, Part 2):
      S199-247.

Bound, John, and Johnson, George. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
      Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review 83 (June): 371–92.




                                         Page 28 of 45
Buchmueller, Thomas C., John DiNardo, and Robert G. Valletta. 2011. “The Effect of an
     Employer Health Insurance Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage and the Demand for
     Labor: Evidence from Hawaii.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3
     (November), pp. 25–51.

Card, David. 1999. "The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings". In Orley Ashenfelter and
       David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, and Nicholas Turner. 2016. “Gainfully Employed? Assessing the
        Employment and Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data.”
        NBER Working Paper 22287, May.

Daly, Mary C., and Yifan Cao. 2015. “Does College Pay?” In Does College Matter? Federal
       Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2014 Annual Report. http://sffed-
       education.org/annualreport2014/#college-essays/does-college-pay

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. "Labour Market Institutions and
      the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach." Econometrica
      64(5, September): 1001-1044.

Goldin, Caudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology.
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. “Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of
      Work in Britain.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118–133.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2014. “Explaining Job Polarization:
      Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring.” American Economic Review,
      104(8): 2509–2526.

Jaeger, David. 1997. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 15(3,
        Jul.): 300-09.

Krueger, Alan. 1993. “How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from
      Microdata, 1984-1989.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (1, Feb.): 33-60.

Lemieux, Thomas. 2006a. “Postsecondary Education and Increasing Wage Inequality.”
      American Economic Review 96(2, May): 195-99.

Lemieux, Thomas. 2006b. “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy
      Data, or Rising Demand for Skill?” American Economic Review 96(3, June): 461-98.

Lemieux, Thomas. 2010. “What Do We Really Know About Changes in Wage Inequality?” In
      Katharine G. Abraham, James R. Spletzer, and Michael Harper, eds., Labor in the New
      Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                        Page 29 of 45
Lindley, Joanne, and Stephen Machin. 2013. “The Rising Postgraduate Wage Premium.”
       Working paper, London School of Economics, October.
       http://personal.lse.ac.uk/machin/pdf/jl%20sm%20october%202013.pdf.




                                       Page 30 of 45
         Table 1: Educational Attainment Shares and Real Hourly Wages

                                                      Panel A: Employment share
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)
                                   1980        1990        1992      2000       2010         2015

No degree (<12 yrs. education)     0.197      0.130         0.115     0.099      0.082       0.077

High school degree                 0.371      0.368         0.358     0.314      0.280       0.256

Some college                       0.205      0.238         0.259     0.280      0.280       0.278

College only (4-year)              0.158      0.183         0.177     0.205      0.232       0.247

Graduate Degree                    0.069      0.081         0.090     0.103      0.126       0.143

Graduate degree by type
   Master's                                                 0.068     0.075      0.094       0.107

   Professional                                             0.012     0.014      0.016       0.016

   Doctoral                                                 0.010     0.013      0.016       0.019

                                       Panel B: Real Hourly Wage (2015 $) (averages by group)

                                    (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)
                                   1980        1990         1992      2000        2010       2015

No degree (<12 yrs. education)     14.19      12.84         12.47     13.03      13.22       13.56

High school degree                 16.33      15.99         15.87     17.20      17.77       17.98

Some college                       18.80      19.29         19.16     20.84      21.47       21.59

College only (4-year)              22.85      25.32         25.18     28.98      30.49       30.93

Graduate Degree                    27.27      31.43         31.66     36.40      39.70       39.48

Graduate degree by type
   Master's                                                 29.94     33.99      36.85       36.83

   Professional                                             38.32     45.01      50.75       50.51

   Doctoral                                                 35.83     41.44      46.43       45.70

Note: Author's calculations from CPS monthly files (Panel A) and MORG files (Panel B); sample weights
used. See Table 2 note for MORG sample description and counts. Master's degrees include MBAs along
with a wide set of other master's degrees; professional degrees are J.D., M.D., and related.




                                            Page 31 of 45
                   Table 2: Composition-Adjusted Wage/Earnings Differentials
                          (log points, relative to high school graduates)

                                                             Panel A: CPS MORG Data
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)          (6)
                                      1980          1990           1992      2000          2010         2015
Full sample
College degree or higher              0.304         0.449        0.464        0.518       0.566        0.566
                                      (.003)        (.003)       (.003)       (.004)      (.004)       (.005)
College only (4-year)                 0.270         0.402        0.403        0.451       0.475        0.477
                                      (.004)        (.004)       (.004)       (.005)      (.005)       (.005)
Graduate degree                       0.383         0.553        0.581        0.648       0.727        0.712
                                      (.005)        (.005)       (.005)       (.006)      (.006)       (.006)
Observations                         121001        123111       119014        83314       85397        76789
College degree or higher sample
Graduate degree                       0.111        0.149          0.170      0.194        0.245        0.226
                                      (.006)       (.006)         (.006)     (.007)       (.006)       (.006)
Observations                          27042        33334         32684       26789        32305        31572
                                                             Panel B: CPS March Data
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)          (6)
                                      1980          1990          1992       2000          2010         2014

Full sample
College degree or higher              0.293        0.449         0.477        0.538       0.579        0.576
                                      (.006)       (.006)        (.006)       (.006)      (.006)       (.007)
College only (4-year)                 0.260        0.400         0.415        0.468       0.488        0.488
                                      (.007)       (.007)        (.007)       (.006)      (.007)       (.007)
Graduate degree                       0.368        0.557         0.593        0.680       0.740        0.725
                                      (.009)       (.009)        (.009)       (.008)      (.008)       (.008)
Observations                          34258        38123         37143        52489       45575        43435
College degree or higher sample
Graduate degree                       0.102        0.155         0.174        0.206       0.244        0.230
                                      (.011)       (.010)        (.010)       (.009)      (.008)       (.009)
Observations                          8184         10630         10709        16350       17608        17540
Note: Estimated coefficients from ln(wage or earnings) regressions for the years indicated in the column labels;
horizontal lines identify coefficients obtained from separate regressions. Standard errors in parentheses.
Samples are wage and salary workers age 25-64 for both data sources, restricted to full-time year-round workers
(annual hours>=1750) in the CPS March data. Dependent variable is ln(hourly earnings) for the MORG data
and ln(weekly earnings) for the CPS March data, with allocated values dropped and top-code adjustments (see
the text and appendix). Composition adjustment relies on the inclusion of the following control variables (all
categorical): 7 age, 3 race/ethnic, married, female, married*female, 8 geographic divisions.




                                                Page 32 of 45
      Table 3: Within-Between Analysis of Higher Education Wage Premiums
           (CPS MORG Data, regressions by broad occupation groups)

                                        (1)           (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
                                       1980          1990       1992     2000        2010       2015
College only vs. high school degree
(full sample)
Regressions:
Nonroutine Cognitive                   0.215         0.303      0.305    0.350      0.378       0.392
                                       (.007)        (.007)     (.007)   (.009)     (.009)      (.011)
Routine Cognitive                      0.134         0.255      0.265    0.309      0.346       0.327
                                       (.007)        (.007)     (.007)   (.009)     (.009)      (.010)
Routine Manual                         0.056         0.142      0.134    0.131      0.163       0.160
                                       (.010)        (.011)     (.011)   (.014)     (.014)      (.014)
Nonroutine Manual                      0.166         0.246      0.256    0.286      0.297       0.325
                                       (.014)        (.014)     (.014)   (.017)     (.013)      (.014)
Decomposition:
  Within component                     0.135         0.237      0.241    0.278      0.314       0.322
    share of total                     0.501         0.590      0.598    0.616      0.662       0.674
  Between component                    0.135         0.165      0.162    0.173      0.160       0.155
    share of total                     0.499         0.410      0.402    0.384      0.338       0.326
  Total                                0.270         0.402      0.403    0.451      0.475       0.477
Graduate degree (college degree or
higher sample)
Regressions:
Nonroutine Cognitive                  0.068         0.096       0.109    0.128      0.170       0.154
                                       (.006)        (.006)     (.006)   (.007)     (.007)      (.007)
Routine Cognitive                     0.101         0.085       0.112    0.157      0.147       0.135
                                       (.021)        (.018)     (.018)   (.025)     (.022)      (.022)
Routine Manual                         0.034        0.032       0.033    0.072      0.041       0.017
                                       (.031)        (.033)     (.037)   (.040)     (.042)      (.042)
Nonroutine Manual                     -0.032        -0.008      0.015    0.151      0.194       0.130
                                       (.048)        (.046)     (.044)   (.050)     (.035)      (.036)
Decomposition:
  Within component                     0.068         0.087      0.103    0.131      0.163       0.144
    share of total                     0.612         0.587      0.605    0.674      0.667       0.637
  Between component                    0.043         0.061      0.067    0.063      0.081       0.082
    share of total                     0.388         0.413      0.395    0.326      0.333       0.363
  Total                                0.111         0.149      0.170    0.194      0.245       0.226
Note: See note to Table 2 for basic data and specification. Coefficients listed, with standard errors in
parentheses; regressions run separately for each of the broad occupation groups listed, by year. See the
text for a description of the decomposition.




                                                Page 33 of 45
Figure 1: Estimated Higher Education Wage Premium, 1979-2015

                                                           Panel A: CPS MORG Data (1979-2015)
             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80            College or more
                                                           College only
                                                           Graduate degree
 ln points




                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                                    year


                                                            Panel B: March CPS Data (1979-2014)
             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80




                                                           College or more
                                                           College only
                                                           Graduate degree
 ln points




                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                                    year

             Note: Author's calculations using CPS MORG and March data (see Table 2 note). Differentials
             expressed relative to high school graduates.




                                                                             Page 34 of 45
                    Figure 2: Estimated Graduate Degree Wage Premium


            0.30
                                MORG
            0.25
            0.20                March
ln points
            0.15
            0.10
            0.05




                   1980       1985         1990         1995     2000             2005         2010        2015
                                                            year
                   Note: Author's calculations using CPS MORG and March data (see Table 2 note). Differentials
                   expressed relative to 4-year college graduates.




                                                   Page 35 of 45
Figure 3: Estimated Higher Education Wage Premium, 1979-2015,
                         by Age Group


             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80
                                                                             Panel A: Age 25-34
                                                           College or more
                                                           College only
                                                           Graduate degree
 ln points




                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000     2005   2010   2015
                                                                                    year


                                                                             Panel B: Age 45-54
             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80




                                                           College or more
                                                           College only
                                                           Graduate degree
 ln points




                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000     2005   2010   2015
                                                                                    year

             Note: Author's calculations using CPS MORG data (see Table 2 note). Differentials expressed
             relative to high school graduates.




                                                                             Page 36 of 45
Figure 4: Estimated Higher Education Wage Premium, 1979-2015,
                           by Gender


             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80
                                                                                Panel A: Men
                                                           College or more
                                                           College only
                                                           Graduate degree
 ln points




                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000   2005   2010              2015
                                                                                    year


                                                                              Panel B: Women
             0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80
 ln points




                                                                                                       College or more
                                                                                                       College only
                                                                                                       Graduate degree



                                                  1980   1985        1990        1995    2000   2005   2010              2015
                                                                                    year

             Note: Author's calculations using CPS MORG data (see Table 2 note). Differentials expressed
             relative to high school graduates.




                                                                             Page 37 of 45
          Figure 5: Employment Growth by Broad Occupation Category,
                          Sub-Periods from 1983-2015
                                                                                                      Percent change (annual)
                                                                                                                         3.5
                                                                                                           1983-1990
                                                                                                           1990-1999
                                                                                                           2000-2007
                                                                                                           2007-2015 2.5


                                                                                                                                   1.5



                                                                                                                                   0.5



                                                                                                                                   -0.5



                                                                                                                                   -1.5



                                                                                                                                   -2.5
Nonroutine Cognitive               Routine Cognitive                 Routine Manual                Nonroutine Manual
Note: Author's calculations from Bureau of Labor Statistics data. See text and Appendix B for occupational category definitions.




                                                          Page 38 of 45
             Figure 6: Higher Educational Attainment Shares by
                Occupational Category (selected), 1992-2015


          40
          35
                                       Panel A: Nonroutine Cognitive
percent
          30
          25




                                                                                      College only
                                                                                      Graduate degree
          20




            1992       1995       1998          2001    2004      2007       2010       2013         2016
                                                        year


                                             Panel B: Routine Cognitive
          25




                              College only
                              Graduate degree
          20
          15
percent
          10
          5
          0




            1992       1995       1998          2001    2004      2007       2010       2013         2016
                                                        year

          Note: Author's calculations using monthly CPS files. See text and Appendix B for
          occupational category definitions. Series are shares of educational attainment groups
          in the broad occupational categories.




                                                Page 39 of 45
          Figure 7: Share of Nonroutine Cognitive Employment
                 by Educational Attainment, 1992-2015


          90
          85
          80
percent




                                                                                         Graduate degree
          75




                                                                                         College only
          70
          65
          60




           1992        1995        1998       2001        2004        2007        2010        2013        2016
                                                          year
               Note: Author's calculations using monthly CPS files. See text and Appendix B for occupational
               category definitions. Series are nonroutine cognitive jobs as a share of employment within
               each educational attainment group.




                                               Page 40 of 45
  Figure 8: U.S. Productivity Growth, 1973-2016Q1 (with period averages)

Labor Productivity
Percent change from four quarters earlier; nonfarm business sector                                           Percent
                                                                                                                  7

                                                                                                                   6
                                                                          1995‐2004
                                                                                                                   5
                                                                            2.85%

                 1973‐1994                                                                                         4
                                                                                                     2005‐2016:1
                   1.56%
                                                                                                        1.30%
                                                                                                                   3

                                                                                                                   2

                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                   -1

                                                                                                                   -2

                                                                                                                   -3
1973      1977        1981         1985        1989        1993          1997   2001   2005   2009    2013
Note: Author's calculations from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data.




                                                           Page 41 of 45
Figure 9: Total and Within/Between Wage Premiums, 1979-2015


                                                     Panel A: College Only (relative to HS grads)
            0.50
            0.40
            0.30
ln points
            0.20
            0.10




                                                                                                      Total
                                                                                                      Within
                                                                                                      Between
            0




                                            1980   1985         1990       1995    2000   2005   2010          2015
                                                                              year


                                                   Panel B: Grad Degree (relative to college grads)
            0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30




                                                      Total
                                                      Within
                                                      Between
ln points
            0




                                            1980   1985         1990       1995    2000   2005   2010          2015
                                                                              year

            Note: See text and Table 3 for data and methods. Based on broad polarization occupation
            grouping (nonroutine cognitive, routine cognitive, routine manual, nonroutine manual).




                                                                       Page 42 of 45
Appendix A: MORG and March CPS Data

           The data handling and definitions for the CPS MORG and March data generally follow

Lemieux (2006b, 2010) and Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008); see also Buchmueller, DiNardo,

and Valletta (2011). All analyses are limited to wage and salary workers age 25-64 (with farming

and resource occupations excluded), and appropriate survey weights are used for all tabulated

results.

MORG Data (definitions, top-coding, and imputation)

           As noted in the text, I use hourly wages as my earnings measure, either reported directly

by hourly workers or formed as usual weekly earnings divided by usual weekly hours worked for

salaried workers. Wage levels are expressed in real terms using the GDP deflator for personal

consumption expenditures.

           Following Lemieux (2006b), the wage analyses are limited to individuals whose hourly

wage is greater than $1 and less than $100 (in 1979 dollars); only a small number of observations

are dropped due to this restriction. Recorded earnings are subject to maximum limits (“top-

codes”) in the public-use data files, which change over time. I multiplied the value of top-coded

earnings observations by 1.4. This largely follows Lemieux (2006), with the exception that for

the sake of consistency over time, I did not rely on the higher top-code enabled by the use of

unedited earnings values for the years 1989-1993.

           As noted in past research, non-response to the earnings and hours questions in the CPS

data and the consequent need to impute their values is substantial and has grown over time,

potentially distorting analyses of wage differentials. Following common practice, I dropped

observations with imputed values of earnings or hours worked from all wage analyses. I

followed the procedures outlined in Lemieux (2006) for identifying imputed earnings




                                              Page 43 of 45
observations. This includes the comparison of unedited and edited earnings values during the

years 1989-1993, when the earnings imputation flags are incorrect. Imputation flags are missing

for 1994 and most of 1995, which precludes dropping observations with imputed values during

this period.

CPS March Annual Demographic Supplement Data (definitions, top-coding, and imputation)

        I supplement the CPS MORG analyses using data from the CPS March Annual

Demographic Supplement files. These files are currently available through 2015. Income data

from the annual March supplement refer to the prior calendar year, so the reference period for

the March data that I use ends one year earlier than the MORG data (2014 rather than 2015).

        As noted in the text, following standard practice, I restrict the March CPS sample to full-

time, full-year workers and use weekly earnings (annual labor earnings divided by weeks

worked) as the earnings measure. The sample restriction with respect to real hourly wages (in

1979 dollars), the treatment of top-coded values, and the elimination of imputed earnings values

are the same as described for the MORG data.




                                           Page 44 of 45
Appendix B: Polarization Occupational Coding (excluding agriculture/resources)


      Broad polarization category            Standard Occupational Classification (SOC)
                                                    major occupation groupings

         Non-Routine Cognitive               Management, business and financial operations
                                                              (SOC 11, 13)
                                                  Professional/technical (SOC 15-29)
           Routine Cognitive                           Sales and related (SOC 41)
                                              Office and administrative support (SOC 34)
            Routine Manual                       Construction and extraction (SOC 47)
                                               Installation/maintenance/repair (SOC 49)
                                                          Production (SOC 51)
                                             Transportation and material moving (SOC 53)
          Non-Routine Manual                          Healthcare support (SOC 31)
                                                      Protective services (SOC 33)
                                                Food preparation and serving (SOC 35)
                                                    Building and grounds (SOC 37)
                                                  Personal care and service (SOC 39)

Note: 2010 SOC codes listed; earlier period codes harmonized.




                                        Page 45 of 45
