                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            COMMITMENT VS. FLEXIBILITY WITH COSTLY VERIFICATION

                                         Marina Halac
                                         Pierre Yared

                                      Working Paper 22936
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22936


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank Kyle Bagwell, Heski Bar-Isaac, Yeon-Koo Che, Eddie Dekel, Wouter Dessein, Navin
Kartik, Francine Lafontaine, Debraj Ray, Ken Shotts, and various seminar and conference
audiences for helpful comments. We also thank Niko Matouschek for a valuable discussion of the
paper. Weijie Zhong provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marina Halac and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Commitment vs. Flexibility with Costly Verification
Marina Halac and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 22936
December 2016
JEL No. D02,D82,D86,E02

                                          ABSTRACT

We introduce costly verification into a general delegation framework. A principal faces an agent
who is better informed about the efficient action but biased towards higher actions. An audit
verifies the agent’s information, but is costly. The principal chooses a permissible action set as a
function of the audit decision and result. We show that if the audit cost is small enough, a
threshold with an escape clause (TEC) is optimal: the agent can select any action up to a
threshold, or request audit and the efficient action if the threshold is sufficiently binding. For
higher audit costs, the principal may instead prefer auditing only intermediate actions. However,
if the principal cannot commit to inefficient allocations following the audit decision and result,
TEC is always optimal. Our results provide a theoretical foundation for the use of TEC in
practice, including in capital budgeting in organizations, fiscal policy, and consumption-savings
problems.


Marina Halac
Columbia University
616 Uris Hall, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
mhalac@columbia.edu

Pierre Yared
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 823
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pyared@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
How to optimally delegate decision making is central to a variety of applications. In
organizations, headquarters delegate investment decisions to division managers who have
superior information about project benefits but also a desire for a larger empire. When
designing fiscal policy institutions, society delegates spending decisions to a government
which can better assess current social needs but tends to overweigh the value of present
spending. In a self-control context, an individual delegates consumption to his ex-post
self who learns from taste shocks but may be tempted to overconsume and undersave.
    The delegation problem was first formally analyzed by Holmström (1977, 1984) and
has since been studied by an extensive literature (e.g., Melumad and Shibano, 1991;
Amador, Werning and Angeletos, 2006; Alonso and Matouschek, 2008; Amador and Bag-
well, 2013). The canonical model considers a principal who faces a better informed but
biased agent, as in the above applications. Transfers between the parties are infeasible, so
the principal simply chooses an allowable set of actions from which the agent can select.1
Optimal delegation reflects a fundamental tradeoff between commitment and flexibility:
on the one hand, commitment is valuable to limit biased decisions by the agent; on
the other hand, flexibility is valuable as the efficient action depends on the agent’s pri-
vate information, and only with discretion can the agent react to this information. A
main insight from the literature is that, under weak conditions, this commitment-versus-
flexibility tradeoff is resolved by threshold delegation. Specifically, if the agent is biased
towards higher actions, the principal optimally allows him to select any action up to a
threshold.
    Threshold rules are indeed common in applications. However, real-world rules also
typically feature an “escape clause.” As reported in survey studies on capital budget-
ing (e.g., Ross, 1986; Taggart, 1987) and discussed in Harris and Raviv (1996), division
managers in organizations are given a budgetary limit but can ask for a revision of the
budget when in need. Managers must provide project documentation for headquarters to
review and approve an increase in the division’s capital allocation. Likewise, governments
are constrained by deficit limits but legal procedures exist to break these limits under
exceptional circumstances. In fact, Budina et al. (2012) find that formal escape clause
provisions are included in fiscal rules in many countries, with more recently introduced
   1
     In various applications, like those described above, transfers are ruled out because of institutional
reasons or ethical considerations. See Alonso and Matouschek (2008) for a discussion and other examples
where transfers are not feasible.


                                                    1
rules defining clearer trigger points.2 As for savings policies, most pension plans impose
minimum savings requirements, but these do not apply if an individual can document
special conditions.3 Real-world rules make use of escape clauses because agents’ pri-
vate information can often be verified, albeit at a cost. Once an agent’s information is
ascertained, the appropriate action by the agent can be selected.4
    In this paper, we introduce costly state verification, as in the seminal work of Townsend
(1979), into a general delegation framework. Our main goal is to explore the conditions
under which a threshold with an escape clause (TEC), as we observe in practice, is op-
timal. We define TEC as a rule in which an agent can freely select any action up to
a threshold, and if the threshold is sufficiently binding, he can request an audit to be
assigned the efficient action by triggering the escape clause.
    Costly verification has been shown to play an important role in other contexts, most
notably in models of financial contracting and tax collection (e.g., Townsend, 1979; Gale
and Hellwig, 1985; Border and Sobel, 1987; Mookherjee and Png, 1989) but also more
recently in various allocation problems (e.g., Ben-Porath, Dekel and Lipman, 2014; Er-
lanson and Kleiner, 2015). Existing work, however, focuses on environments in which the
objectives of a principal and an agent are in complete disagreement, an assumption that
is at odds with the subject of delegation theory. In a delegation problem like the one
we study, flexibility is valuable precisely because the principal and agent are in partial
agreement, namely the agent’s bias is not “extreme.” We find that this distinction has
key implications for an agent’s incentives to be audited and, in turn, for the optimal rule
for a principal. Intuitively, an agent with an extreme bias towards higher actions would
only pursue an audit to increase his action, whereas one with a moderate bias may pursue
an audit to increase or decrease his action.
   2
      For instance, until 2010 Germany had in place an escape clause allowing for temporary deviations
from its fiscal rule in case of a “distortion of the macroeconomic equilibrium.” Since 2010, the clause
applies more precisely to “natural disasters or unusual emergency situation which are outside government
control and have major impact on the financial position of the government.” Parliament must approve
the use of the escape clause and an amortization plan for reducing the accumulated deviation. See
Budina et al. (2012), p. 42.
    3
      For example, retirement plan distributions are not subject to early withdrawal penalties in a
number of circumstances pre-specified by the plan. See https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/
plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-tax-on-early-distributions.
    4
      Other applications include international trade agreements and price delegation in firms. Beshkar and
Bond (2016) examine the properties of an optimal trade agreement within the class of caps with escape
clauses and provide examples of agreements that take this structure. Lo et al. (2016) study the pricing
flexibility afforded to sales people, who are allowed to unilaterally offer their customers discounts up to
a certain percentage off the list price but must request approval from a supervisor for larger discounts.



                                                    2
    We examine a general principal-agent model with no transfers in which the agent
is biased towards higher spending relative to the principal. The agent’s private infor-
mation, or type, concerns the value of spending; a higher agent type corresponds to a
higher marginal value of spending for both the principal and the agent. We expand this
delegation model by allowing the principal to audit the agent. The principal incurs an
additive cost if she conducts an audit, which may also be partially born by the agent.
An audit verifies the agent’s type perfectly.5
    For most of our analysis, we assume that the principal can fully commit to a delegation
rule. The problem can be viewed in three steps: first, the principal chooses a mapping
from the agent’s audit decision and result to a set of allowable spending; second, the
agent decides whether to seek audit, in which case the principal verifies his type; third,
the agent chooses a spending level from the allowable set. Formally, a delegation rule
is a pair of schedules specifying, for each agent type, whether he is audited or not and
his spending level.6 A delegation rule is optimal if it maximizes the principal’s expected
welfare subject to the incentive compatibility constraint that each agent type prefer his
audit assignment and spending level to those of any other type. Specifically, each agent
type must prefer his allocation to that of any other type who is not prescribed audit;
deviations to types who are audited can be trivially deterred as the principal can punish
the agent when the audit reveals that he has deviated.
    Our first main result shows that if the cost of audit is sufficiently small, TEC is
optimal. Importantly, we also show that auditing all agent types is never optimal; hence,
no matter how small the audit cost is, an optimal rule prescribes no audit for some
types. The intuition why TEC is optimal is that auditing an upper region of agent
types not only allows the principal to improve the spending allocation for these types,
but is also an efficient means of imposing discipline on lower agent types who are not
audited: these types select from a set of lower spending levels and cannot mimic a higher
type who is audited. In fact, the proof of this result rests on showing that any rule
with decreasing auditing — prescribing audit for a set of agent types and no audit for
a set of higher types — can be dominated. Decreasing auditing is expensive for the
principal because it requires incentivizing types in the audit region to seek audit rather
than mimic a higher type in a no-audit region above them, and this in turn requires
inducing significant overspending in the no-audit region. We show that when the audit
  5
    See Section 6 for a discussion of imperfect verification.
  6
    We restrict attention to deterministic auditing in our analysis. The case of random auditing is
discussed in Section 6.


                                                3
cost is small enough, a perturbation that audits all types in the decreasing auditing region
increases the principal’s welfare.
    TEC however may not be optimal when the audit cost is relatively higher. Our second
main result shows that auditing only an intermediate set of types can yield the principal
higher welfare relative to not auditing any type as well as relative to using a TEC rule.
The main reason why auditing only intermediate types can dominate not auditing any
type is that an intermediate audit region serves to discipline types in the no-audit region
below. The main reason why auditing only intermediate types can dominate TEC is
that it allows the principal to save on audit costs. We show that these benefits can
outweigh the cost of overspending that is needed to incentivize intermediate types to be
audited. Thus, when the audit cost is not low (and not high) enough, a rule that involves
decreasing auditing can be optimal.
    An implication of our construction is that high commitment power from the principal’s
side is needed whenever decreasing auditing is induced. Consider the aforementioned
delegation rule where the principal only audits an intermediate set of types. To implement
this rule, the principal commits to an allocation that may be inefficient ex post, following
the audit decision and result. In particular, the rule may assign an inefficient spending
level after an audit is conducted and the agent’s type is verified, both in the case that
the agent’s seeking audit is “on path” as well as when this audit is part of a deviation.
Moreover, the rule may induce an allocation after the agent decides not to seek audit that
is inefficient conditional on no audit, i.e. when ignoring the incentives of audited types.
What happens if the principal is unable to commit ex ante to these ex-post inefficient
allocations?
    Our third main result characterizes the optimal rule when the principal’s commitment
power is limited. In terms of the three-step timing described previously, limited commit-
ment means that the principal now revises the agent’s allowable spending set following
the agent’s audit decision and result. We show that under limited commitment, TEC is
optimal whenever auditing is optimal. Indeed, we prove that any incentive compatible
rule must have weakly increasing auditing everywhere. The reason is that inducing de-
creasing auditing requires incentivizing audited types not to deviate and choose a higher
spending level in a no-audit region above them, and under limited commitment it also
requires incentivizing non-audited types not to seek an audit that guarantees them ef-
ficient spending. When unable to fully commit to a rule ex ante, the principal cannot
implement the spending levels that would be required to make these deviations unattrac-


                                             4
tive, and thus decreasing auditing is not feasible. We obtain that in an environment with
limited commitment, the delegation rules that we observe in practice coincide with the
predictions of the theory.

Related literature. Our paper is related to two literatures. First, we contribute to
the literature on optimal delegation and self control, starting with Holmström (1977,
1984). Melumad and Shibano (1991) and Alonso and Matouschek (2008) study delegation
under quadratic preferences; Amador, Werning and Angeletos (2006) analyze a model
of consumption with hyperbolic preferences; and Amador and Bagwell (2013) consider
a general framework which we take as our baseline.7 As in this literature, we study a
principal-agent environment with no transfers in which the agent is better informed about
the efficient action but biased relative to the principal. In contrast to this literature,
we allow the principal to verify the agent’s information at a cost. By introducing this
additional tool, we are able to explore the conditions under which a threshold with an
escape clause is optimal, and how these conditions depend on the extent of the principal’s
commitment power.8
    Second, we contribute to the literature on costly verification, starting with Townsend
(1979). Both that paper and others that followed it, including Gale and Hellwig (1985),
Border and Sobel (1987), and Mookherjee and Png (1989), analyze settings with transfers,
which we rule out. More recently, Ben-Porath, Dekel and Lipman (2014) and Erlanson
and Kleiner (2015) consider costly verification in one-good and collective allocation prob-
lems without transfers.9 Our main departure from this literature (in addition to other
differences specific to each paper) is that we study a delegation setting in which we allow
for different degrees of bias by the agent relative to the principal. This is also the main
distinction with respect to Harris and Raviv (1996), which analyzes costly verification
in a delegation model in which the agent always benefits from higher actions.10 The
   7
      See also Athey, Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), Ambrus and Egorov (2013, 2015), and Halac and Yared
(2014, 2015).
    8
      We study the effects of the principal not being able to commit to not changing the agent’s allowable
spending set following the audit decision and result. A different question that a literature on auditing
has investigated concerns a principal’s ability to commit to an audit strategy; see, e.g., Reinganum and
Wilde (1986), Banks (1989), and Chatterjee, Morton and Mukherji (2002).
    9
      See also Glazer and Rubinstein (2004, 2006) and Mylovanov and Zapechelnyuk (2014), which use
different verification technologies. More broadly, there is a literature on mechanism design and imple-
mentation with evidence, including Green and Laffont (1986), Bull and Watson (2007), Deneckere and
Severinov (2008), Ben-Porath and Lipman (2012), and Kartik and Tercieux (2012).
  10
      In their model, the agent’s marginal utility from a higher action depends on his type but is always
positive. Their model also differs from ours in other respects: there are only three agent types, the agent


                                                    5
results in Harris and Raviv (1996) are consistent with our benchmark finding that TEC
is optimal for any audit cost if the agent’s bias is extreme. As previously discussed, our
interest is in understanding optimal delegation and auditing when the agent’s bias is not
extreme: the agent’s most preferred action is higher than the principal’s but not neces-
sarily the highest possible action.11 The principal as a result faces a tradeoff between
commitment and flexibility, which introduces new conceptual issues into our mechanism
design problem. In fact, the agent’s bias not being extreme implies that decreasing au-
diting is sometimes optimal in our setting, a feature that does not emerge in this related
work.


2     Model
Our baseline model of delegation is the same general principal-agent environment of
Amador and Bagwell (2013), where we focus on the case in which the agent’s bias is
towards higher actions. We extend this delegation model by allowing for costly state
verification, following Townsend (1979).


2.1     Environment
                                                              
There are a principal and an agent. The state is γ ∈ Γ ≡ γ, γ for γ > 0, with continuous
density f (γ) > 0 for all γ. The corresponding distribution function is F (γ). The level of
spending is denoted by π ∈ [π, π].
                                                                                 2
   The principal’s welfare is UP (γ, π), twice continuously differentiable with ∂ U∂π
                                                                                   P (γ,π)
                                                                                      2    <
0. We assume that the principal’s optimum, π P (γ) ≡ arg maxπ UP (γ, π), is interior,
and refer to it as the efficient level of spending. We impose the following single-crossing
condition:
                                       ∂ 2 UP (γ, π)
                                                     > 0.                                 (1)
                                           ∂γ∂π
Thus, the efficient level of spending is increasing in the state: π 0P (γ) > 0.
receives a non-contingent transfer from the principal, and the principal can choose to audit the agent
with an interior probability. Harris and Raviv (1998) consider an extension of Harris and Raviv (1996)
in which capital is allocated not to one project but across multiple projects. Malenko (2016) analyzes a
dynamic version in which projects of independent and identically distributed quality arrive stochastically
over time.
  11
     Hence, the agent may agree or disagree with the principal when she prefers a lower action, whereas
in other work the agent would always disagree with the principal about lowering the action.



                                                    6
    The agent’s welfare is UA (γ, π) = γπ + b (π), with b(π) twice continuously differen-
tiable and b00 (π) < 0. We assume that the agent’s optimum, π A (γ) ≡ arg maxπ UA (γ, π),
is interior, and refer to it as the flexible level of spending. Note that the agent’s welfare
                                            2
satisfies the single-crossing condition ∂ U∂γ∂π
                                              A (γ,π)
                                                      > 0.12 We study the case in which the
agent is biased towards higher spending:

                                       ∂UA (γ, π)   ∂UP (γ, π)
                                                  >            .                                         (2)
                                          ∂π           ∂π

Thus, conditional on the state, the flexible level of spending always exceeds the efficient
level: π A (γ) > π P (γ) for all γ ∈ Γ.
    The state γ is private information to the agent, i.e. the agent’s type. The principal
can conduct an audit to perfectly verify γ by paying an additive cost φ > 0. The agent’s
cost of audit is αφ for α ∈ [0, 1]. This formulation allows us to cover situations in which
the agent pays no audit cost (α = 0) as well as situations in which he pays a cost no
larger than the principal’s (α ∈ (0, 1]).13
    By featuring both a bias and private information by the agent, our environment gives
rise to a tradeoff between commitment and flexibility. If the agent were not biased relative
to the principal, the principal could implement the efficient level of spending by providing
full flexibility to the agent (who would in this case choose π A (γ) = π P (γ)). Similarly, if
the state γ were not the agent’s private information, the principal could implement the
efficient level of spending by committing the agent to a fully contingent spending plan.
In the presence of both a bias and private information, however, the principal cannot
implement efficient spending π P (γ) for all γ without audit, and she faces a non-trivial
tradeoff between commitment and flexibility.

Special cases. As noted in Amador and Bagwell (2013), the model of delegation de-
scribed above encompasses specific cases commonly studied in the literature. One ex-
ample is the case of quadratic preferences, examined by Melumad and Shibano (1991)
and Alonso and Matouschek (2008). Under quadratic preferences, the principal’s wel-
                2                                     2
fare is − (γ−π)
             2
                  and the agent’s welfare is − (γ+β−π)
                                                   2
                                                        , for some β > 0 representing the
agent’s bias. This formulation is equivalent to letting UP (γ, π) = γπ + b (π) − βπ and
  12
     For both the principal and the agent’s preferences, we will refer to “single-crossing” as the (stronger)
supermodularity condition that we have assumed these preferences satisfy.
  13
     One can also allow for the agent to pay a higher audit cost than the principal’s (namely let α > 1).
Our main results continue to hold in this case if the agent’s bias is sufficiently large.



                                                     7
                                         2
UA (γ, π) = γπ + b (π) for b (π) = βπ − π2 , and is therefore a special case of our model.
We will use the quadratic preferences case to illustrate some of our results.
    Another example is the model of consumption under hyperbolic preferences, analyzed
by Amador, Werning and Angeletos (2006) and Halac and Yared (2014, 2015). The
principal’s welfare in this case is γu (c) + w (y − c) and the agent’s welfare is γu (c) +
βw (y − c), where u and w are utility functions, c and y represent consumption and
exogenous income respectively, and β ∈ (0, 1) captures the degree of present bias by the
agent. This formulation is equivalent to letting UP (γ, π) = γπ + β1 b (π) and UA (γ, π) =
γπ + b (π) with π = u (c) and b (π) = βw (y − u−1 (π)), and is thus also encompassed by
our model.


2.2    Timing
The order of events is as follows:

  1. The principal sets a rule, which maps an audit decision and result into an allowable
     spending set Π.

  2. The agent chooses whether or not to seek audit, a ∈ {0, 1}, and the principal verifies
     his type γ if a = 1.

  3. The agent chooses a spending level π from the allowable set Π.

    The above timing assumes that the agent learns his type γ before the principal sets
a rule in Step 1. Our analysis is unchanged if instead the agent learns his type after the
rule has been set, i.e. at the beginning of Step 2.


2.3    Delegation Rules
Given the game form described above, we can analyze the principal’s problem as that
of choosing a delegation rule M which consists of a pair of schedules {a (γ) , π (γ)}γ∈Γ ,
specifying an audit decision and spending level for each type γ. The principal chooses a




                                             8
rule M to maximize her expected welfare:
                                           Z   γ                          
                              max                  UP (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) φ f (γ) dγ                         (3)
                          {a(γ),π(γ)}γ∈Γ   γ

                                                     subject to
           UA (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                                γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                                b for which a (b
                                                                               γ ) = 0.                     (4)

    The objective (3) is the principal’s expected welfare under a given rule, taking into
account the additive audit costs. The constraint (4) is an incentive compatibility (or
truthtelling) constraint: it guarantees that an agent of type γ prefers his assigned audit
decision and spending level, a (γ) and π (γ), to a different allocation a (b   γ ) and π (b
                                                                                          γ ) for
some type γ b who is not audited (that is, with a (b     γ ) = 0). Note that it is sufficient to
consider deviations to non-audited types: since a deviation in which an agent of type γ
mimics an audited type γ    b would be detected by the principal (as an audit reveals the
true type) and the principal can arbitrarily punish the agent when she learns that he has
deviated (off path), we do not need to consider such a deviation.14
    We also note that the formulation above does not rule out mixed strategies by the
agent. If the agent were willing to mix over audit and no audit or over two spending
levels, he would be indifferent over these allocations, and thus the principal can select
one of these that maximizes her expected welfare.15 In fact, building on this observation,
we can show that our results are not limited to the game form in Section 2.2 but continue
to hold when allowing for any indirect mechanism specifying a message space for the
agent and a deterministic allocation function to which the principal commits. Such a
mechanism induces a game in which the agent sends a message, is either audited or not
as a function of the message, and is assigned a spending level as a function of the message
and audit result. Appendix B shows that a version of the Revelation Principle in terms of
payoffs holds in our setting, implying that to study the optimal deterministic mechanism
for the principal, it is without loss to restrict attention to deterministic direct mechanisms
(i.e. where the message space coincides with the agent’s type space) that induce truthful
reporting by the agent, as considered in program (3)-(4) above.
   14
      The principal can punish a deviation of a type γ in which he mimics a type γ        b 6= γ with a(b
                                                                                                        γ) = 1
by assigning following audit some spending level π(b   γ , γ) such that UA (γ, π(bγ , γ)) ≤ UA (γ, π (γ)). It is
clear that such a spending level exists; in fact, setting π(b γ , γ) = π(γ) would be a sufficient punishment.
   15
      While this selection relaxes the principal’s problem, it is not used under the optimal rule described
in our main result in Proposition 3, which induces a unique best response by the agent. Hence, the result
does not rely on selection of equilibria of the game in Section 2.2.


                                                         9
     Because there is a continuum of types, it is possible that the problem in (3)-(4) admit
multiple solutions that are identical everywhere except for a countable set of types. As
a means of selecting the optimum in such a situation, we say that a rule M is optimal
if it solves (3)-(4) and there is no other solution M
                                                    f, with associated audit and spending
schedules {e a(γ), π
                   e(γ)}γ∈Γ , such that

                                    e (γ)) − e
                             UP (γ, π        a (γ) φ ≥ UP (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) φ                                   (5)

for all γ and strictly for some γ ∈ Γ.16


3      No Verification Benchmark
Before analyzing the optimal delegation rule with verification, we review the results of
the literature by considering the optimal rule in the absence of verification. Suppose
the principal faces the constraint that a (γ) = 0 for all γ.17 The problem in (3)-(4)
subject to this additional constraint is studied by Amador and Bagwell (2013). To solve
this problem, they make the following Assumption 1 on the distribution of γ; we extend
this assumption to any truncation from above, with support [γ, γ 0 ] for γ 0 ≤ γ, density
f (γ) /F (γ 0 ), and distribution function F (γ) /F (γ 0 ):

Assumption 1. Take the distribution of γ truncated from above by γ 0 ≤ γ. For each
                                                                           2           2π
such truncated distribution, there exists γ ∗ such that for κ ≡ inf {γ,π} ∂ UPb(γ,π)/∂
                                                                                00 (π)    ,

                   ∂UP (γ,π A (γ))
                                       (γ) is nondecreasing for all γ ∈ γ, γ ∗ , and
                                                                             
    (i) κF (γ) −        ∂π
                                   f
                       R γ0        γ ,π A (γ ∗ )) f (e
                              ∂UP (e                 γ)
 (ii) (γ − γ ∗ ) κ ≥     γ          ∂π           1−F (γ)
                                                         de
                                                          γ   for all γ ∈ [γ ∗ , γ 0 ], with equality at γ ∗ .

   One can verify that for the special cases typically studied in the literature, such as
those with quadratic or hyperbolic preferences, Assumption 1 is satisfied under commonly
used distribution functions, including exponential, log-normal, and any nondecreasing
density.18 Given Assumption 1, the results in Amador and Bagwell (2013) yield:
  16
      Although multiple solutions can in principle continue to exist under this condition, this criterion
turns out to be sufficient for our characterization.
   17
      In this case, the constraint (4) becomes UA (γ, π (γ)) ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                                                         γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                                                         b.
   18
      We note also that Assumption 1 on the original, non-truncated distribution implies that the assump-
tion is satisfied for all truncations from above if the conditions in Proposition 2 of Amador and Bagwell
(2013) hold.



                                                              10
                                     In[41]:=   Plot@8theta,
                                                           TECtheta + b, of
                                                                 consists   {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡ ⇤⇤ } such
                                                                          gNA@thetaD<,       8theta,
                                                                                                that thetaL, thetaH<,
th Escape Clause (TEC)                           PlotRange Ø 8thetaL, thetaH + b<, BaseStyle Ø 8FontSize Ø 14<,
                                                 AxesLabelOptimal
                                                           Ø 8"theta",Rule   without
                                                                          ""<,             Verification
                                                                                Axes Ø True,       AxesOrigin Ø 8thetaL,
                                                                                                                      ⇤} thetaL<,
                                                             1. (threshold) If no  audit,   ⇡ (  ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡
                                                 PlotStyle Ø 88Gray<, 8Gray<, 8Blue, Thickness@0.01D<<, Ticks Ø 88<, 8<<D
  TEC consists of {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡ ⇤⇤ } such that
                                                                      2. (escapeThreshold        withand
                                                                                      clause) If audit   Escape           ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                                                             ⇡ P ( ) Clause       (TEC)
                                                                                                                                      ⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                                                                                                                                   0
 {⇡ ⇤1.
     , ⇡ ⇤⇤ } such that If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A (Agent’s
          (threshold)                                                        ) , ⇡ ⇤ }preferred spending is ⇡ A ( ):        = b (⇡ A ( ))
                                                                                                      = b (⇡ P ( )) v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
                                                                                                           0
                                   Optimal           Rule    without          Verification
     2.audit,
 If no    (escape
                ⇡ ( )clause)
                       = min {⇡  If Aaudit
                                      ( ) , ⇡and ⇤} ⇡ ( )
                                                       P             ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then ⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                                                                          Types with ⇡ P ( ) < ⇡ ⇤⇤ are punished if audited
                                                                                                        ⇤ ⇤⇤
use) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then        = ⇡b(0 (⇡ ) P=(⇡ P))( ) vfor0
                                                                           (⇡ P (TEC)) consists of {⇡ , ⇡ } such that
                                             Agent’s preferred spending is ⇡ A ( ):
                                        Out[41]=
                                                                                                    = b0 (⇡ A ( ))
          Types    b0 (⇡ P⇡( P))( )v<
               = with                 0
                                        (⇡⇡P⇤⇤ ( ))
                                                  are punished if audited1. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ }
                                                                                                                                                ⇤

                                             Distributional assumption as in Amador-Bagwell 13: there is ⇤ s.t.
 ⇡ P ( ) < ⇡ ⇤⇤ are punished if audited                n 00             o          2. (escape clause) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then ⇡ ( ) = ⇡
                                                         v (⇡)+b00 (⇡)
                                                 • inf      b00 (⇡)
                                                                           F ( ) v 0 (⇡ A ( ))f ( ) nondecreasing for < ⇤
                                                                 n 00             o R                                     0              0
                                                          ⇤         v (⇡)+b00 (⇡)                ⇤    0
                                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                                  f (e ) b (⇡ P ( )) ⇤ v (⇡ P ( ))
                                                                                                             ⇤ theta
                                                • (        ) inf    b00 (⇡)
                                                                                    (e      + v (⇡ A (   )) 1    F (e )
                                                                                                                          de 8 2 [   , ]

                                                                 TypesThe
                                                                        with  ⇡ P (is)drawn arethe
                                                                                       < ⇡ for  punished        ⇤⇤
                                                                                                         if audited
                    Figure 1: An optimal rule under no verification.       figure                  quadratic
                    preferencesProposition
                                case (see Section 2.1), where we let γ = 0.5, γ = 1.5, β = 0.12, and F (γ)
                    uniform. Without verification, optimal rule is a threshold ⇡ ⇤ :


                    Proposition 1 (no verification). Take ⇡ ( ) the
                                                                = min
                                                                    distribution  of⇤ }γ truncated from above by
                                                                       {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡
                    γ 0 ≤ γ. If the principal is constrained to a (γ) = 0 for all γ ∈ γ, γ 0 , an optimal rule is
                                                                                            

                    a threshold γ ∗ < γ 0 such that

                                                      π (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )} for γ ∈ γ, γ 0 .
                                                                                                      


                        Under no verification, an optimal rule is a threshold γ ∗ such that all types γ ≤ γ ∗
                    spend at their flexible level and all types γ > γ ∗ are bunched at the flexible spending level
                    of γ ∗ . The principal can implement this rule by setting a spending limit π ∗ = π A (γ ∗ )
                    and allowing the agent to choose any spending level up to this limit.
                        Figure 1 illustrates an optimal rule with no verification for the case of quadratic
                    preferences. The level of spending is on the vertical axis and the agent’s type on the
                    horizontal axis. In this simple example, both efficient and flexible spending are increasing
                    linear functions of the state γ, and flexible spending exceeds efficient spending by a
                    constant amount representing the agent’s bias. The rule characterized in Proposition 1
                    specifies a spending level that coincides with the agent’s flexible level for γ ≤ γ ∗ and
                    equals π A (γ ∗ ) for γ > γ ∗ .
                        A key insight behind the result in Proposition 1 is that “holes” are suboptimal. More
                    precisely, the principal can always improve upon a rule as that depicted in Figure 2, which
                    does not allow the agent to choose a spending level π ∈ [π L , π H ], for some π < π L <
                    π H < π 0 , but allows the agent to choose spending immediately below π L and immediately

                                                                              11
  adratic uniform Pierre's example.nb
                                           8theta, thetaL, thetaH<, PlotRange Ø 8thetaL, thetaH + b<,
 t Verification
                                           BaseStyle Ø     8FontSize
                                                         TEC   consists Ø   {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡AxesLabel
                                                                        of14<,       ⇤⇤ } such that
                                                                                                Ø 8"theta", ""<,
 ith  Escape Clause (TEC)                  Axes Ø True, AxesOrigin Ø 8thetaL, thetaL<, PlotStyle Ø
                                             88Gray<,Optimal         Rule without
                                                         8Gray<, 8Blue,                    Verification
                                                                              Thickness@0.01D<,      8Blue, Thickness@0.01D<<,
   ( )          for all             Verification
                                           Ticks   Ø  88<,
                                                           1.
 of course 2a hole like this would not be optimal as the types
 fOptimal    Contract     without                             (threshold)
                                                               in the middleIf would
                                                            8<<,   Exclusions
                                                                               no   audit,
                                                                                    Ø
                                                                                             ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ ⇤ }
                                                                                      jump⇡up.
                                                                                      8thetadpri<D
           1
    TEC uniform
   Threshold
   Quadratic consists
  gNAC4[theta_  with    of
                 Pierre's    {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡
                        Escape
                          example.nb
                  ); thetadpri
                                      ⇤⇤ } such that
                                    Clause
                                     < theta (TEC)
                                              < thetapri] := thetapri + b;
 ning-Angeletos 06. Holds for many distributions
 out  Verification                       2
                                                                     Threshold
                                                             2. (escape               with
                                                                           clause) If audit  Escape
                                                                                            and           ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                                                ⇡ P ( ) Clause    (TEC)
                                                                                                                      ⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                        0
 Clause
out         (TEC)
     Verification
       Assumption:
 Plot[{theta,
  {⇡ ⇤1.
      , ⇡ ⇤⇤
                      f
                  theta
           (threshold)
                          (
                          + )
                            b,/f ( )          for all
                                           ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ (Agent’s
                                gNAC3[theta],
             } such that If no audit,    1         gNAC4[theta]},
                                                                  ) , ⇡ ⇤ }preferred spending is ⇡ A ( ):
                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                            = b (⇡ A ( ))
                                                    A
    {theta, thetaL, thetaH}, PlotRange . {thetaL, thetaH + b},
Rule
ow        without
      of course         Verification
                    a {FontSize
                       hole    like this    wouldAxesLabel
                                                   not be optimal    as the types                        b0 (⇡
                                                                             ""}, in the middle would=jump     P ( ))
                                                                                                             up.                                                      v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
  )
) /f /fOptimal
   BaseStyle
       ( () )
   Proposition    2.2
                    1
                       Contract
                          for
                         for    all
                              all⇤
                                        without
                                        . 14},   Optimal Rule without Verification
                                                    Verification
                                                        ⇤
                                                                . {"theta",
                                                                           ⇤⇤
malIf
   TECno
   Axes 2.consists
      rule  is(escape
               a threshold
            audit,
       Threshold
           .      1
              True,
 0]:= gNAC4[theta_
                           )clause)
                            ⇤
                     ⇡ofAxesOrigin
                        ({g
                          with
                            );,=  ⇤⇤
                                   :Escape
                                   min    If. A
                                         {⇡
                                gthetadpri
                                     } s.t.   audit , ⇡and
                                                (Clause
                                                 <)theta
                                              {thetaL,
                                                             <⇡thetapri]
                                                          }thetaL},
                                                            (TEC)             , then
                                                                P ( ) PlotStyle   . ⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                                                                         ⇡:= thetapri  + b;
      Without
          {{Gray},      verification,
                                {Gray},         optimal
                                                   {Blue,          rule              threshold g ⇤ : {Blue, Thickness[0.01]}}, ⇤⇤
                                                                             is adistributions
                                                                       Thickness[0.01]},
  Werning-Angeletos
Werning-Angeletos
butional            assumption         06.implies
                                     06.       Holds
                                             Holds        foraforholemany
                                                                  many      [⇡distributions
                                                                                 L , ⇡ H ] is suboptimal                     Types with ⇡ P ( ) < ⇡ are punished if audited
                                             ⇤ Exclusions                               2                 ⇤}
    (Ticks
 pe Clause (TEC)
thout    )1.=If  min .Assumption:
                         {{},
                          {gA and
                    Verification
                (threshold)       ( {}},
                                     )If, gno       f 0 )(+ )b,
                                               }audit,           g/f     ⇤⇤   ).then
                                                                    (⇡gNAC3[theta],
                                                                         )( =       {thetadpri}]
                                                                                  min   {g  A(0(for)⇤ ,=ggNAC4[theta]},
                                                                                                       all                                                         ⇤ ⇤⇤
ause)                audit
           Plot[{theta,
  ey result in Amador-Werning-Angeletos    ⇡
                                           theta
                                               P    (    g ( ) = min06,       ,           ⇡ b (⇡ P ( ))13 v (⇡ P (TEC
                                                                                   =Amador-Bagwell
                                                                                   {g   1
                                                                                      A( ),g }
                                                                                                   )       ⇡  P   (    )    0
                                                                                                                          for             )) consists of {⇡ , ⇡ } such that
   0 2. {theta,
  al  (gA Rule  (escape
             (BaseStyle
                  )) = without  W
                                  thetaL,
                                   0
                                 clause)
                                     (y
                                                       thetaH},Out[51]=
                                               IfgAaudit
                                             Verification
                                                       (    0))   and gPPlotRange (Agent’s
                                                                                     ) g ⇤⇤ , then  preferredg ( ) =spending
                                                                                                     . {thetaL,
                                                                                                                               ( ) for +isb},
                                                                                                                          gPthetaH             ⇡ A ( ):      = b0 (⇡ A ( ))
                                    2. 0{FontSize
                                            for
                                              ⇤} U              (gA .  ( 014},
                                                                            ))   =⇤⇤   AxesLabel
                                                                                       W (y gA ( .)){"theta", ""},                                                                                          ⇤
  0 (( )) =
timal        /f   min
               rule    )is.{g
             Proposition
                    ( Types    =A (1 )b, (⇡ gfor     (gall
                                                         ⇤ ))
                                                                     )v<     (⇡⇡   P ( ))                                    audited1.. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ }
 ptimal      TEC
             Axes rule     isaTrue,
                        consistsathreshold
                                     with
                                   threshold  {gP⇤⇡, P
                                        ofAxesOrigin     g:⇤⇤⇤0:(} s.t.    . {thetaL,    are
                                                                                          0       punished
                                                                                                    thetaL}, if          PlotStyle
on                                                        U (gP ( rule        )) =isWa threshold
                                                                                            (y gP ( g))
and
  ⇤tion     gWithout           gverification,
                  ( ) assumption
              P {{Gray},
                                 ⇤⇤ , {Gray},
                                       then            ( optimal
                                                  g⇤implies      =Threshold
                                                            ){Blue,  gaPhole     )Distributional
                                                                                    for     with
                                                                            ( Thickness[0.01]},          Escape ⇤:
                                                                                                                 assumption
                                                                                                                         {Blue,          as in Amador-Bagwell 13: there is ⇤ s.t.
                                                                                                                          ClauseThickness[0.01]}},
                                                                                                                                        (TEC)
     :g ( implies
or-Werning-Angeletos
stributional )   =    min    “holes”
                                {g    (    )are
                                             06.
                                              ,  g   suboptimal
                                                      Holds
                                                      }             for    many     [⇡distributions
                                                                                         , ⇡     ]  is   suboptimal
             (Distributional
      ⇡gP(Ticks )1.)=<
                                ⇤⇤
                            ⇡ {{},
                            .
                       (threshold)
                        min       {gare
                                   A       assumption
                                             punished
                                            {}},       ⇤ Exclusions
                                                     <}gaudit,
                                             )If,) gno
                                      gP0( (by                ⇤⇤ are
                                                                      implies
                                                                      ifgaudited
                                                                              ( ) =.min
                                                                                       L
                                                                                     “holes”  H    suboptimal
                                                                                                  nA 00( )⇤ , g ⇤00} o
                                                                                          {thetadpri}]
                                                                                               {g                                         2. (escape clause) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then ⇡ (                )=⇡
 •]s.t.         Types        with    A                                      punished        ifAmador-Bagwell
                                                                                               audited
      not
       Key    allowed,
                result      in improve              closing
                                 Amador-Werning-Angeletos         ghole:
                                                                      (    )  = lower
                                                                                   min  g{g
                                                                                       06,       (   )v , g  }
                                                                                                          (⇡)+b      (⇡)  13              v 0 (⇡ A ( ))f ( ) nondecreasing for < ⇤
        0
 gllUP ((g    A (=))
                     • W Hole 0
                            =(ybetween
                                   W g(y          any  g g(and     )) g means •spending     inf
                                                                                              A              00 (⇡)intervalFnot
                                                                                                       in that                  ( )allowed
           0 ))  2.    (escape             0P ( ))IfA audit and gP ( )
                                       clause)                                                     g  ⇤⇤ , bthen     g  (  )  =   g    (  )  for
       U (gA •( But
 dor-Werning-Angeletos   )) =closing W (y    06
                                              holefor     gAlowering
                                                                 ( 0)) g increases principal’snwelfare                              P
                                                                                                                                       o R                                            0               0
                                                        ⇤by                                                                                                                   =
   t,    g
       ( ))
  Aoptimal
            (    )  =    min      {g      (
                      rule is a threshold g :
                                      A        )  ,  g    }       U
                                                                  ⇤    (g   A    (  ))  =      W    (y ⇤
                                                                                                             g  A  (v ))
                                                                                                                      00
                                                                                                                         (⇡)+b  00
                                                                                                                                   (⇡)                    ⇤     0             f (e ) b (⇡ P ( )) ⇤ v (⇡ P ( ))
                                                                                                                                                                         ⇤ theta
    are punished     • Keyifresult audited  in Amador-Werning-Angeletos0
                                                                                       •    (     0 06   ) inf            b00 (⇡)
                                                                                                                                                   (e       + v   (⇡ A (  ))          de 8   2 [  , ]
mption            implies         “holes”         are suboptimal
                                               U (gP ( )) = W (y gP ( ))                                                                                                     1 F (e )
dit and
umption       gimplies    g ⇤⇤ , then
               P ( ) “holes”         are     ( ) =Threshold
                                                     gP ( ) for with Escape Clause (TEC)
                                          g⇤suboptimal
 ld    ⇤ :g ( allowed,
  , g]g not                {gFigure
               ) Distributional
                 = min        A ( by
                        improve              }
                                    ) , gclosing
                                             2: ⇤⇤Ahole:
                                    assumption       rulelower
                                                     implies   g
                                                              “holes”
                                                            without     suboptimal with a hole
                                                                       verification               Types[πwith     ⇡ ( ) < ⇡ ⇤⇤ are punished if audited
                                                                                                           L , π H ].PParameters are the same as
                 Types with     gP0 06      < g are
                                     (by) closing   hole:punished
                                                           lower g if Graphical
                                                                      audited
 [g, g] not
Urg0⇤(g    0 allowed,
mador-Werning-Angeletos
      } UP ((g))
                   • W
                A (=))
                          improve
                        =0 (yin
                      Hole    WFigure
                             between
                                   g(y
                                    P ( ))
                                          any   gProposition
                                             gA1.(and
                                                    )) g means spending   in thatrepresentation
                                                                                   interval not allowed
                                                                                                   of escape clause
Amador-Werning-Angeletos
                  • But closing 06
 51]=
      g   ( ))
                                 hole by Without
                                          lowering g increases  principal’s
                                                      verification,
                                                                on x axis
                                                             theta          welfare
                                                                       optimal
                                                                            and     rule isona ythreshold
                                                                                 spending         axis        ⇡⇤:
   ⇤⇤   A
g are punished
ssumption         • Keyifresult
                implies    audited
                         “holes”in Amador-Werning-Angeletos
                                   πare
                                                               ⇤   ⇤⇤
                                          The hole [π L , π H ]06implies that an agent of type γ for whom
                          above      H . suboptimal                                                         π A (γ) ∈ (π L , π H )
 nthis
    [g, g]case
            not what  weimprove
                 allowed,  can do by is impose
                          is not allowedclosingto discipline
                                                hole:       gby
                                                      lowerat
                                                   spend
                                                                  auditing⇡only
                                                                his flexible      )the
                                                                              (level.   types{⇡
                                                                                     = min
                                                                                         Such an
                                                                                                in the ) , ⇡ ⇤spends
                                                                                                       middle:
                                                                                                  A (agent    }      at
                                                                                                            the lower limit of
ngTECC[theta_
  Amador-Werning-Angeletos
                 ); thetadpri 06 < theta < thetapri] := Max[theta, ga[theta]];
                    the hole π L < π A (γ) if his type   Graphical  representation
                                                            is relatively    low, butof escape clauseat the upper limit of the
                                                                                        he spends
 Plot[{theta, theta hole+ π                                on x axisAssumption
                                                 type is theta
                               > π A (γ) if his gTECC[theta]},
                          b,H gNAC3[theta],              higher.      and spending1onimplies
                                                                                         y axis that if the principal removes
   {theta, thetaL, thetaH}, PlotRange . {thetaL,          ⇤ thetaH
                                                              ⇤⇤     + b},
                    the hole.and
   BaseStyle . {FontSize        14},allows   full flexibility
                                      AxesLabel    . {"theta", over  [π L , π H ], the benefit of reducing overspending for
                                                                  ""},
o in  this case what we  can
   Axes . True, AxesOrigin
                               do is impose   discipline by  auditing  only the types in the middle:
                    the types.that{thetaL,
                                       bunchthetaL},      PlotStyle
                                                at π H would           .
                                                                 outweigh      the (potential) cost of increasing spending
     {{Gray}, {Gray}, {Blue, Thickness[0.01]}, {Red, Thickness[0.01]}},
 2]:= gTECC[theta_ ); thetadpri < theta < thetapri] := Max[theta, ga[theta]];
   Ticks . {{}, {}},for Exclusions
                        the types that     bunch at π L . Therefore, the principal is better off by closing the hole.
                                      . {thetadpri}]
        Plot[{theta, theta + b, gNAC3[theta], gTECC[theta]},
         {theta, thetaL, thetaH}, PlotRange . {thetaL, thetaH + b},
                              4          Optimal Rule
         BaseStyle . {FontSize . 14}, AxesLabel . {"theta", ""},
         Axes . True, AxesOrigin . {thetaL, thetaL}, PlotStyle .
          {{Gray}, {Gray}, {Blue, Thickness[0.01]}, {Red, Thickness[0.01]}},
         Ticks . {{},We now
                      {}},   turn to the
                           Exclusions    study of optimal delegation when costly
                                      . {thetadpri}]                                           verification is possible. The
                              following class of rules will play a central role in our analysis:

                              Definition 1. A rule is a threshold with an escape clause (TEC) if it consists of {γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ }
                              with γ ∗ < γ ∗∗ and γ < γ ∗∗ < γ such that
                                                                              theta
 53]=                             (i) (threshold) If γ ≤ γ ∗∗ , a (γ) = 0 and π (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )}, and

                                 (ii) (escape clause) if γ > γ ∗∗ , a (γ) = 1 and π (γ) = π P (γ).

                                 Figure 3 illustrates a TEC rule using the quadratic preferences example. Under TEC,
                              types γ ≤ γ ∗ are not auditedtheta
                                                             and spend at their flexible level, types γ ∈ (γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ ] are
                              not audited and are bunched at the flexible spending level of γ ∗ , and types γ > γ ∗∗ are

                                                                                                            12
                                                8theta, thetaL, thetaH<, PlotRange Ø 8thetaL, thetaH + b<,
           Threshold with Escape Clause (TEC)
                                 BaseStyle Ø 8FontSize
                                           TEC  consists Ø   {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡AxesLabel
                                                         of 14<,                  Ø 8"theta", ""<, Axes Ø True,
                                                                      ⇤⇤ } such that
                                                AxesOrigin Ø 8thetaL, thetaL<, PlotStyle Ø 88Gray<, 8Gray<,
                                                          Optimal Rule without
                                                  8Blue, Thickness@0.01D<,      8Blue,Verification
                                                                                         Dashing@MediumD, Thickness@0.01D<<,
                                                            1. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ ⇤ }
                                                Ticks Ø 88<, 8<<, Exclusions Ø 8thetadpri<D
    TEC consists of {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡ ⇤⇤ } such that
            TEC consists of {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡ ⇤⇤ } such that                      2. (escape  Threshold           withand
                                                                                           clause) If audit      Escape         ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                                                                     ⇡ P ( ) Clause     (TEC)⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                                                                              Agent’s     preferred    spending   is  ⇡   ( ):    =     b0 (⇡ ( ))
       1. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ ⇤ }                                                         A                    A
                                                                                   ⇤}                              0               0
 ith  EscapeRule
 Optimal     1. Clause
                (threshold)
                      without(TEC)Verification A
                                If no  audit,    ⇡  (  ) =  min   {⇡     (   ) , ⇡                           = b (⇡ P ( )) v (⇡ P ( ))
       2. (escape clause) If audit       Threshold
                                                and ⇡ Pwith  ( ) Escape    ⇤⇤
                                                                        ⇡ , then   Clause ⇡ ((TEC)
                                                                                                ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
             2. (escape clause) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then              Types  ⇡ (with
                                                                                          )=⇡  ⇡PP (( )) for
                                                                                                          < ⇡ ⇤⇤ are punished if audited
                                                                                                                ⇤ ⇤⇤
                                             = b00 (⇡ P ( )) 0 v 0 (⇡ P (TEC             )) consists of {⇡ , ⇡ } such that
                                       Out[431]==
     ⇤
        Agent’s
         ⇤⇤
                 preferred spending            is ⇡ Ab ((⇡):
                                                           P ( )) = v (⇡      P ( ))
                                                                           b0 (⇡  A ( ))
f {⇡ , ⇡ } such that                                                                                                                                  ⇤
          TypesTypes
                  withwith⇡ P ⇡( () <  )  < ⇡⇡⇤⇤⇤⇤ are
                                                    are  punished         if audited1. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ }
                                                         punishedif audited
                                  P
        Distributional assumption            as in Amador-Bagwell
                                                            of { ⇤ , ⇤⇤ } such          there is ⇤ s.t.
                                                                                  13:that
) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( TEC      ) , ⇡ ⇤consists
                                                   }                                     2. (escape clause) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then ⇡ ( ) = ⇡
                n 00             o
                  v (⇡)+b00 (⇡)                                                                      ⇤
          • inf       00            F ( ) 1.v 0(threshold)
                                                  (⇡ A ( ))f ( If) nondecreasing
                                                                      ⇤⇤ , a( ) = for    0 and<⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ A ( ⇤ )}
                         (n ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then
ause) If audit and ⇡b P(⇡)                         ⇡  (  ) =  ⇡  P  (   )  for
                  ⇤        v 00 (⇡)+b00 (⇡)
                                            o R
                                                               ⇤      0          ⇤⇤⇤   f (e )              ⇤
                                                                                                                          = b0 (⇡ P ( )) v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
                                                                                                                        theta
           • (        ) inf      b00 (⇡)
                                                   (e clause)
                                           2. (escape      + vIf (⇡ A>(   )), 1a( F)(e=
                                                                                      )
                                                                                        de 8 2⇡ [( ), =] ⇡ P ( )
                                                                                         1 and
                 b0 (⇡ P ( )) v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
                 =
                 Figure 3: A TEC rule. Parameters are the              Types
                                                                         samewith     ( ) < ⇡1,⇤⇤ with
                                                                                  ⇡ P Figure
                                                                               as in              are punished if audited
                                                                                                       φ = 0.008
h Proposition⇤⇤
  ⇡ P ( ) < ⇡ areand    α = 0.if The
                     punished    auditedsolid line depicts the allocation of non-audited types; the dashed line
                 corresponds    to  audited    types.
  Without verification, optimal rule is a threshold      ⇡⇤:

                      audited and⇡ ( are
                                      ) =assigned
                                            min {⇡ Atheir , ⇡ ⇤ } spending level. This rule therefore adds an escape
                                                      ( ) efficient
                      clause to the threshold rule that we described in the previous section. In particular, the
                      principal can implement TEC by allowing the agent to choose any spending level up to
                      a limit π ∗ = π A (γ ∗ ) or request audit by triggering an escape clause. When the agent is
                      audited, he is assigned his efficient spending level provided that it is above a specified
                      level π ∗∗ = π P (γ ∗∗ ) (and is otherwise punished).
                          An important feature of TEC is that the audit function a(γ) is weakly increasing,
                      that is, there is no decreasing auditing:

                      Definition 2. A rule features decreasing auditing at γ 0 if for all ε > 0 arbitrarily small,
                      either (i) a (γ 0 ) < a (γ 0 − ε) or (ii) a (γ 0 ) > a (γ 0 + ε). A rule features weakly increasing
                      auditing at γ 0 if neither (i) nor (ii) holds.

                           Note that we will refer to decreasing/increasing auditing in the strict sense, and we
                      will clarify whenever we use decreasing/increasing auditing in the weak sense. Figure 4
                      depicts an example of a rule with decreasing auditing. This rule specifies audit only for
                      types between two interior cutoffs, γ L and γ H > γ L . Types above and below this audit
                      region are not audited, and hence the rule features decreasing auditing at γ H . We will
                      return to this example in Section 4.3.
                           Another feature of TEC is that it specifies audit for some agent types but not for all,
                      i.e. the principal conducts an audit only when the agent triggers the escape clause. We
                      begin by showing in Section 4.1 that inducing no audit for some types is in fact a property

                                                                               13
 adratic uniform Pierre's example.nb
                                          8theta, thetaL, thetaH<, PlotRange Ø 8thetaL, thetaH + b<,
tth
  Verification
                                          BaseStyle Ø     8FontSize
                                                        TEC                {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡
                                                              consists Øof14<,      ⇤⇤ } such that
                                                                                  AxesLabel    Ø 8"theta", ""<, Axes Ø True,
     Escape Clause (TEC)                  AxesOrigin Ø 8thetaL, thetaL<, PlotStyle Ø 88Gray<, 8Gray<,
                                                       Optimal      Rule without
                                             8Blue, Thickness@0.01D<,            8Blue,   Verification
                                                                                           Dashing@MediumD, Thickness@0.01D<<,
                                                          1.
of course 2a hole like this would not be optimal as the types
 Optimal
f( )        Contract
               for all   without   Verification              (threshold)
                                                              in the middleIf would
                                                                              no  audit,
                                          Ticks Ø 88<, 8<<, Exclusions Ø 8thetadpri<D
                                                                                            ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ ⇤ }
                                                                                     jump⇡up.
          1
   TEC uniform
  Threshold
  Quadratic consists
 gNAC4[theta_  with    of
                Pierre's    {⇡ ⇤ , ⇡
                       Escape
                         example.nb
                 ); thetadpri
                                     ⇤⇤ } such that
                                   Clause
                                    < theta (TEC)
                                             < thetapri] := thetapri + b;
 ning-Angeletos 06. Holds for many distributions
 out  Verification                       2
                                                                     Threshold
                                                             2. (escape            with
                                                                        clause) If audit  Escape
                                                                                         and            ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                                              ⇡ P ( ) Clause    (TEC)⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                        0
 Clause     (TEC)
 ut Verification
       Assumption:
 Plot[{theta,
  {⇡ ⇤1.
      , ⇡ ⇤⇤
                      f
                  theta
           (threshold)
                          (
                          + )
                            b,/f ( )
                                gNAC3[theta],
             } such that If no audit,    1    for all           Agent’s
                                                   gNAC4[theta]},
                                           ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ ( ) , ⇡ ⇤ }   preferred spending  is ⇡ A ( ):   =     b0 (⇡ ( ))
                                                                                                                     A
                                                   A
   {theta, thetaL, thetaH}, PlotRange . {thetaL, thetaH + b},
Rule      without
 wBaseStyle
      of course         Verification
                    a {FontSize
                       hole    like this    wouldAxesLabel
                                                      not be optimal    as the types                        b0 (⇡
                                                                                ""}, in the middle would=jump     P ( ))
                                                                                                                up.                                                 v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
  )/f/f(Optimal
         () )
   Proposition    2.2
                       Contract
                          for
                         for    all
                              all       without
                                        . 14},         Verification
                                                                  . {"theta",
 alIf
   TECno
   Axes 2.consists
      rule audit,
        Threshold
           .      1
              True,
0]:= gNAC4[theta_
                    1
            is(escape
               a threshold  ⇤    Higher
                                 ⇤
                           )clause)
                     ⇡ofAxesOrigin
                        ({g
                   Higher with
                            );,=  ⇤⇤
                                   :Escape
                                gthetadpri
                                   min
                                 Audit   {⇡
                                     } s.t.    Audit
                                          If. Cost
                                              audit
                                                (Clause
                                              {thetaL,
                                              A           Cost
                                                          ⇤
                                                    ) , ⇡and   <⇡thetapri]
                                                            }thetaL},
                                                              (TEC)
                                                                              ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                  P ⇤( ) PlotStyle   . ⇡ ( ) = ⇡ P ( ) for
                                                                            ⇡:= thetapri
   Without verification,        optimal     rule is< atheta
                                                       threshold   g :                    + b;
         {{Gray}, {Gray},
 Werning-Angeletos
   erning-Angeletos
  utional          assumption        06.implies
                                   06.       Holds
                                           Holds  {Blue,
                                                           aforhole
                                                         for         Thickness[0.01]},
                                                                   many
                                                                many          Ldistributions
                                                                          [⇡distributions
                                                                                 , ⇡ H ] is suboptimal
                                                                                                                    {Blue,Types            with ⇡ P ( ) < ⇡ ⇤⇤ are punished if audited
                                                                                                                                   Thickness[0.01]}},
     Ticks          .   {{},      {}},     ⇤ Exclusions
                                                      0                      .         2
                                                                                  {thetadpri}]               ⇤                                                        ⇤ ⇤⇤
pe(hout
  use)
 ey
          Clause
        )1.=If  min     {gA
                    audit
          Plot[{theta,
        result      in
                            (TEC)
                   Verification
               (threshold)     ( )If, gno
                      Assumption:
                               and       ⇡ P}audit,
                                         theta
                        Amador-Werning-Angeletos   (f g)(+( )b,g/f
                                                                )=
                                                                       ⇤⇤      min {g
                                                                  (⇡gNAC3[theta],
                                                                       )( =,) 06,
                                                                         min   then
                                                                                 {g    1 ⇡A b(0((⇡
                                                                                 =Amador-Bagwell
                                                                                     A( ),g }
                                                                                                for))⇤ P,=
                                                                                                         all(⇡} P))13
                                                                                                          ggNAC4[theta]},
                                                                                                                      ( ) vfor  0
                                                                                                                                  (⇡ P (TEC )) consists of {⇡ , ⇡ } such that
             {theta, thetaL,                         thetaH},
 al(g2.  Rule( (escape
                 )) =  without
                             W   0
                              clause)
                                   (y        IfgAaudit( 0)) and
                                           Verification                  gPPlotRange
                                                                               ( ) g ⇤⇤ , then
                                                                         Out[438]=                     . {thetaL, thetaH + b},
                                                                                                                g ( ) = gP ( ) for
         A
   (( )) =   BaseStyle
                min
            Proposition  {g         .
                             Proposition
                                       0
                                ( )b, (⇡
                                  2     {FontSize
                                          for
                                            ⇤
                                          gfor    Proposition
                                                      U
                                               }P⇤(gall       (g    .(   014},
                                                                          ))   =     AxesLabel
                                                                                      W    (y          g A ( .)){"theta", ""},                                                                             ⇤
                                                                                                                                 audited1.. (threshold) If no audit, ⇡ ( ) = min {⇡ A ( ) , ⇡ }
            /f     (  )     =                          ⇤ :))     A    v    (⇡      (
                                                                                  ⇤⇤   ))
  imal        rule     is
                     Types a Athreshold
                                  1with                                        ⇡P are             punished
                                                                                                     thetaL}, if
 ptimalTEC      rule
             Axes       .isTrue,
                             a threshold
                       consists             {g ⇡, P
                                      ofAxesOrigin     g ⇤⇤⇤0:(} s.t.
                                                        U (gexist
                                                                   )<    . {thetaL,      0                                   PlotStyle
    n gWithout                                                     P ( rule )) =isW, Wa f, (y , g}P such      ( g))
                                                 gThere                    ( {U,
                                                                                                                   ⇤ : that TEC is not optimal
  nd
  tion                      gverification,
                ( ) assumption
             P {{Gray},
                              ⇤⇤ , {Gray},
                             There   then  exist     ( optimal
                                                        {U,    =Threshold
                                                          ){Blue,W,      f,
                                                                   gaPhole     ) ,for       with
                                                                                          threshold
                                                                                     } such
                                                                              Thickness[0.01]},      that  EscapeTEC          Clause
                                                                                                                           is{Blue,
                                                                                                                               not optimal(TEC)
                                                                                                                                        Thickness[0.01]}},
    :g ( implies
   r-Werning-Angeletos
  tributional
            )Ticks
               =     min   “holes”
                             {g     (    )are
                                           06.
                                            ,  g    suboptimal
                                                     Holds
                                                  ⇤implies
                                                     }           for     many     [⇡ distributions
                                                                                        , ⇡      ]   is    suboptimal
  s.t.
              Distributional
     ⇡gP((Types)1.)=<        ⇤⇤
                          ⇡with
                          .     A
                              {{},
                               {g
                      (threshold)
                       min         are
                                   A   (
                                         assumption
                                           punished
                                          {}},
                                           )If ,  no
                                                  g
                                    gP0 (by) closing
                                                     ⇤
                                                       }Exclusions
                                                         audit,
                                                    < g gare⇤⇤
                                                                    implies
                                                                    if  g audited
                                                                            (   )
                                                                          punished = .L
                                                                                   “holes”
                                                                                       min
                                                                                             H     suboptimal
                                                                                         {thetadpri}]
                                                                                                {g    A   (
                                                                                           ifAmador-Bagwell
                                                                                                audited        )
                                                                                                               ⇤
                                                                                                                 ,  g ⇤ }                  2. (escape clause) If audit and ⇡ P ( ) ⇡ ⇤⇤ , then ⇡ (             )=⇡
      not
      Key
       0     allowed,
               result     in
                           0improve
                              Amador-Werning-Angeletos           hole:
                                                              Show  (    )  =
                                                                           bylower
                                                                                 min   g{g
                                                                                      06,
                                                                                 example         (that )  , g    }
                                                                                                              decreasing      13   auditing    can dominate      TEC
 gU
  lP ((g     A (=))
                    • W Hole     W Show
                          =(ybetween   g(y       any gbyg(example
                                                               and
                                                                 )) g means      thatspending
                                                                                          decreasing
                                                                                             A           in that    auditing
                                                                                                                       interval notcanallowed
                                                                                                                                        dominate       TEC
          0 ))  2.    (escape            0P ( ))IfA audit and gP ( )
                                     clause)                                                        g  ⇤⇤ , then g ( ) = g ( ) for
      U (gA •( But
 dor-Werning-Angeletos  )) =closing W (y   06           gAlowering
                                                               ( 0)) g increases principal’s welfare                                  P
  t,(g))( ) =rule
 Aoptimal
                        minis{g         (
                                            holefor
                                 a Athreshold)  ,   g ⇤by}    g
                                                                U
                                                                ⇤ : (gA ( )) = W (y                              gA ( ))                                                        = b0 (⇡ P ( )) v 0 (⇡ P ( ))
                                                                                                                                                                             theta
  are punished      • Keyifresult     Intuition:
                                 audited                      Intuition:
                                                                Auditing
                                          in Amador-Werning-Angeletos              Auditing            only      intermediate
                                                                                   only intermediate 2 [ L , H ] can                      2  [     ,
                                                                                                                                                L be   ]  can
                                                                                                                                                      H optimalbe  optimal
mption           implies       “holes”          are suboptimal
                                     ⇤⇤ , then g ( U) =
                                                                     0
                                                                        (gP ( )) = W 0 06             (y gP ( ))
  it     and      g     (  )       g                                      Threshold
                                                                             g     (  )   for         with          Escape          Clause
                                                                                                                            ê; thetadpri          (TEC)
                                                                                                                                                     < theta
  mption
  d  g]g ⇤not       implies
           :g ( allowed,
                       = min     “holes”
                    )PDistributional{gFigure
                                improve
                                            • Benefit
                                        A ( by     )are       }4:•over
                                                           ⇤suboptimal
                                                      , gclosing
                                                   assumption
                                                                        Benefit
                                                                         hole:no
                                                                          In[439]:=
                                                                         A implies
                                                                               rule
                                                                                      over
                                                                               P auditing:
                                                                                   lower     gno auditing:
                                                                                      gTECC@theta_
                                                                                           “holes”
                                                                                         with
                                                                                                       impose discipline impose     discipline
                                                                                                                                     below below
                                                                                                              suboptimalauditing. LTypes
                                                                                                        decreasing                                         with<⇡thetapriD
                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                  Parameters        P ( the
                                                                                                                                                                    are       ⇡ ⇤⇤:=are
                                                                                                                                                                         ) <same     ga@thetaD;
                                                                                                                                                                                     as punished
                                                                                                                                                                                        in Figureif3.audited
                      Types      with       g
                                            •       (    )
                                                   Benefit   <   g  ⇤⇤
                                                                   over    areTEC:punished
                                                                                        save     auditif   audited
                                                                                                               costs      above
  g, g] not   0 allowed,
mador-Werning-Angeletos            improve
                                       The     P   06by any
                                                     solid  closing•    Benefit
                                                                           hole:      over
                                                                                     lower the TEC:
                                                                                                g Graphical save      audit     costs  above
                                                               gAline     ))depicts                      allocation              of non-audited          types;   the dashed    line corresponds to
                                                                                                                                     H            H
Urg0⇤(g} UP ((g))
                          • W
                     A (=))     =0 (ybetween
                              Hole       W 0g(y
                                            •       P ( ))
                                                   Cost:
                                                                   g(and
                                                                incentivizing
                                                                                g means        spending
                                                                                      Plot@8theta,
                                                                                        audit        is   expensive
                                                                                                                   in thatthetainterval
                                                                                                                             (overspend
                                                                                                                                       +not
                                                                                                                             representation    allowed
                                                                                                                                                  of
                                                                                                                                          b,in/above escape
                                                                                                                                                gNAC3@thetaD,clause
                                                                                                                                                         audit region)
                                                                                                                                                                       gTECC@thetaD<,
                                       audited                     •    Cost:      incentivizing             audit      is expensive     (overspend     in/above  audit region)
  mador-Werning-Angeletos
   1]=                    • But closing               hole types.
                                                      06        by lowering g increases  8theta,             principal’s
                                                                                                             onthetaL,
                                                                                                           theta    x axis and welfare
                                                                                                                                     spending on PlotRange
                                                                                                                                    thetaH<,          y axis          Ø 8thetaL, thetaH + b<,
     ⇤⇤gAare ( ))
                   punished         if   audited
                                                        I We show            I benefits
                                                                                  We show     can
                                                                                         BaseStyle     outweigh
                                                                                                  benefits  ⇤ 06 ⇤⇤      cost
                                                                                                                   canØoutweigh
                                                                                                                           8FontSize  cost Ø 14<, AxesLabel Ø 8"theta", ""<,
                          •   Key     result
  sumption implies “holes” are suboptimal           in   Amador-Werning-Angeletos
  this      case                                                                         Axes ØbyTrue,                       AxesOrigin            Ø 8thetaL,        thetaL<, PlotStyle Ø
 n [g, g]        not whatallowed,weof     can
                                        improveany   dooptimal
                                                             is impose
                                                            by   closing rule.     discipline
                                                                                 hole:     As a gresult,
                                                                                           lower                 auditing we showonly the
                                                                                                                                        that types    in the middle:
                                                                                                                                                 to identify     conditions under which TEC is
                                                                    88Gray<, 8Gray<, 8Blue, Thickness@0.01D<, 8Red, Thickness@0.01D<<,
  Amador-Werning-Angeletos
                  optimal,06it<istheta
                                   sufficient to find  conditions  under  which   decreasing
 gTECC[theta_  ); thetadpri                       Ø 88<,
                                        < thetapri]
                                          Ticks       :=   8<<,
                                                         Max[theta,
                                                     Graphical                of Ø
                                                                      ga[theta]];
                                                                 Exclusions
                                                               representation    escape clause auditing
                                                                                   8thetadpri<D   is suboptimal.
                 We+study
 Plot[{theta, theta        a simple extreme
                     b, gNAC3[theta],          bias
                                                  on case
                                                thetax axisin
                                        gTECC[theta]},      andSection
                                                                spending4.2
                                                                          on and
                                                                             y axisprovide a characterization for
  {theta, thetaL,our                             ⇤  ⇤⇤
                     generalPlotRange
                  thetaH},   setting in.Section 4.3.
                                         {thetaL,  thetaH + b},
   BaseStyle . {FontSize . 14}, AxesLabel . {"theta", ""},
   in this case what we can do is impose discipline by auditing only the types in the middle:
   Axes . True, AxesOrigin . {thetaL, thetaL}, PlotStyle .
    {{Gray}, {Gray}, {Blue, Thickness[0.01]}, {Red, Thickness[0.01]}},
 2]:=
                              4.1          No Auditing All
     gTECC[theta_ ); thetadpri < theta < thetapri] := Max[theta, ga[theta]];
   Ticks . {{}, {}}, Exclusions . {thetadpri}]
        Plot[{theta, theta + b, gNAC3[theta], gTECC[theta]},
                     A possibility we must rule out to establish the optimality of TEC is that of                                                                     auditing all
         {theta, thetaL, thetaH},     PlotRange . {thetaL, thetaH + b},
                                  Out[440]=
         BaseStyle . agent types.
                     {FontSize     The AxesLabel
                                . 14},      next lemma shows this ""},
                                                     . {"theta",  is never optimal for the principal:
         Axes . True, AxesOrigin . {thetaL, thetaL}, PlotStyle .
          {{Gray}, {Gray}, {Blue, Thickness[0.01]}, {Red, Thickness[0.01]}},
                     Lemma 1. A rule with a (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ Γ is not optimal.
         Ticks . {{}, {}}, Exclusions . {thetadpri}]

                                  The logic is simple. Suppose that a rule that audits all types is optimal. Such a rule
                              must trivially assign efficient spending to all types. Now consider a perturbation
                                                                                                              theta         in which
                              the principal allows the agent to choose π P (γ) without audit. Under the perturbed rule,
                              a set of types [γ, γ 0 ], for γ 0 ≥ γ, will prefer π P (γ) over being audited and assigned efficient
                                            The benefit relative to TEC is that we don’t need to audit so many types, which is expens
                              spending. Moreover, since theta   the agent is biased towards higher spending and pays an audit
  3]=
                                            shown, though, the cost is that here we audit some types and we have to give them abov
                              cost no largerbest
                                              thanto the    principal’s,
                                                        incentivize   them it to
                                                                              must
                                                                                 seekbeaudit.
                                                                                        that the
                                                                                              Whenprincipal
                                                                                                     we do isTEC,
                                                                                                               strictly bettereveryone
                                                                                                                    we audit   off by at the top, an
                              not auditing we   can
                                            these        give them
                                                      types.   Hence,first
                                                                        we best   sinceincentivizing
                                                                            find that   we don’t needlowtotypes
                                                                                                            provide  incentives:
                                                                                                                 to not overspendthere
                                                                                                                                    is is no region o
                                            of the audit region to which they can jump! This is why, as the cost of auditing goes down
                              cheaper than auditing them, and thus auditing all types cannot be optimal.
                                            eventually we prefer TEC to decreasing auditing.
                                  Given Lemma 1, we can establish: theta



                                                                                                          14
Corollary 1. If an optimal rule features auditing that is weakly increasing everywhere,
then TEC is optimal.

     Since auditing all agent types is suboptimal, an optimal rule with auditing that is
weakly increasing everywhere must feature a no-audit region followed by an audit region,
i.e. there must be a type γ ∗∗ such that a(γ) = 0 for γ < γ ∗∗ and a(γ) = 1 for γ > γ ∗∗ .
Conditional on the agent’s type being in the no-audit region, an optimal rule is a threshold
γ ∗ < γ ∗∗ (by Proposition 1), and conditional on the agent’s type being in the audit region,
an optimal rule assigns efficient spending to all types. To prove Corollary 1, we show that
the rule that results from optimizing over each region separately is incentive compatible,
and thus optimal, over the whole set of types. Specifically, we show that an optimal rule
conditional on no-audit sets a maximum allowable spending level π A (γ ∗ ) ≤ π P (γ ∗∗ ), and
by optimality of γ ∗∗ the principal prefers to pay the cost of auditing type γ > γ ∗∗ to
assign him π P (γ) rather than bunch him at π A (γ ∗ ). Since the agent is biased towards
higher spending and pays an audit cost no larger than the principal’s, it follows that
types γ > γ ∗∗ also prefer to be audited rather than deviating to π A (γ ∗ ). Therefore, the
resulting rule is incentive compatible and thus optimal, and it is TEC.


4.2     Extreme Bias
Suppose b (π) = 0 for all π ∈ [π, π], so that the agent’s welfare is simply UA (γ, π) =
γπ. We call this an extreme bias case because the agent always prefers higher levels
of spending: the agent’s flexible spending level is π A (γ) = π for all γ ∈ Γ.19 This
is analogous to what is assumed in other models of costly verification, including the
seminal work of Townsend (1979) and more recent contributions such as Ben-Porath,
Dekel and Lipman (2014). It is also the assumption that is maintained in the delegation
model of Harris and Raviv (1996, 1998).
    An extreme bias implies that if the agent is not audited, he will choose the highest
allowable level of spending, regardless of his type. Moreover, the agent will seek an
audit only if that allows him to spend more than under no audit. As a result, the
analysis is significantly simplified. The only incentive compatible rule for an agent with
an extreme bias involves bunching all non-audited types at one spending level; that is,
flexibility has no value in this setting. Furthermore, any agent type that is audited must
  19
    As assumed in Section 2.1, we are primarily interested in the case in which π A (γ) is interior rather
than a corner; however, we find it is instructive to study this corner case first.



                                                   15
be assigned a higher spending level than that at which non-audited types are bunched.
These observations yield:

Proposition 2 (extreme bias). Suppose b (π) = 0 for all π ∈ [π, π]. Then if auditing is
optimal, TEC is optimal.

    When the agent’s bias relative to the principal is extreme and auditing some types is
optimal, an optimal rule is TEC, with non-audited types γ ≤ γ ∗∗ bunched and awarded
no flexibility and audited types γ > γ ∗∗ spending at their efficient level. The optimality of
TEC follows from the optimality of weakly increasing auditing. Suppose for the purpose of
contradiction that an optimal rule featured decreasing auditing. Take γ 0 to be a marginal
non-audited type splitting an audit region and a higher no-audit region, i.e. with a (γ 0 ) = 0
and a (γ 0 − ε) = 1 for ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Let π A (γ ∗ ) be the level of spending at
which non-audited types are bunched. The optimality of auditing γ 0 − ε implies

                     UP (γ 0 − ε, π (γ 0 − ε)) − UP (γ 0 − ε, π A (γ ∗ )) ≥ φ,             (6)

where, as noted, incentive compatibility requires π(γ 0 − ε) ≥ π A (γ ∗ ), and since φ > 0,
(6) yields π(γ 0 − ε) > π A (γ ∗ ). The optimality of not auditing γ 0 then implies

                         UP (γ 0 , π (γ 0 − ε)) − UP (γ 0 , π A (γ ∗ )) ≤ φ.               (7)

However, (6) and (7) together with π(γ 0 −ε) > π A (γ ∗ ) violate the single-crossing condition
(1), yielding a contradiction. Intuitively, the principal can improve upon a rule with
decreasing auditing by auditing a higher agent type instead of a lower type, as the
marginal benefit of letting the higher type spend more is higher. Note that such a
perturbation is always incentive compatible for the agent because all non-audited types
are bunched at the same spending level π A (γ ∗ ), which (by incentive compatibility) is
lower than the spending level assigned to any audited type. This feature is of course due
to the agent’s bias being extreme.


4.3    Optimal Rule with Verification
We next study the optimal rule with verification in our general setting in which the
agent’s bias is not extreme. To this end, it is useful to consider a relaxed version of the




                                                 16
problem in (3)-(4), in which we assume that the agent pays no audit cost (α = 0):
                                         Z   γ                          
                            max                  UP (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) φ f (γ) dγ                    (8)
                        {a(γ),π(γ)}γ∈Γ   γ

                                                   subject to
                 UA (γ, π (γ)) ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                           γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                           b for which a (b
                                                                          γ ) = 0.                   (9)

Since the original incentive compatibility constraint (4) is tighter than the relaxed con-
straint (9), if a solution to (8)-(9) satisfies (4), then it is also a solution to the problem
in (3)-(4). Furthermore, we can show that if a solution to (8)-(9) is TEC, then it will
indeed satisfy (4), implying:

Lemma 2. If a TEC rule is a solution to (8)-(9), then it is also a solution to (3)-(4).

    To verify that a TEC rule {γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ } that solves (8)-(9) satisfies the original constraint
(4), we must check that an agent of type γ > γ ∗∗ would prefer to pay the audit cost
αφ and spend at his efficient level π P (γ) rather than pay no audit cost and choose the
threshold flexible spending level π A (γ ∗ ). Now TEC being a solution to (8)-(9) implies
that the principal prefers auditing such an agent type γ to assign him π P (γ) rather than
bunching this type at π A (γ ∗ ), where π A (γ ∗ ) ≤ π P (γ) for all γ > γ ∗∗ . Since the agent
is biased towards higher spending and pays an audit cost no larger than the principal’s,
the optimality of auditing γ for the principal therefore yields that auditing γ is incentive
compatible for the agent. This is the logic behind Lemma 2, and it implies that in order
to prove the optimality of TEC, it is without loss to focus on the relaxed problem in
(8)-(9).20 We thus analyze this problem for the remainder of this section.
    The following two lemmas establish useful properties of any solution:

Lemma 3. If a solution to (8)-(9) prescribes audit for type γ, it has π P (γ) ≤ π (γ) ≤
π A (γ). If (9) does not bind for γ, then π (γ) = π P (γ).

Lemma 4. In any solution to (8)-(9), π (γ) is weakly increasing.

    Lemma 3 states that if a type γ is audited, his assigned spending level is (weakly)
between his efficient level and his flexible level. The argument is straightforward. If as-
signed spending for type γ is either below efficient or above flexible, then either increasing
  20
    We maintain our optimality condition (5), so that to prove the optimality of TEC, it is sufficient to
show that TEC solves (8)-(9) and no other solution provides the principal weakly larger welfare from
each type γ and strictly larger from some type γ.

                                                       17
or decreasing this spending, respectively, makes the principal better off and is incentive
compatible for the agent. Since the principal maximizes her expected welfare subject to
incentive compatibility, if an audited type’s incentive compatibility constraint is slack,
the principal assigns this type efficient spending.
    Lemma 4 shows that the principal assigns a spending level that is weakly increasing
in the agent’s type γ. When comparing two agent types that are not audited, the re-
sult naturally follows from incentive compatibility: a type γ cannot be assigned higher
spending than a higher type γ 0 > γ, as at least one of them would have an incentive to
deviate given that preferences satisfy single-crossing. When comparing two agent types
such that (at least) one of them is audited, the result follows from optimality: if a type
γ is assigned higher spending than a higher type γ 0 > γ, the principal can improve wel-
fare by swapping these types’ spending levels and audit assignments, and if incentive
compatibility was initially satisfied, it will continue to be satisfied after the swap, given
single-crossing.
    To show the optimality of TEC, we must rule out decreasing auditing, namely a
situation in which a set of types is audited and a set of higher types is not audited.
Using the two lemmas above, we show that a rule with decreasing auditing must induce
significant overspending, limiting the welfare that this rule can provide to the principal:

Lemma 5. Suppose a solution to (8)-(9) features decreasing auditing at γ 0 < γ. Then
the solution satisfies
                      Rγ
                         γ0
                              [UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π (γ))] f (γ) dγ
                                                                           ≥ η (γ 0 )               (10)
                                             1−F    (γ 0 )

for
                   R min{π−1
                          P (π A (γ )),γ }
                                   0

            0       γ0                       [UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π A (γ 0 ))] f (γ) dγ
        η (γ ) =                                                                             > 0.   (11)
                                                   1 − F (γ 0 )
    This lemma shows that under a rule featuring decreasing auditing at γ 0 < γ, the
principal’s expected welfare in the region above γ 0 is strictly bounded away from that
achieved under efficient spending. The reason is that such a rule must induce strict
overspending by a positive mass of types γ ≥ γ 0 . To see the intuition, let a(γ 0 ) = 1 and
thus a(γ 0 + ε) = 0 for ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Note that the principal must incentivize
types in the audit region below γ 0 to seek audit rather than deviate and mimic a type
in the no-audit region above γ 0 . By Lemma 4, all types above γ 0 spend more than types
below γ 0 , and by Lemma 3, audited types γ spend no more than their flexible amount

                                                      18
π A (γ). Thus, for types in the audit region below γ 0 not to deviate to the no-audit region
above γ 0 , we must have π(γ 0 + ε) ≥ π A (γ 0 ). Given that by Lemma 4 all types γ > γ 0
spend above π(γ 0 + ε), it follows that all types γ ∈ (γ 0 , min π −1         0
                                                                  
                                                                     P (π A (γ )) , γ ) spend
above π A (γ 0 ) > π P (γ), yielding the bound in (11).
     The properties shown in Lemma 3-Lemma 5 are satisfied in the examples of Figure 3
and Figure 4. Importantly, Lemma 5 shows that the principal’s expected welfare under
a rule featuring decreasing auditing is bounded away from efficient welfare by a bound
that is independent of the audit cost φ. This allows us to establish our first main result:

Proposition 3 (low audit cost). Let φ ≡ min η (γ) > 0. If φ < φ and auditing is optimal,
                                                γ∈Γ
TEC is optimal.

     Recall that by Corollary 1, if a rule with auditing that is weakly increasing everywhere
is optimal, then TEC is optimal. The proof of Proposition 3 therefore rests on showing
that, for any audit cost φ < φ, an optimal rule induces weakly increasing auditing
everywhere, i.e. decreasing auditing is suboptimal. To see why this must be true, suppose
by contradiction that an optimal rule induces decreasing auditing at some point, and let
γ ∗∗ be the lowest audited type under this rule. We show that the principal can improve
upon such a rule by performing a global perturbation: in the perturbed rule, the principal
audits all types γ ≥ γ ∗∗ and assigns them efficient spending, while solving for an optimal
rule without verification for types γ < γ ∗∗ . By Proposition 1, an optimal rule for the
no-audit region is a threshold γ ∗ < γ ∗∗ , and since π A (γ ∗ ) ≤ π P (γ ∗∗ ) (by optimality of γ ∗ )
and α = 0, it is easy to verify that the perturbed rule is incentive compatible.
     To show that the perturbation strictly raises the principal’s welfare, note first that
expected welfare conditional on γ < γ ∗∗ weakly increases because it is now maximized
subject to fewer constraints: under the perturbed rule, types γ < γ ∗∗ cannot mimic a
type γb ≥ γ ∗∗ . Thus, all we need to show is that expected welfare conditional on γ ≥ γ ∗∗
increases strictly, namely that the (allocative) benefit of auditing these types is strictly
greater than the additional auditing cost the principal incurs. Because audited types are
assigned efficient spending, the benefit of auditing γ ≥ γ ∗∗ is weakly positive for all such
types. Moreover, note that by the contradiction assumption, there exists a type above
γ ∗∗ at which the original rule features decreasing auditing. Thus, if γ 0 < γ is the lowest
such type, Lemma 5 implies that the benefit of auditing types γ ≥ γ ∗∗ is bounded from
below by (1 − F (γ 0 ))η(γ 0 ), where η(·) is defined in (11). The claim then follows in this
case from the fact that, given φ < φ, the additional cost of auditing types γ ≥ γ ∗∗ is


                                                 19
strictly smaller than (1 − F (γ 0 ))φ = (1 − F (γ 0 )) min η (γ), and hence strictly smaller than
                                                    γ∈Γ
the benefit of auditing these types. If the lowest type above γ ∗∗ at which the original rule
features decreasing auditing is γ 0 = γ, an analogous argument applies, as in this case the
original rule induces strict overspending by γ and the benefit of auditing this type is no
smaller than φ.
    Proposition 3 implies a positive result: if the principal’s cost of audit φ is low enough,
a TEC rule as we observe in practice is optimal. But what happens if φ is higher?
Our next result shows that there exist environments and audit costs for which TEC is
suboptimal, even though the principal benefits from auditing some agent types:
Proposition 4 (intermediate audit cost). There exist {UP , b, f, φ, α} such that auditing
is optimal but TEC is not.
    To prove this result, we construct examples in which auditing only an intermediate
range of types [γ L , γ H ] dominates both not auditing any type as well as using TEC. The
main reason why auditing only intermediate types can dominate not auditing any type is
that an intermediate audit region imposes discipline on the no-audit region below. That
is, even when the audit cost is high enough that the principal would not benefit from
auditing types in [γ L , γ H ] only to improve their allocation relative to flexible spending,
she may benefit from auditing these types to discipline lower types: with the intermediate
audit region, types γ < γ L can no longer mimic types in [γ L , γ H ]. On the other hand, the
main reason why auditing only intermediate types can dominate auditing with a TEC
rule is that it allows the principal to save on audit costs. Specifically, with intermediate
auditing, the principal may be able to impose discipline on types γ < γ L without pre-
scribing audit for types γ > γ H as she would under a TEC rule; this will be the case
if γ L has no incentive to deviate to mimic a type as high as γ H . In such a situation,
intermediate auditing allows the principal to save on the cost of auditing types above γ H .
    These arguments yield that a rule with decreasing auditing as that depicted in Fig-
ure 4 can dominate any no-audit rule (as that in Figure 1) and any TEC rule (as that
in Figure 3), provided that the cost of audit φ is not low (nor high) enough. We em-
phasize that Proposition 4 does not rely on non-uniformity of the principal’s objective
across types or any other sort of asymmetry; in fact, we prove the result in Appendix A
by constructing examples as those depicted in our figures, with quadratic preferences
and a uniform distribution of types. We also note that while these examples imply that
decreasing auditing is optimal for some parameters when φ > φ, the optimal rule in this
case may not take the simple intermediate-auditing structure that we consider to prove

                                               20
the result. In fact, we can show that even when restricting attention to quadratic pref-
erences and a uniform distribution, there exist parameters for which TEC, no auditing,
and intermediate auditing are all dominated by a rule featuring multiple interior audit
regions.21
    An interesting implication of our construction is that the principal must have strong
commitment power to implement a rule that features decreasing auditing. In particular,
take the rule depicted in Figure 4. The principal assigns spending strictly above the
efficient level to some agent types γ ∈ [γ L , γ H ] who are audited, that is for whom the
principal verifies the true type. By doing this, the principal incentivizes those types to
be audited: if they were instead assigned efficient spending following audit, they would
not seek an audit in the first place. The principal must be committed to allowing this
inefficient spending despite her learning the true type of the agent after the audit is
conducted. Strong commitment power from the principal is also required to incentivize
types γ < γ L sufficiently close to γ L to not seek audit. In the example of Figure 4,
these types are punished by the principal if they seek audit, even though ex post, once
the audit is conducted, both the principal and the agent would strictly prefer efficient
spending to punishment. Without the threat of punishment, the principal may not be
able to prevent an agent of type γ < γ L sufficiently close to γ L from seeking audit, as an
efficient allocation following audit would allow this agent to increase his spending.
    In practice, principals may not have sufficient commitment power to implement al-
locations that are inefficient ex post, following an audit. Can headquarters commit to
an inefficient budget after verifying the benefits of a manager’s investment project? We
explore the implications of limited commitment power in the next section.


5       Limited Commitment
We study a setting in which the principal has limited commitment power. The order of
events is as follows:

    1. The principal sets a rule, which maps an audit decision and result into an allowable
       spending set Π.

    2. The agent chooses whether or not to seek audit, a ∈ {0, 1}, and the principal verifies
       his type γ if a = 1.
 21
      Details are available from the authors upon request.


                                                    21
   3. The principal revises the allowable spending set Π to Π0 .

   4. The agent chooses a spending level π from the allowable set Π0 .

    The first two steps are the same as those in our environment of Section 2 with full
commitment power. What is new is Step 3: after observing the agent’s audit decision
and the result of the audit if one is conducted, the principal now revises the allowable
spending set for the agent. Note that this is a rather mild form of limited commitment.
In particular, in Step 2 we maintain the assumption that the principal is able to commit
to an audit plan, so the agent’s type is verified if and only if the agent requests audit, and
in Step 4 we maintain the assumption that the principal is able to commit to allowing the
agent to choose freely any spending level from the allowable spending set.22 Our problem
is therefore still one of delegation rather than cheap talk. The only assumption that we
relax is about the principal’s commitment to not changing the allowable spending set
following the audit decision and result; we believe lack of commitment in this respect
often shapes delegation rules in the real world.23
    Limited commitment on the side of the principal matters for two reasons. First,
conditional on an audit, the principal verifies the agent’s true type γ and must necessarily
assign the agent the efficient spending level π P (γ). This is true both when the agent’s
seeking audit is on path as well as when this audit decision is part of a deviation. As
such, the agent can always choose to be audited to guarantee himself the efficient level of
spending. Importantly, this means that all agent types who are not audited must weakly
prefer their allocation under no audit to being audited and receiving efficient spending. A
second implication of limited commitment is that conditional on no audit, the principal
chooses an allocation that is optimal for the non-audited types. More precisely, when the
agent chooses not to seek audit, the principal assigns spending taking into account the
distribution of non-audited types and ignoring the incentives of audited types.
  22
     As noted in fn. 8, there is a literature that studies auditing when the principal cannot commit to
an audit strategy. In many of the applications of our problem, however, we find that there are often
institutions ensuring that principals cannot deny an audit once it has been requested. In this sense,
the agent can always choose to trigger an audit. Lack of commitment in this respect would change the
nature of our problem, and so we leave its analysis for future work.
  23
     It is worth noting that our results in this section are not limited to the exact game described above;
analogous to our claims in Section 2.3, our findings can be extended to variations of this game that allow
messages between principal and agent (while maintaining our assumptions on the principal’s limited
commitment). We also emphasize that throughout this section, we maintain our optimality condition
(5), so that a rule is optimal if it maximizes the principal’s expected welfare and no other rule provides
weakly larger welfare from each type γ and strictly larger welfare from some type γ.



                                                    22
   Limited commitment as a result implies certain conditions that any incentive com-
patible rule must satisfy. In what follows, we restrict attention to strategies that specify
piecewise continuous mappings {a(γ), π(γ)}.

Lemma 6. Under limited commitment, any incentive compatible rule must satisfy:

  (i) If there is decreasing auditing at γ H , then

                              UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − αφ = UA (γ H , π (γ H )) ,        (12)

      where π (γ H ) ≡ lim π (γ H + ε) if a (γ H ) = 1. Moreover,
                        ε↓0

                                            π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) .                     (13)

 (ii) If there is increasing auditing at γ L , then

                              UA (γ L , π P (γ L )) − αφ = UA (γ L , π (γ L )) ,        (14)

      where π (γ L ) ≡ lim π (γ L − ε) if a (γ L ) = 1.
                        ε↓0

    Part (i) shows that if γ H splits an audit region from a higher no-audit region, then γ H
must be indifferent between being audited and spending at the efficient level versus not
being audited and spending at π(γ H ) as allowed in the no-audit region above this type.
Likewise, part (ii) shows that if γ L splits a no-audit region from a higher audit region,
then γ L must be indifferent between being audited and spending at the efficient level
versus not being audited and spending at π(γ L ) as allowed in the no-audit region below
this type. This result follows from the fact that a principal with limited commitment
power assigns efficient spending whenever the agent seeks an audit, both on and off path.
Therefore, if there is a point at which an audit region either ends or starts, the marginal
audited type at such point must weakly prefer audit with efficient spending to no audit,
and the marginal non-audited type must weakly prefer no audit to audit with efficient
spending. The marginal type must thus be indifferent.
    Lemma 6 also shows that for type γ H as defined in the lemma, an incentive compatible
rule must set π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ). This is required to make γ H indifferent between audit
and no audit: if this inequality is not satisfied, the marginal audited type would instead
prefer to deviate and not seek an audit.
    For the remainder of our analysis, we require:



                                                  23
Assumption 2. If

                        R (γ, π H ) ≡ UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ − UA (γ, π H ) ≥ 0

for π H > π P (γ), then
                                    R (γ 0 , π H ) > 0 for all γ 0 < γ.
    This is a single-crossing property: we assume that if a type γ weakly prefers audit
with efficient spending π P (γ) to no audit with a higher spending level π H > π P (γ), then
any lower type γ 0 < γ strictly prefers audit with efficient spending π P (γ 0 ) to no audit
with the higher spending level π H .24 A sufficient condition for this assumption is that if
R (γ, π H ) ≥ 0 for some γ ∈ Γ and π H > π P (γ), then UA (γ, π P (γ)) be convex in γ for all
γ ∈ Γ; it can be established that in this case UA (γ, π P (γ)) is convex somewhere, and a
sufficient condition is that it be convex everywhere. This convexity assumption is in fact
satisfied in the cases commonly studied in the literature, such as those with quadratic
preferences or with hyperbolic preferences under common parameterizations.25
    Given Assumption 2, we obtain:
Proposition 5 (limited commitment). Under limited commitment, any incentive compat-
ible rule features weakly increasing auditing everywhere. Moreover, if auditing is optimal,
TEC is optimal.
    Under limited commitment, decreasing auditing is not incentive compatible for the
principal. As we discussed in Section 4.3, decreasing auditing requires that the principal
commit to allowing the agent to spend at a level that is inefficient ex post, following
the agent’s audit decision and result. Without this commitment, the principal cannot
induce decreasing auditing, and hence any incentive compatible rule must feature weakly
increasing auditing at all types γ ∈ Γ. Analogous arguments to those behind Lemma 1
and Corollary 1 in our full-commitment environment then imply that if auditing some
agent types is optimal, a TEC rule is optimal.
    A sketch of the proof of Proposition 5 is as follows. Suppose by contradiction that
there is an incentive compatible rule that induces decreasing auditing, with γ H being
  24
     Our single-crossing conditions on preferences imply that if a type γ weakly prefers audit with efficient
spending π P (γ) to no audit with a lower spending level π L < π P (γ), then any higher type γ 0 > γ strictly
prefers audit with efficient spending π P (γ 0 ) to no audit with the lower spending level π L . Assumption 2
requires that this property be maintained in the opposite direction as well.
  25
     For example, in the hyperbolic preferences case described in Section 2.1, UA (γ, π P (γ)) will be convex
in γ if the utility functions for present and future consumption are the same and either exponential or
CRRA with a coefficient weakly greater than 1.

                                                     24
a type splitting an audit region from a higher no-audit region. Given limited commit-
ment, audited types immediately below γ H are assigned efficient spending, and types γ
immediately above γ H spend at a level π H > π A (γ) that makes γ H indifferent between
audit and no audit (cf. Lemma 6). This means that types immediately above γ H must be
strictly overspending, in fact spending above their flexible level. The heart of the proof
is showing that the principal cannot commit to allowing such overspending.
    It is clear that conditional on the agent not seeking an audit, the principal would like
to reduce the overspending by types immediately above γ H . Reducing this overspending
is ex post incentive compatible for these types: having chosen no audit, types γ > γ H
would prefer π A (γ) to π H > π A (γ). Hence, the only reason the principal would not
reduce the overspending above γ H once the agent chooses no audit is if doing so would
violate incentive compatibility for some other non-audited type. Such a non-audited type
must be below γ H ; specifically, there must exist a type γ L < γ H who is not audited and
is exactly indifferent between his assigned spending level, call it π L , and the spending
level π H > π L . In fact, because of single-crossing, this type must be the marginal type
right below the audit region that ends at γ H , i.e. the rule must induce audit for types
γ ∈ [γ L , γ H ] and no audit for types immediately below and above this set. An example
is the rule depicted in Figure 4.
    Now if the principal induces such an interior audit region [γ L , γ H ], then by Lemma 6
type γ L must be indifferent between no audit with spending π L and audit with efficient
spending. Since we have defined γ L as being indifferent between spending at π L and
spending at π H under no audit, by transitivity, we obtain that γ L must be indifferent
between no audit with spending π H and audit with efficient spending. However, recall
that type γ H is also indifferent between no audit with spending π H and audit with efficient
spending. Hence, by Assumption 2, γ L < γ H cannot hold,26 and we must have γ L = γ H .
This means that the principal audits a single type at this point who is indifferent between
audit with efficient spending, no audit with higher spending at π H , and no audit with
lower spending at π L . Conditional on no audit, this is thus an allocation in which the
agent faces a hole [π L , π H ], namely he is not allowed to choose spending in this set but
can choose spending immediately below and above this set. But our analysis in Section 3
shows that such a hole is suboptimal conditional on no verification; hence, following no
audit, the principal would have a strict incentive to close the hole. This shows that a rule
  26
     If γ L < γ H , the indifference of type γ H between audit with efficient spending and no audit with
spending π H would imply that γ L strictly prefers audit with efficient spending to no audit with spending
π H , a contradiction.


                                                   25
with decreasing auditing cannot be incentive compatible when the principal has limited
commitment power, allowing us to establish that TEC is optimal in this case.
     It is worth pointing out that while TEC is optimal both when the principal has full
commitment power and a low audit cost (as shown in Proposition 3) as well as when
she has limited commitment power (as shown in Proposition 5), the specific details of
an optimal TEC rule vary with each case. Under full commitment, an optimal TEC
rule {γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ } is such that the principal prefers to audit types γ > γ ∗∗ to assign them
efficient spending rather than bunch them at π A (γ ∗ ) without audit, whereas the opposite
is true for types γ ∈ [γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ ]. Hence, the principal is indifferent between auditing and
not auditing the threshold type γ ∗∗ ; that is, the increase in assigned spending at γ ∗∗
exactly compensates the principal for the cost φ of auditing this type. In contrast, under
limited commitment, it is the agent who is indifferent at γ ∗∗ : as implied by Lemma 6,
type γ ∗∗ must be indifferent between being audited and assigned efficient spending versus
not being audited and assigned π A (γ ∗ ), and thus any increase in assigned spending at
γ ∗∗ must exactly compensate this type for his audit cost αφ.


6     Conclusion
This paper has studied the tradeoff between commitment and flexibility in the presence of
costly verification. We have examined a general delegation problem in which a principal
delegates decision making to an agent who has superior information about the efficient
action but is biased towards higher actions. A novel element of our framework is that
the principal can verify the agent’s private information by conducting an audit. Because
audits are costly, the principal wishes to use this technology selectively, and in a way
that supplements delegation and improves her commitment-versus-flexibility tradeoff.
    Our results provide insight into how the principal achieves this by designing an optimal
delegation rule. We have shown that if the cost of audit is small enough, an optimal rule
is a threshold with an escape clause (TEC), allowing the agent to freely select any action
up to a threshold or to request audit and the efficient action if the threshold is sufficiently
binding. If the cost of audit is higher, the principal may instead prefer to prescribe audit
only for intermediate actions, still imposing some discipline on the agent but saving on
audit costs. Yet, we find that the optimality of TEC is recovered under mild limitations
to the principal’s commitment power: if the principal is unable to commit to not changing
the agent’s permissible action set following the audit decision and result, TEC is optimal


                                              26
for any audit cost for which auditing is optimal.
    A main contribution of our paper is to provide a theoretical foundation for the use
of TEC in practice. As discussed in the Introduction, there is a variety of applications
where delegation rules make use of audits and often take the form of TEC, including
in capital budgeting in organizations, fiscal policy, and consumption-savings problems.
More broadly, our framework may help inform the empirical analysis of real-world rules.
Data on delegation policies and the way verification is used is increasingly available and
offers an opportunity to explore the structure of these rules in more detail. For example,
data on fiscal rules around the world may be used to study how delegation varies with
the institutional and macroeconomic context, which may affect both the cost of auditing
a government and the importance of flexibility in responding to shocks.
    Lastly, by uncovering a new set of issues that arise when audits are introduced to
a setting in which both commitment and flexibility are valuable, our paper opens the
door for further work that can help understand the optimal joint design of delegation
and verification. We have focused on a simple model that emphasizes the main forces at
play but abstracts from other potentially relevant aspects, for instance associated with
more complex verification technologies. We close by discussing some possible extensions
and variations of our work.

Random auditing. Our analysis restricted attention to deterministic auditing, namely,
we assumed that the principal’s rule assigns a(γ) ∈ {0, 1} to each agent type γ. More
generally, one could allow for mechanisms in which the principal randomizes over the
audit assignment, choosing a probability of audit for each type. In our game form of
Section 2.2, random audits would be implemented by letting the agent choose in Step 2
not between audit and no-audit but rather between lotteries over audit. The literature
on financial contracting and tax collection finds that random audits can yield qualita-
tively different results compared to deterministic audits; see Border and Sobel (1987) and
Mookherjee and Png (1989).
    While the study of random audits in delegation would be an interesting extension of
our work, we emphasize two points. First, as noted in the aforementioned papers, an
analysis of optimal rules with random audits requires imposing a bound on the extent to
which an agent can be punished following an audit. The reason is that, otherwise, the
efficient allocation can be approached with a rule that audits all agent types with very
low probability and arbitrarily punishes the agent when the audit verifies that he has


                                           27
deviated — such a rule would prevent deviations with a deadweight loss that approaches
zero as the probability of audit approaches zero.27 This possibility not only yields rather
implausible predictions, but also generates the problem that an optimal rule in general
will fail to exist unless a bound is imposed.
    Random audits therefore demand taking a stance on how (and why) punishments
are bounded. One possibility is to consider some form of limited commitment by the
principal, as we have done in Section 5. However, that takes us to our second point: im-
plementing random audits requires high commitment power from the principal. When the
decision is simply over audit or no-audit, commitment to the audit policy would in prin-
ciple be facilitated by the fact that the principal’s execution of the agent’s audit/no-audit
request can be easily monitored. But checking that the principal implements a specific
non-degenerate lottery is more difficult, as it requires monitoring of the randomization
itself rather than its outcome. The difficulty to commit to randomized mechanisms may
be an obstacle to their implementation in applications.

Imperfect auditing. Another simplifying assumption of our setting is that the princi-
pal verifies the agent’s type perfectly when she conducts an audit. An alternative would
be to consider imperfect audits, namely audits that provide only imperfect information
about the agent’s type. For example, in the context of capital budgeting in organizations,
headquarters may review information about the benefits of a project that a manager ad-
vocates, but the available documentation may be incomplete and fail to reveal the full
merits of the project.
    A simple specification that may be possible to accommodate within our framework is
when an imperfect audit either verifies the agent’s type perfectly or provides no informa-
tion (i.e., when there are no “false” audit results). Provided that available punishments
are unbounded, the principal would be able to prevent, at no cost, any deviation in which
an agent type mimics another type who is audited, as is true in our problem with perfect
audits. Yet, a difference introduced by imperfect audits is that the principal may not
observe the agent’s type and thus may not be able to assign a type-dependent spending
level following audit; the principal’s rule must specify a spending allocation for the case
of audit and no information. Allowing for imperfect audits that may produce false results
would naturally introduce further issues, as now punishing an agent type for mimicking
  27
     In our specific game form, a rule that approaches the efficient allocation would be implemented by
inducing each agent type to choose a different lottery over audit, so the agent’s choice perfectly reveals
his type and allows the principal to assign efficient spending following no audit.


                                                   28
another type who is audited would require imposing punishments on path.
    How imperfect is an imperfect audit? At one extreme, if audits are sufficiently accu-
rate, we conjecture that our (qualitative) results would remain valid (where the defini-
tion of TEC would be adjusted to account for the issues discussed above). At the other
extreme, if audits are sufficiently inaccurate, they would become equivalent to money
burning, and the results of the literature on when money burning is used in an optimal
delegation rule would then apply (see Amador, Werning and Angeletos, 2006; Amador
and Bagwell, 2013; Ambrus and Egorov, 2015). More generally, it would be of interest
to explore the role of audits in delegation away from these two extremes.

Audit costs. We have assumed that audit costs are both type-independent and ex-
ogenous. An extension of our problem could explore the effects of type-dependent audit
costs: the principal’s cost of auditing the agent’s private information may be increasing in
his type, for example because more evidence is needed to verify larger projects benefits,
or one may take the view that audit costs are actually lower for extreme types, as these
states are more “visible.” One possible difficulty is that monotonicity of the spending
allocation (as shown in Lemma 4) may fail to hold if audit costs increase very rapidly
with the agent’s type. But if the audit cost function is such that the principal would still
prefer to swap the audit and spending allocations of two types γ and γ 0 > γ whenever
type γ has higher spending than γ 0 , monotonicity will be satisfied and our analysis could
be extended to allow for type-dependent audit costs.
    Another variation would be to endogenize α, so that the principal can affect the
agent’s cost of audit. In our problem with full commitment power, the principal would
optimally set α = 0, as a zero cost of audit for the agent maximally relaxes the agent’s
incentive compatibility constraint (4). Things are less straightforward in the setting of
Section 5 where the principal has limited commitment power: here the principal may
want to set a strictly positive audit cost for the agent in order to limit the set of agent
types that may want to demand audit and efficient spending.

Transfers. Our focus has been on a canonical delegation problem in which transfers
between the principal and the agent are not feasible. There are various ways in which
transfers could be introduced in our framework and used to alter the feasibility and cost of
inducing different allocations. Transfers could be contingent on the agent’s audit decision
and/or the result of the audit; moreover, the principal could offer different allowable


                                            29
spending sets for the agent to choose from and specify transfers associated with each
set. These questions are beyond the scope of our paper and so we leave them for future
research.


A      Appendix: Proofs
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The claim follows from Proposition 1(a) in Amador and Bagwell (2013, p. 1551).


A.2     Proof of Lemma 1
Suppose by contradiction that a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ with a (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ Γ is
optimal. Since the incentive compatibility constraint (4) is trivially satisfied under this
rule, it must be that π (γ) = π P (γ) for all γ ∈ Γ. Define γ 0 ∈ [γ, γ] as the solution to

                          UA (γ 0 , π P (γ 0 )) − αφ = UA γ 0 , π P γ
                                                                        
                                                                                         (15)

if such a solution exists and γ 0 = γ otherwise. Consider now a perturbed rule {e a(γ), π
                                                                                        e(γ)}γ∈Γ
                 e (γ) = π P γ for γ ≤ γ 0 , and e               e (γ) = π (γ) for γ > γ 0 . By
                                 
with ea (γ) = 0, π                                a (γ) = a (γ), π
single-crossing and the definition of γ 0 in (15), the perturbed rule satisfies the incentive
compatibility constraint (4). Conditional on γ > γ 0 , this rule yields the same expected
welfare to the principal and the agent as the original rule. However, conditional on γ ≤ γ 0 ,
the perturbed rule yields the agent a higher welfare than the original one, since, by (15),
                                                                    
                           UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ ≤ UA γ, π P γ                            (16)

for all γ ≤ γ 0 . Moreover, note that (2) implies
                                                                                 
            UA (γ, π P (γ)) − UA γ, π P γ        > UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP γ, π P γ

for all γ > γ, and hence, using (16) and the fact that α ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                   
                            UP (γ, π P (γ)) − φ < UP γ, π P γ




                                                 30
for all γ ≤ γ 0 . Conditional on γ ≤ γ 0 , the principal is therefore strictly better off under
the perturbed rule than under the original rule. It follows that the perturbed rule with
no audit below γ 0 strictly dominates the original rule, contradicting the optimality of a
rule that audits all types.


A.3      Proof of Corollary 1
Suppose an optimal rule features auditing which is weakly increasing everywhere. By
Lemma 1, a(γ) = 0 for some γ ∈ Γ, and hence this rule must feature a no-audit region
followed by an audit region. That is, the principal solves (3)-(4) by choosing a threshold
γ ∗∗ such that a(γ) = 0 for γ < γ ∗∗ and a(γ) = 1 for γ > γ ∗∗ , and a spending allocation
π(γ) for each γ ∈ Γ.
     Now consider a relaxed version of this problem in which the principal chooses an
optimal allocation in the no-audit and audit regions separately, ignoring the incentives
of types in one region to deviate to the other region. Taking the no-audit region to be
[γ, γ ∗∗ ], it follows from Proposition 1 that an optimal allocation is a threshold γ ∗ < γ ∗∗
such that π (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )} for each γ ∈ [γ, γ ∗∗ ]. For the audit region (γ ∗∗ , γ],
since incentive compatibility is trivially satisfied, an optimal allocation assigns π P (γ) to
each γ ∈ (γ ∗∗ , γ]. Note that the resulting rule for the whole set Γ is TEC. Moreover,
because this rule solves a relaxed problem, it is sufficient to show that it is incentive
compatible over the whole set Γ to prove its optimality in the original problem.
     To show incentive compatibility, note first that incentive compatibility within each
region is guaranteed by construction. Furthermore, since, as explained in Section 2.3,
no type would have incentives to deviate to mimic a different type which is audited,
incentive compatibility is satisfied for all γ ∈ [γ, γ ∗∗ ]. All is left to be shown is that no
type γ ∈ (γ ∗∗ , γ] has incentives to deviate to mimic a type γ     b ∈ [γ, γ ∗∗ ]:

                                                 γ )) for all γ > γ ∗∗ , γ
                UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (b                       b ≤ γ ∗∗ .

The single-crossing condition in UA implies that a sufficient condition for the above
inequality to hold is

                    UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) for all γ > γ ∗∗ .                 (17)




                                                 31
Now note that optimality of γ ∗∗ for the principal implies

                     UP (γ, π P (γ)) − φ ≥ UP (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) for all γ > γ ∗∗ .                                     (18)

Given the agent’s bias (2) and α ∈ [0, 1], (18) implies (17) if π P (γ) ≥ π A (γ ∗ ) for all
γ > γ ∗∗ , or equivalently since π 0P (γ) > 0, if

                                                 π P (γ ∗∗ ) ≥ π A (γ ∗ ).                                           (19)

We prove that the TEC rule that we constructed satisfies (19). The optimal threshold
γ ∗ in the no-audit region solves
                  (Z                                                                                     )
                          γ∗                                    Z   γ ∗∗
            max
             ∗
                               UP (γ, π A (γ)) f (γ) dγ +                  UP (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) f (γ) dγ       .
              γ       γ                                           γ∗


The first-order condition yields
                                    γ ∗∗
                                           ∂UP (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) 0 ∗
                                Z
                                                              π A (γ )f (γ) dγ = 0.
                                  γ∗          ∂π A (γ ∗ )
                                                ∗                                                                ∗
Note that π 0A (γ ∗ ) > 0, ∂UP∂π(γ,π  A (γ ))
                                       ∗
                                   A (γ )
                                              < 0 if π P (γ) < π A (γ ∗ ), and ∂UP∂π(γ,π A (γ ))
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                      A (γ )
                                                                                                 > 0 if
                     ∗                                                                     ∗
π P (γ) > π A (γ ). Hence, the first-order condition requires π P (γ) > π A (γ ) for some
γ ∈ [γ ∗ , γ ∗∗ ], implying that (19) must hold.


A.4      Proof of Proposition 2
Assume b (π) = 0 for all π ∈ [π, π]. Suppose by contradiction that an optimal rule specifies
a (γ) = 1 for some γ ∈ Γ but TEC is not optimal. By Lemma 1, a (γ) = 0 for some γ ∈ Γ.
Moreover, it follows from the incentive compatibility constraint (4) and b (·) = 0 that all
types γ with a(γ) = 0 are bunched at the same level of spending, and, letting such level
be π A (γ ∗ ) for some γ ∗ , any type γ with a(γ) = 1 must be assigned π (γ) ≥ π A (γ ∗ ). It
is then immediate that if an optimal rule features auditing which is weakly increasing
everywhere, it must be TEC, and hence by the contradiction assumption the optimal rule
under consideration must feature decreasing auditing. We proceed by showing that an
optimal rule cannot feature decreasing auditing at any γ 0 ∈ Γ.
    Consider first the case in which a (γ 0 ) = 0, a (γ 0 − ε) = 1 for some γ 0 ∈ Γ and ε > 0
arbitrarily small. As shown in the text, the optimality of auditing type γ 0 − ε implies (6)

                                                           32
and π(γ 0 − ε) > π A (γ ∗ ), whereas the optimality of not auditing γ 0 implies (7). However,
the two equations together with π(γ 0 − ε) > π A (γ ∗ ) violate the single-crossing condition
(1). Contradiction.
    Consider next the case in which a (γ 0 ) = 1, a (γ 0 + ε) = 0 for some γ 0 ∈ Γ and ε > 0
arbitrarily small. Analogous arguments to those above apply to this case and yield a
contradiction.


A.5     Proof of Lemma 2
Suppose TEC is a solution to (8)-(9) with associated cutoffs γ ∗ and γ ∗∗ . Note that any
rule satisfying constraint (4) will satisfy constraint (9). Hence, (8)-(9) is a relaxed version
of (3)-(4), implying that any solution to (8)-(9) that satisfies (4) will also be a solution to
(3)-(4). It follows that to prove the claim, all we need to show is that the TEC rule that
solves (8)-(9) will satisfy constraint (4). It is immediate that for any γ with a (γ) = 0,
(9) being satisfied implies that (4) will be satisfied. Now consider γ with a (γ) = 1.
Optimality of auditing type γ under a TEC rule that solves (8)-(9) implies

                            UP (γ, π P (γ)) − φ ≥ UP (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) ,                       (20)

since a perturbation that assigns no audit and spending level π A (γ ∗ ) to a type γ > γ ∗∗
is incentive compatible. Note that by the arguments in the proof of Corollary 1, a TEC
rule that solves (8)-(9) satisfies π P (γ) ≥ π A (γ ∗ ) for all γ > γ ∗∗ . Hence, combining (20)
with (2) and the fact that α ∈ [0, 1] implies

                           UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) .

It follows that (4) is satisfied for type γ with a(γ) = 1.


A.6     Proof of Lemma 3
Suppose a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ solving (8)-(9) specifies a (γ 0 ) = 1 for some type γ 0 ∈ Γ.
    To prove that the rule specifies π (γ 0 ) ≤ π A (γ 0 ), suppose by contradiction that
π (γ 0 ) > π A (γ 0 ). Consider a perturbed rule {e  a(γ), π
                                                           e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets e  a (γ 0 ) = 1 and
e (γ 0 ) = π A (γ 0 ) while keeping the allocation unchanged for all γ 6= γ 0 . This perturbation
π
strictly increases the principal’s welfare conditional on γ 0 , leaves the principal’s welfare
conditional on γ 6= γ 0 unchanged, and is incentive compatible for the agent.

                                               33
      Similarly, to prove that the rule specifies π (γ 0 ) ≥ π P (γ 0 ), suppose by contradiction
that π (γ 0 ) < π P (γ 0 ). Consider a perturbed rule {e a(γ), π
                                                               e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets e   a (γ 0 ) = 1 and
e (γ 0 ) = π P (γ) while keeping the allocation unchanged for all γ 6= γ 0 . This perturbation
π
strictly increases the principal’s welfare conditional on γ 0 , leaves the principal’s welfare
conditional on γ 6= γ 0 unchanged, and is incentive compatible for the agent.
      Finally, we prove that the rule must specify π (γ 0 ) = π P (γ 0 ) if (9) does not bind for
γ 0 . Suppose by contradiction that (9) does not bind for γ 0 and π (γ 0 ) 6= π P (γ 0 ). By the
claim above, π (γ 0 ) ≥ π P (γ 0 ), and thus the rule must set π (γ 0 ) > π P (γ 0 ). But then a
perturbed rule {e   a(γ), π e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets ea (γ 0 ) = 1 and πe (γ 0 ) = π (γ 0 ) − ε for ε > 0
arbitrarily small, while keeping the allocation unchanged for all γ 6= γ 0 , strictly increases
the principal’s welfare conditional on γ 0 , leaves the principal’s welfare conditional on
γ 6= γ 0 unchanged, and is incentive compatible for the agent.


A.7      Proof of Lemma 4
Suppose by contradiction that a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ that solves (8)-(9) specifies π (γ 0 ) >
π (γ 00 ) for some γ 0 < γ 00 . We consider four cases separately.

Case 1. Suppose a (γ 0 ) = a (γ 00 ) = 0. Then (9) for γ 0 and γ 00 requires

                                   UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) ≥ UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) ,
                                 UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) ,

which together imply

             UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) − UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) − UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) .   (21)

However, given γ 0 < γ 00 and π (γ 0 ) > π (γ 00 ), (21) violates the single-crossing condition in
UA . Contradiction.

Case 2. Suppose a (γ 0 ) = a (γ 00 ) = 1. By Lemma 3, π (γ 00 ) ≥ π P (γ 00 ), and thus π (γ 0 ) >
π (γ 00 ) implies π (γ 0 ) > π P (γ 00 ) > π P (γ 0 ). Using Lemma 3 again, it then follows that (9)
binds for γ 0 , that is, there exists γ   b ∈ Γ with a(b   γ ) = 0 such that

                                     UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) = UA (γ 0 , π (b
                                                                        γ )) .                             (22)


                                                        34
Furthermore, note that we must have π (b   γ ) ≥ π (γ 0 ), since π (γ 0 ) ≤ π A (γ 0 ) and UA is
strictly concave. Incentive compatibility for γ 00 requires

                                   UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                         γ )) ,

which, combined with the observation that

                                π (γ 00 ) < π (γ 0 ) ≤ π A (γ 0 ) < π A (γ 00 ) ,                     (23)

implies
                                   UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) > UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                        γ )) .                        (24)

Combining (22) and (24) yields

              UA (γ 0 , π (b
                           γ )) − UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) > UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                      γ )) − UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) .   (25)

However, given γ 0 < γ 00 and π (b
                                 γ ) ≥ π (γ 0 ), (25) violates the single-crossing condition in
UA . Contradiction.

Case 3. Suppose a (γ 0 ) = 1 and a (γ 00 ) = 0. Note that (23) must hold. Then consider a
perturbed rule {ea(γ), πe(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets ea (γ 00 ) = 1 and π
                                                               e (γ 00 ) = π (γ 0 ) while leaving the
allocation for types γ 6= γ 00 unchanged. Since incentive compatibility was initially satisfied
and γ 0 < γ 00 while (23) holds, this perturbation is incentive compatible. Optimality of
the original rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ therefore requires that this perturbation do not strictly
increase the principal’s welfare, which requires

                                UP (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UP (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) − φ.

The single-crossing condition in UP then implies

                                UP (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) > UP (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) − φ.                       (26)

Now consider a different perturbed rule {b  a(γ), π                   a (γ 0 ) = 0 and π
                                                  b(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets b                b (γ 0 ) =
π (γ 00 ) while leaving the allocation for types γ 6= γ 0 unchanged. Equation (26) implies
that this perturbation would strictly increase the principal’s welfare. Hence, optimal-
ity of the original rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ requires that this perturbation violate incentive



                                                       35
                                         b ∈ Γ with a(b
compatibility, that is, there must exist γ            γ ) = 0 such that

                                    UA (γ 0 , π (b
                                                 γ )) > UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) .                          (27)

Note that since π (γ 00 ) < π A (γ 0 ), we must have π (b
                                                        γ ) > π (γ 00 ). Moreover, by incentive
compatibility being satisfied under the original rule, we have

                                   UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                         γ )) .

Combining this equation with (27) yields

              UA (γ 0 , π (b
                           γ )) − UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) > UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                       γ )) − UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) .   (28)

However, given γ 0 < γ 00 and π (b
                                 γ ) > π (γ 00 ), (28) violates the single-crossing condition in
UA . Contradiction.

Case 4. Suppose a (γ 0 ) = 0 and a (γ 00 ) = 1. By Lemma 3, π (γ 00 ) ≤ π A (γ 00 ), and
hence given π (γ 0 ) > π (γ 00 ), incentive compatibility for type γ 00 requires π (γ 0 ) > π A (γ 00 ).
Consider a perturbed rule {e       a(γ), π
                                         e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets e a (γ 0 ) = 1 and π e (γ 0 ) = π (γ 00 )
while leaving the allocation for types γ 6= γ 0 unchanged. Since the original rule satisfies
incentive compatibility for γ 00 , single-crossing implies that this perturbation is incentive
compatible for γ 0 . Optimality of the original rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ then requires that this
perturbation do not strictly increase the principal’s welfare, which requires

                                 UP (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) ≥ UP (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) − φ.

The single-crossing condition in UP then implies

                                UP (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) > UP (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) − φ.                       (29)

Now consider a different perturbed rule {b        a(γ), π
                                                        b(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets b  a (γ 00 ) = 0 and
b (γ 00 ) = π (γ 0 ) while leaving the allocation for types γ 6= γ 00 unchanged. Equation (29)
π
implies that such a perturbation would strictly increase the principal’s welfare. Hence,
optimality of the original rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ requires that this perturbation violate




                                                       36
                                                   b ∈ Γ with a(b
incentive compatibility, that is, there must exist γ            γ ) = 0 such that

                                     UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                   γ )) > UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) .                      (30)

Note that since π (γ 0 ) > π A (γ 00 ), we must have π (b
                                                        γ ) < π (γ 0 ). Moreover, by incentive
compatibility being satisfied under the original rule, we have

                                      UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) ≥ UA (γ 0 , π (b
                                                                         γ )) .

Combining this equation with (30) yields

              UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) − UA (γ 0 , π (b
                                                 γ )) > UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) − UA (γ 00 , π (b
                                                                                             γ )) .   (31)

However, given γ 0 < γ 00 and π (b
                                 γ ) < π (γ 0 ), (31) violates the single-crossing condition in
UA . Contradiction.


A.8      Proof of Lemma 5
Suppose a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ solves (8)-(9) and features decreasing auditing at some
γ 0 ∈ Γ with a (γ 0 ) = 1. Then a (γ 0 + ε) = 0 for some ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Suppose it
were the case that π (γ 0 + ε) = π (γ 0 ). Then optimality of this rule would be violated, as
a perturbed rule {e   a(γ), π
                            e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets e  a (γ 0 ) = 0 and π
                                                                    e (γ 0 ) = π(γ 0 ) while keeping
the allocation unchanged for γ 6= γ 0 would be incentive compatible and strictly increase
the principal’s welfare (recall φ > 0). It follows that π (γ 0 + ε) 6= π (γ 0 ), and hence by
Lemma 4, π (γ 0 + ε) > π (γ 0 ). Moreover, by Lemma 3, π (γ 0 ) ≤ π A (γ 0 ), and thus incentive
compatibility for γ 0 would be violated if it were the case that π A (γ 0 ) ≥ π (γ 0 + ε) > π (γ 0 ).
It therefore follows that
                                       π (γ 0 + ε) > π A (γ 0 )                                 (32)

for ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Lemma 4 then implies π (γ) > π A (γ 0 ) for γ ∈ (γ 0 , γ 00 ),
γ 00 ≡ min π −1       0
          
             P (π A (γ )) , γ , which implies

                   Z   γ 00                                Z   γ 00
                              UP (γ, π (γ)) f (γ) dγ <                UP (γ, π A (γ 0 )) f (γ) dγ.    (33)
                    γ0                                       γ0




                                                        37
Moreover, by definition,
                    Z    γ                                  Z   γ
                              UP (γ, π (γ)) f (γ) dγ ≤               UP (γ, π P (γ)) f (γ) dγ.    (34)
                       γ 00                                   γ 00


Combining (33) and (34), and taking into account that 1 − F (γ 0 ) > 0, yields (10).
   Suppose next that a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ solves (8)-(9) and features decreasing audit-
ing at some γ 0 ∈ Γ with a (γ 0 ) = 0. Then a (γ 0 − ε) = 1 for some ε > 0 arbitrarily small
and arguments analogous to those above can be used to establish (10).


A.9      Proof of Proposition 3
The arguments in the proofs of Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 apply to the relaxed problem,
implying that if a solution to (8)-(9) involves auditing some type γ ∈ Γ, this solution is
either a TEC rule or a rule that features decreasing auditing at some γ 0 ∈ Γ. To prove
the optimality of TEC for φ < φ, we thus proceed by showing that for any such audit
cost a rule featuring decreasing auditing cannot be a solution to (8)-(9).
    Suppose a rule {a(γ), π(γ)}γ∈Γ solves (8)-(9) and features decreasing auditing. Denote
by γ ∗∗ the infimum of the lowest audit region under this rule. Now consider a perturbed
rule {e a(γ), π
              e(γ)}γ∈Γ which sets e  a (γ) = 0 for γ < γ ∗∗ , e
                                                              a (γ ∗∗ ) = a(γ ∗∗ ), and e
                                                                                        a (γ) = 1 for
        ∗∗                                                 ∗          ∗
γ > γ . If e  a(γ) = 0, let π e (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ )} for γ as defined in Proposition 1
           0      ∗∗
under γ = γ . If e        a(γ) = 1, let πe (γ) = π P (γ). By the arguments in the proof of
Corollary 1, this rule is incentive compatible for types prescribed no audit and sets
π A (γ ∗ ) ≤ π P (γ ∗∗ ). Moreover, given this inequality and the fact that α = 0, it follows
that the rule is also incentive compatible for types prescribed audit. We now show that
this rule strictly increases the principal’s expected welfare for φ < φ, contradicting the
optimality of the original rule. Denote by γ 0 the lowest type above γ ∗∗ featuring decreasing
auditing in the original rule. Then the change in the principal’s expected welfare from
using the perturbed rule instead of the original rule is
                   Z    γ ∗∗
                                  [UP (γ, min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )}) − UP (γ, π (γ))] f (γ) dγ   (35)
                    γ
                        Z     γ
                   +               [UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π (γ))] f (γ) dγ
                         γ ∗∗
                        Z γ
                   −              [φ (1 − a (γ))] f (γ) dγ.
                            γ0



                                                         38
    Note that since all types above γ ∗∗ are audited, the principal’s welfare conditional on
the agent’s type being in the no-audit region of the perturbed rule is optimized subject
to fewer incentive compatibility constraints in this rule compared to the original rule.
Hence, the first term in (35) is weakly positive.
    To evaluate the second and third terms in (35), suppose first that γ 0 < γ. Then by
Lemma 5, the second term in (35) satisfies
Z   γ                                                      Z   γ
        [UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π (γ))] f (γ) dγ ≥               [UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π (γ))] f (γ) dγ
 γ ∗∗                                                        γ0
                                                       ≥ (1 − F (γ 0 )) η (γ 0 ) .                      (36)

Moreover, the third term in (35) satisfies
                       Z   γ
                   −           [φ (1 − a (γ))] f (γ) dγ > − (1 − F (γ 0 )) φ
                       γ0
                                                       = − (1 − F (γ 0 )) min η (γ) .                 (37)
                                                                               γ∈Γ


Together, (36) and (37) imply that the perturbation strictly increases welfare.
    Suppose next that γ 0 = γ. Analogous arguments to those above imply that the
perturbation makes the principal weakly better off conditional on γ < γ. To evaluate the
change in welfare conditional on γ = γ, note that decreasing auditing in this case implies
a (γ) = 0 and a (γ − ε) = 1 for ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Analogous arguments to those in
the proof of Lemma 5 then imply π (γ) ≥ π A (γ). Moreover, (11) implies

                  η (γ) = lim η (γ) = UP (γ, π P (γ)) − UP (γ, π A (γ)) ≥ φ > φ,                      (38)
                               γ→γ


where we have appealed to the definition of φ. It thus follows from (38) that the pertur-
bation strictly increases the principal’s welfare conditional on γ = γ.


A.10         Proof of Proposition 4
Consider the following quadratic-uniform setting: preferences satisfy UP (γ, π) = γπ −
π 2 /2 and UA (γ, π) = (γ + β) π − π 2 /2 for β > 0, and f (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ Γ. In this
setting, the efficient and flexible spending levels are given by π P (γ) = γ and π A (γ) =
γ + β respectively. Let α = 0, so that the agent pays no audit cost.
     We first establish that in this setting, if the audit cost φ is high enough, TEC is


                                                     39
suboptimal, as it is dominated by a rule without verification.

Lemma 7. Consider the quadratic-uniform setting with α = 0. If φ > β 2 /2, then TEC
is not optimal.

Proof. Take the quadratic-uniform setting with α = 0 and φ > β 2 /2. Consider the
following problem:
                         ( R γ∗                              R γ ∗∗                          )
                            γ
                                  UP (γ, π A (γ)) f (γ) dγ + γ ∗ UP (γ, π A (γ ∗ )) f (γ) dγ
            max                             Rγ                                                 .     (39)
          {γ ∗ ,γ ∗∗ }                   + γ ∗∗ (UP (γ, π P (γ)) − φ) f (γ) dγ

Note that the solution to this program coincides with a rule without verification if it
sets γ ∗∗ = γ, and it coincides with a rule that audits all types if it sets γ ∗∗ = γ. By
the definition of TEC, a necessary condition for a TEC rule to be optimal is that the
solution to program (39) specify γ < γ ∗∗ < γ. We show that this cannot be satisifed
when φ > β 2 /2.
    The first-order condition for γ ∗ , given our assumptions on preferences and the distri-
bution of γ, implies
                                          γ + γ ∗∗
                                                             
                            ∗                            ∗∗
                           γ = max                 − β, γ − 2β ,                       (40)
                                             2
where we have taken into account the fact that γ ∗ may be lower than γ. If the solution
to (39) sets γ ∗∗ strictly interior, then the first-order condition for γ ∗∗ implies

                                            ∗∗   ∗  (γ ∗ + β)2 γ ∗∗ 2
                                       −γ (γ + β) +           +       = φ.
                                                         2       2

Substituting with (40) and rearranging terms yields
                                                                                         2
                                                       γ+γ ∗∗
                                                  n                                o
                                      ∗∗                                 ∗∗
                                  γ        − max         2
                                                                − β, γ        − 2β − β
                                                                                              = φ.   (41)
                                                                2

Note that if γ ∗ ≥ γ, (41) implies φ = β 2 /2, contradicting the assumption that φ > β 2 /2.
Therefore,
                                           γ ∗ < γ,                                   (42)

and thus (41) implies
                                                                         p
                                                       γ ∗∗ = γ + 2           2φ.



                                                                    40
Substituting back into (40), we obtain
                                                  p
                                       γ∗ = γ +       2φ − β.                                (43)

However, combined with (42), equation (43) implies φ < β 2 /2, contradicting the assump-
tion that φ > β 2 /2. Therefore, the solution to (39) cannot set γ ∗∗ strictly interior when
φ > β 2 /2.

   Given this lemma, we prove the proposition by showing that there exists φ > β 2 /2
under which a rule with auditing is optimal.

Lemma 8. Consider the quadratic-uniform setting with α = 0. If β 2 /2 < φ < 2β 2 /3 and
6β < γ − γ, then a rule with auditing is optimal.

Proof. Take the quadratic-uniform setting with α = 0, β 2 /2 < φ < 2β 2 /3, and 6β < γ−γ.
An optimal rule without verification sets π (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )}, where using (40)
(with γ ∗∗ = γ) and the fact that γ − 2β > γ + 4β > γ, we have

                                           γ ∗ = γ − 2β.

We construct a perturbed rule {e   a(γ), π
                                         e(γ)}γ∈Γ that features auditing and yields the prin-
cipal strictly higher expected welfare than this optimal rule without verification. For any
given γ H < γ ∗ , define γ L as the solution to

                             UA (γ L , γ L − β) = UA (γ L , π A (γ H )) ,

which after some algebra yields
                                          γ L = γ H − 2β.                                    (44)

Take γ H < γ ∗ sufficiently close to γ ∗ so that γ L satisfies γ L − 2β > γ (note that the
assumption that 6β < γ−γ ensures that such a γ H exists). Type γ L is defined so that he is
indifferent between the flexible spending level of γ H and the optimal spending limit under
no verification for a distribution truncated at γ L (which is given by π A (γ L −2β) = γ L −β).
Now construct the perturbed rule as follows: if γ < γ L −2β or γ > γ H , then e   a(γ) = 0 and
e(γ) = π(γ); if γ ∈ [γ L − 2β, γ L ), then e
π                                                        e (γ) = γ L − β; and if γ ∈ [γ L , γ H ],
                                           a (γ) = 0 and π
then ea (γ) = 1 and π e (γ) satisfies

                               UA (γ, π
                                      e (γ)) = UA (γ, π A (γ H )) ,

                                                 41
which after some algebra yields

                                             e (γ) = 2γ − γ H + β.
                                             π

Note that given the definition of γ L , this rule is incentive compatible. The perturbation
only changes the principal’s welfare for types γ ∈ [γ L − 2β, γ H ]. The change in welfare is
equal to
                       Z   γL
                                 [UP (γ, γ L − β) − UP (γ, γ + β)] f (γ) dγ
                        γ L−2β
                         Z γH
                       +          [UP (γ, 2γ − γ H + β) − φ − UP (γ, γ + β)] f (γ) dγ.
                            γL


After some algebra and substitution of (44), using our assumptions on preferences and
the distribution of γ, this simplifies to

         γ H−2β
                  (γ − γ H + 3β)2               γH
                                                      (γ H − γ − β)2            γH                γH
                                                                                                        β2
     Z                                      Z                               Z                 Z
 −                                dγ −                               dγ −             φdγ +                dγ.
     γ H−4β              2                   γ H−2β          2               γ H−2β           γ H −4β   2

Simplifying further yields that the change in welfare is equal to

                                                 4 3
                                                   β − 2βφ > 0,
                                                 3

where the inequality follows from the assumption that φ < 2β 2 /3. Therefore, the per-
turbed rule with auditing strictly increases the principal’s expected welfare relative to no
verification.

   It follows from Lemma 7 and Lemma 8 that in a quadratic-uniform setting with α = 0,
β /2 < φ < 2β 2 /3, and 6β < γ − γ, auditing is optimal but TEC is not.
 2




A.11        Proof of Lemma 6
Part (i). Suppose an incentive compatible rule induces decreasing auditing at γ H .
Consider first the case in which a (γ H ) = 0 and thus a (γ H − ε) = 1 for ε > 0 arbitrarily
small. Incentive compatibility for type γ H requires

                                 UA (γ H , π (γ H )) ≥ UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − αφ,                         (45)



                                                        42
since γ H can choose to be audited and guarantee himself the efficient level of spending.
Incentive compatibility for type γ H − ε requires

                  UA (γ H − ε, π P (γ H − ε)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ H − ε, π (γ H )) ,               (46)

since γ H − ε can choose not to be audited and spend at π (γ H ). Given the continuity of
UA and π P in their respective arguments, we can take the limit of both sides of (46) as
ε approaches 0 to obtain

                         UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − αφ ≥ UA (γ H , π (γ H )) .                 (47)

Combining (45) and (47) yields (12).
   Consider next the case in which a (γ H ) = 1 and thus a (γ H + ε) = 0 for ε > 0
arbitrarily small. Analogous arguments to those above imply the following incentive
compatibility constraints for γ H and γ H + ε, respectively:

                UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − αφ ≥ UA (γ H , π (γ H + ε)) ,                       (48)
               UA (γ H + ε, π (γ H + ε)) ≥ UA (γ H + ε, π P (γ H + ε)) − αφ.                (49)

Since the rule is piecewise continuous, limε↓0 π (γ H + ε) exists and can be defined as
π (γ H ). Taking the limit of both sides of (48) and (49) as ε goes to 0 yields (47) and
(45), and combining these two inequalities yields (12).
    To complete the proof of part (i), we show that π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) must hold. Note that
by (12), either π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) or π (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H ). For the purpose of contradiction,
suppose it were the case that π (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H ). Consider the incentive compatibility
constraint of type γ H − ε for ε > 0 arbitrarily small. Take first the case in which
a (γ H − ε) = 1. Then γ H − ε must weakly prefer audit to no audit, which requires

                  UA (γ H − ε, π P (γ H − ε)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ H − ε, π (γ H )) .               (50)

Since π P (γ H − ε) < π P (γ H ) < π A (γ H − ε), (50) implies

                     UA (γ H − ε, π P (γ H )) − αφ > UA (γ H − ε, π (γ H )) .               (51)




                                                43
Combining (12) and (51) yields

   UA (γ H − ε, π P (γ H )) − UA (γ H − ε, π (γ H )) > UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − UA (γ H , π (γ H )) .

Given π (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H ), this inequality violates the single-crossing condition in UA , thus
yielding a contradiction.
    Consider next the case in which a (γ H − ε) = 0. Given decreasing auditing at γ H ,
in this case we must have a (γ H ) = 1 and a (γ H + ε) = 0 for ε > 0 arbitrarily small.
Moreover, given our definition of π(γ H ), π (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H ) implies limε↓0 π (γ H + ε) ≤
π P (γ H ). By incentive compatibility, type γ H must weakly prefer audit to no audit, which
requires
                       UA (γ H , π P (γ H )) − αφ ≥ UA (γ H , π (γ H + ε)) ,                (52)

whereas type γ H + ε must weakly prefer no audit to audit, which requires

                 UA (γ H + ε, π (γ H + ε)) ≥ UA (γ H + ε, π P (γ H + ε)) − αφ.                    (53)

Combining (52) and (53) and using the fact that π A (γ H ) > π P (γ H + ε) > π P (γ H ) yields

UA (γ H , π P (γ H + ε))−UA (γ H , π (γ H + ε)) > UA (γ H + ε, π P (γ H + ε))−UA (γ H + ε, π (γ H + ε)) .

Since π (γ H + ε) ≤ π P (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H + ε) for ε approaching 0, this inequality violates
the single-crossing condition in UA , thus yielding again a contradiction.
    Therefore, we obtain that π (γ H ) ≤ π P (γ H ) cannot hold and we must thus have
π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ).

Part (ii). Suppose an incentive compatible rule induces increasing auditing at γ L . Then
analogous arguments to those used to prove part (i) can be applied to show that (14)
must hold at γ L . Since the steps are analogous, we omit the details.


A.12      Proof of Proposition 5
To prove this result, we first establish the following lemmas.

Lemma 9. Under limited commitment, if an incentive compatible rule features increasing
auditing at γ L , then
                              π (γ L ) ≤ π P (γ L ) ,                             (54)

                                                  44
where π (γ L ) ≡ lim π (γ L − ε) if a (γ L ) = 1.
                  ε↓0

Proof. Suppose an incentive compatible rule features increasing auditing at γ L . By equa-
tion (14) in Lemma 6, either π (γ L ) > π A (γ L ) or π (γ L ) ≤ π P (γ L ). For the purpose of
contradiction, suppose π (γ L ) > π A (γ L ) holds. Take first the case in which a (γ L ) = 1,
so that a(γ L − ε) = 0 for ε > 0 arbitrarily small and, given our definition of π (γ L ),
limε↓0 π (γ L − ε) > π A (γ L ). By incentive compatibility, type γ L − ε must weakly prefer
no audit to audit, which requires

                  UA (γ L − ε, π (γ L − ε)) ≥ UA (γ L − ε, π P (γ L − ε)) − αφ.              (55)

However, (14) and (55) together with the fact that π (γ L ) > π A (γ L ) imply that Assump-
tion 2 is violated, yielding a contradiction.
    Consider next the case in which a (γ L ) = 0, so that a (γ L + ε) = 1 for ε > 0 arbitrarily
small. By incentive compatibility, type γ L +ε must weakly prefer audit to no audit, which
requires
                    UA (γ L + ε, π P (γ L + ε)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ L + ε, π (γ L )) .           (56)

Note that in this case, π (γ L ) > π A (γ L ) > π P (γ L + ε) requires π (γ L ) > π A (γ L + ε).
However, (14) and (56) together with π (γ L ) > π A (γ L + ε) imply that Assumption 2 is
violated, yielding again a contradiction.
    Therefore, we obtain that π (γ L ) > π A (γ L ) cannot hold and we must thus have
π (γ L ) ≤ π P (γ L ).


Lemma 10. Under limited commitment, if an incentive compatible rule features decreas-
ing auditing at γ H , then there exists γ 0 ≤ γ H satisfying

                                UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) = UA (γ 0 , π (γ H ))                    (57)

for π (γ 0 ) < π A (γ 0 ), π (γ H ) ≡ lim π (γ H + ε) if a (γ H ) = 1, and either a (γ 0 ) = 0, or
                                     ε↓0
a (γ 0 ) = 1, a (γ 0 − ε) = 0 and π(γ 0 ) ≡ lim π(γ 0 − ε) for ε > 0 arbitrarily small.
                                            ε↓0

Proof. Suppose an incentive compatible rule features decreasing auditing at γ H . By
condition (13) in Lemma 6, π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ). Consider the problem of the principal
after the audit decision a (γ) has been made and the audit result (in case of audit) has



                                                  45
been obtained:
                                           Z   γ
                                max                UP (γ, π (γ)) f (γ) dγ                    (58)
                               {π(γ)}γ∈Γ   γ

                                               subject to
                                 π (γ) = π P (γ) if a (γ) = 1,                               (59)
           UA (γ, π (γ)) ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                     γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                     b for which a (γ) = a (b
                                                                            γ ) = 0.         (60)

This program takes into account that the principal will assign the efficient spending
level to any agent type who chooses to be audited, and she will ignore the incentives
of audited types when deciding the spending allocation of types who choose not to be
audited. We now consider the optimal level of π (γ H ) given decreasing auditing at γ H
and the conditions that are necessary for the principal to choose π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ).

Step 1. Consider the spending allocation conditional on no audit. Note that analogous
arguments to those used in the proof of Lemma 4 imply that π (γ) must be weakly
increasing for non-audited types γ. For each non-audited type γ, denote by π (γ) the
spending level closest to π A (γ) from below in the allowable spending set for non-audited
types (i.e., among all spending levels assigned to types who choose no audit). Analogously,
denote by π (γ) the closest spending level to π A (γ) from above in the allowable spending
set for non-audited types. Clearly, if π A (γ) is in this allowable spending set, then π A (γ) =
π (γ) = π (γ). The incentive compatibility constraint (60) together with the concavity of
UA require that if a (γ) = 0, then

                              π (γ) = arg            max       UA (γ, π) .                   (61)
                                               π∈{π(γ),π(γ)}


Step 2. As noted, given decreasing auditing at γ H , the rule must set π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ).
We show that as a result, the rule must induce a (γ) = 0 and π (γ) = π (γ H ) for all types
γ ∈ γ H , π −1
                        
            A (π (γ H )) . To see why, note first that by (61) and the single-crossing condi-
tion in UA , any type γ ∈ γ H , π −1
                                               
                                  A (π (γ H )) who is not audited necessarily chooses spend-
ing π (γ) = π (γ H ). Therefore, it is sufficient to show that any type γ ∈ γ H , π −1
                                                                                                 
                                                                                    A (π (γ H ))
must have a (γ) = 0. Suppose by contradiction that this were not the case. Then incen-
tive compatibility for a type γ ∈ γ H , π −1
                                                        
                                            A (π (γ H )) with a(γ) = 1 requires that this type




                                                     46
weakly prefer audit to no audit, which requires

                            UA (γ, π P (γ)) − αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (γ H )) .                            (62)

However, (12) and (62) together with the fact that γ > γ H and π (γ H ) > π A (γ) violate
Assumption 2. The claim therefore follows.

Step 3. We show that in an incentive compatible rule, constraint (60) cannot be
uniformly slack for all γ ≤ γ H and γ        b = γ H , where recall π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) by de-
creasing auditing at γ H . Suppose by contradiction that this is true. Note that from
                                                                 b ∈ γ H , π −1
                                                                                           
Step 2, (60) is then uniformly slack for all γ ≤ γ H and γ                    A (π (γ H )) , where
a(bγ ) = 0 for all such γ  b. Now consider the following perturbation {e      π (γ)}γ∈Γ : for ε > 0
                                             −1
                                                            
arbitrarily small and all γ ∈ γ H , π A (π (γ H ) − ε) , set π     e (γ) = π (γ H ) − ε; for all
         −1                    −1
                                           
γ ∈ π A (π (γ H ) − ε) , π A (π (γ H )) , set π  e (γ) = π A (γ); and for all other types leave
the spending allocation unchanged. This perturbation strictly increases the principal’s
welfare as it reduces overspending by types γ ∈ γ H , π −1
                                                                           
                                                               A (π (γ H )) . Moreover, since (by
the contradiction assumption) (60) was uniformly slack before the perturbation for all
γ ≤ γ H , it is still satisfied after the perturbation, and incentive compatibility for all types
γ ≥ γ H is guaranteed as the perturbation satisfies (61). Therefore, we obtain that if (60)
is uniformly slack for all γ ≤ γ H and γ      b = γ H , the principal can strictly improve upon
the original rule by reducing π (γ H ) after the audit decision has been made, and hence
the original rule violates incentive compatibility for the principal. The claim follows.

Step 4. By Step 3, in any incentive compatible rule with decreasing auditing at γ H ,
there exists γ 0 ≤ γ H satisfying (57). Moreover, since decreasing auditing at γ H implies
π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) ≥ π A (γ 0 ), this requires π (γ 0 ) < π A (γ 0 ). This proves the lemma.


Lemma 11. Under limited commitment, if an incentive compatible rule features de-
creasing auditing at γ H , then there exists γ L ≤ γ H at which the rule features increasing
auditing. Moreover, a (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ (γ L , γ H ) and

                               UA (γ L , π (γ L )) = UA (γ L , π (γ H ))                         (63)

for π (γ L ) ≡ lim π (γ L − ε) if a (γ L ) = 1 and π (γ H ) ≡ lim π (γ H + ε) if a (γ H ) = 1.
               ε↓0                                              ε↓0




                                                  47
Proof. Suppose an incentive compatible rule features decreasing auditing at γ H . By
Lemma 10, there exists a type γ 0 ≤ γ H satisfying (57) either with a(γ 0 ) = 0 or at which
there is increasing auditing. We can establish that such a type is unique. Suppose by
contradiction that there are two types, γ 00 ≤ γ H and γ 0 < γ 00 , satisfying the condition in
Lemma 10. Then

                               UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) = UA (γ 00 , π (γ H )) ,                            (64)
                                 UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) = UA (γ 0 , π (γ H )) .                             (65)

Incentive compatibility requires

                                UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (γ 0 )) ,                           (66)
                                 UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) ≥ UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) .                            (67)

Combining (64)-(67) yields

           UA (γ 0 , π (γ H )) − UA (γ 0 , π (γ 00 )) ≥ UA (γ 00 , π (γ H )) − UA (γ 00 , π (γ 00 )) .

Since γ 0 < γ 00 and π(γ H ) > π A (γ H ) ≥ π A (γ 00 ) > π(γ 00 ) by decreasing auditing at γ H
and Lemma 10, this inequality violates the single-crossing condition in UA , yielding a
contradiction. Therefore, there exists a unique type below γ H for which (57) holds, and
denoting this type by γ L yields (63).
    Next, we show that a (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ (γ L , γ H ). Note first that a spending level
π ∈ (π (γ L ) , π (γ H )) cannot be allowed by the rule under no audit, since otherwise type γ L
would have a strict incentive to deviate to such a spending level. Consider the relevant
case in which γ L < γ H and suppose by contradiction that a (γ) = 0 for some type
γ ∈ (γ L , γ H ). Let γ 0 denote the highest such type γ. Since, as noted, spending levels
strictly between π (γ L ) < π A (γ 0 ) and π (γ H ) > π A (γ 0 ) are not allowed, it follows from
(63) and γ 0 > γ L that the rule must set π (γ 0 ) = π (γ H ). Moreover, since by construction
the rule features increasing auditing at γ 0 , condition (14) in Lemma 6 implies

                  UA (γ 0 , π P (γ 0 )) − αφ = UA (γ 0 , π (γ 0 )) = UA (γ 0 , π (γ H )) .               (68)

However, given (12) and (13), equation (68) violates Assumption 2. It follows that
a (γ) = 1 for all γ ∈ (γ L , γ H ).


                                                      48
    We can now prove the proposition. We begin by ruling out decreasing auditing.
Suppose by contradiction that an incentive compatible rule features decreasing auditing
at some γ H ∈ Γ. By Lemma 11, there must exist a type γ L ≤ γ H satisfying the conditions
in the lemma. We proceed in two steps.

Step 1. Suppose γ L < γ H . Then it follows from (14) and (63) that

                          UA (γ L , π P (γ L )) − αφ = UA (γ L , π (γ H )) .                   (69)

However, (12) and (69) together with the fact that γ L < γ H and π (γ H ) > π A (γ H ) (by
(13)) imply that Assumption 2 is violated. Contradiction.

Step 2. By Step 1, any incentive compatible rule with decreasing auditing must have
γ L = γ H at each point γ H at which there is decreasing auditing. Now consider the
principal’s problem (58)-(60). Let γ 0 ≤ γ be the highest non-audited type. Since the types
with decreasing auditing are atomistic and the rule is piecewise continuous, following a
decision of no audit the principal solves
                                            Z   γ0
                                 max                 UP (γ, π (γ)) f (γ) dγ
                                {π(γ)}γ∈Γ   γ

                                                subject to
           UA (γ, π (γ)) ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                     γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                     b for which a (γ) = a (b
                                                                            γ ) = 0.

By Proposition 1, the solution assigns π (γ) = min {π A (γ) , π A (γ ∗ )} for γ ∈ [γ, γ 0 ] and
some γ ∗ < γ 0 . However, in this case, conditions (13) and (54) (which require π (γ H ) >
π A (γ H ) and π (γ L ) ≤ π P (γ L ) respectively) cannot be satisfied at a point γ H ∈ [γ, γ 0 ] at
which there is decreasing auditing and thus γ L = γ H . Contradiction.
    The claims above show that under limited commitment, any incentive compatible
rule features weakly increasing auditing everywhere. Analogous arguments to those in
the proofs of Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 can then be applied to show that auditing all
types is suboptimal and TEC is thus optimal if an optimal rule features auditing that is
weakly increasing everywhere. Hence, under limited commitment, if auditing is optimal,
TEC is optimal.




                                                       49
B     Appendix: Other Mechanisms
In this Appendix, we show that our results under full commitment are not limited to
the game form in Section 2.2 but apply more generally when allowing for any indirect
mechanism specifying a message space for the agent and a deterministic allocation func-
tion to which the principal commits. Specifically, we prove that a Revelation Principle
in terms of payoffs holds in our setting, implying that to study the optimal deterministic
mechanism for the principal, it is without loss to restrict attention to deterministic direct
mechanisms in which the agent reports his type truthfully, as in program (3)-(4).
     The usual version of the Revelation Principle cannot be directly applied to our prob-
lem because we consider a game with verification and limit attention to deterministic
allocations. We note that Townsend (1988) provides an extension of the Revelation Prin-
ciple to a class of models with verification and Strausz (2003) provides an extension to
a setting with deterministic mechanisms and one agent. Our results below build on this
work, particularly the latter.
     Consider a general problem in which the principal must select a deterministic alloca-
tion specifying whether the agent is audited or not, a ∈ A ≡ {0, 1}, and the spending
level that the agent is assigned, π ∈ [π, π]. A mechanism (S, a, π) consists of a mes-
sage space for the agent S, an audit function a : S → A that commits the principal to
implement the audit assignment a(s) when the agent sends message s, and a spending
function π : S × R → π ∈ [π, π] that commits the principal to implement the spending
level π(s, r) when the agent sends message s and the audit result is r. Without loss given
our assumption that an audit verifies the agent’s type perfectly, we let r = a(s)γ, that
is, the audit result is equal to the agent’s type γ if an audit is conducted and it is equal
to 0 if an audit is not conducted (recall γ > 0).
     Given a mechanism (S, a, π), the agent chooses a message. The agent’s reporting
strategy µ(γ) : Γ → S selects the message s with probability µ(s|γ). A mechanism is a
direct mechanism if S = Γ.

Proposition 6. Consider an equilibrium of a game induced by a deterministic indi-
rect mechanism (S, a, π). There exists a deterministic direct mechanism, (Γ, a, π), that
induces an equilibrium with truthful revelation yielding the principal a weakly larger ex-
pected welfare than that in the equilibrium under the indirect mechanism. Hence, an
optimal deterministic mechanism for the principal solves program (3)-(4).

Proof. Consider a deterministic mechanism (S, a, π) and equilibrium reporting strategies

                                             50
µ(γ) for each type γ ∈ Γ. For each γ, let Sγ be the set of messages that the agent sends
with positive probability, i.e. Sγ = {s|µ(s|γ) > 0}. Since µ(γ) is an equilibrium strategy,
it satisfies

UA (γ, π (s, a (s) γ)) − a (s) αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (b     s) γ)) − a (b
                                              s, a (b           s) αφ for all s ∈ Sγ , sb ∈ S, (70)
UA (γ, π (s, a (s) γ)) − a (s) αφ = UA (γ, π (b     s) γ)) − a (b
                                              s, a (b           s) αφ for all s, sb ∈ Sγ .      (71)

Define the set Sγ,P as the set of messages that, given the allocation specified by the
mechanism, yield the principal the highest welfare from type γ among the messages
that are sent with positive probability under this type’s reporting strategy. That is,
Sγ,P = {s ∈ Sγ |UP (γ, π(s, a(s)γ))−a(s)φ = maxz∈Sγ {UP (γ, π(z, a(z)γ))−a(z)φ}}. Then
construct a direct mechanism (Γ, a, π) specifying: for a given s ∈ Sγ,P (arbitrarily chosen
if |Sγ,P | > 1), a(γ) = a(s), π(γ, r) = π(s, a(s)γ) if r ∈ {0, γ}, and π(γ, r) = π(s, γ b) if
r=γ  b ∈ Γ, γb 6= γ. By construction, given this direct mechanism, it is an optimal strategy
for each type γ to report his type truthfully. This equilibrium yields each type γ the
same welfare as the equilibrium under the original indirect mechanism and it yields the
principal weakly larger expected welfare than that equilibrium. The latter follows from
the fact that the principal receives weakly larger welfare conditional on any type γ in the
equilibrium of the direct mechanism with truthful revelation. The principal’s expected
welfare is the same in the two equilibria if Sγ = Sγ,P for all γ and is strictly larger in
the equilibrium of the direct mechanism with truthful revelation if Sγ 6= Sγ,P for some γ.
This proves the first part of the proposition.
    We now prove the second part, namely that an optimal deterministic mechanism
solves program (3)-(4). By the result just established, we can restrict attention to direct
mechanisms in which the agent reports his type truthfully. With some abuse of notation,
let π(γ) ≡ π(γ, a(γ)γ). The principal’s problem is
                                              Z   γ                           
                           max                         UP (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) φ f (γ) dγ      (72)
                  {a(γ),π(γ),π(b
                               γ ,γ)}γ,b
                                       γ ∈Γ   γ

                                                      subject to
         UA (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                              γ )) for all γ, γ
                                                              b for which a (b
                                                                             γ ) = 0,        (73)

   UA (γ, π (γ)) − a (γ) αφ ≥ UA (γ, π (b
                                        γ , γ)) − αφ for all γ, γ
                                                                b for which a (b
                                                                               γ ) = 1.      (74)

The only difference between this program and program (3)-(4) is that the incentive com-


                                                         51
patibility constraint (74) is absent in (3)-(4). However, the principal can trivially prevent
a deviation of a type γ in which he mimics a type γ  b with a(b γ ) = 1: as this type is audited
following the deviation, the principal can verify that he has deviated and punish him
by assigning a spending level π (b γ , γ) such that UA (γ, π (bγ , γ)) ≤ UA (γ, π(γ)) for γ 6= γ
                                                                                               b
(where it is clear that such a spending level π (b  γ , γ) exists, and in fact π (bγ , γ) = π(γ)
would be a sufficient punishment). Therefore, the principal can satisfy (74) at no cost,
and hence the solution to this program coincides with the solution to (72)-(73), which is
equivalent to program (3)-(4).


References
Alonso, Ricardo and Niko Matouschek, “Optimal Delegation,” Review of Economic
 Studies, 2008, 75, 259–293.

Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell, “The Theory of Delegation with an Application
 to Tariff Caps,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (4), 1541–600.

  , Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos, “Commitment Vs. Flexibility,”
  Econometrica, 2006, 74, 365–396.

Ambrus, Attila and Georgy Egorov, “Comment on ‘Commitment vs. Flexibility’,”
 Econometrica, 2013, 81 (5), 2113–2124.

   and    , “Delegation and Nonmonetary Incentives,” 2015. Working Paper. URL:
  http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/faculty/egorov/ftp/Delegation

Athey, Susan, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe, “The Optimal Degree of
 Discretion in Monetary Policy,” Econometrica, 2005, 73, 1431–1475.

Banks, Jeffrey, “Agency Budgets, Cost Information, and Auditing,” American Journal
 of Political Science, 1989, 33 (3), 670–699.

Ben-Porath, Elchanan and Barton L. Lipman, “Implementation with Partial Prov-
 ability,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2012, 147 (5), 1689–1724.

  , Eddie Dekel, and Barton Lipman, “Optimal Allocation with Costly Verification,”
  American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3779–3813.



                                              52
Beshkar, Mostafa and Eric Bond, “Cap and Escape in Trade Agreements,” 2016.
 Working Paper.

Border, Kim C. and Joel Sobel, “Samurai Accountant: A Theory of Auditing and
 Plunder,” Review of Economic Studies, 1987, 54 (4), 525–540.

Budina, Nina, Andrea Schaechter, Anke Weber, and Tidiane Kinda,
 “Fiscal Rules in Response to the Crisis :       Toward the ‘Next-Generation’
 Rules: A New Dataset,” 2012.          IMF Working Paper WP/12/187. URL:
 https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2012/wp12187.pdf.

Bull, Jesse and Joel Watson, “Hard Evidence and Mechanism Design,” Games and
 Economic Behavior, 2007, 58, 75–93.

Chatterjee, Kalyan, Sanford Morton, and Arijit Mukherji, “Strategic Audit
 Policies Without Commitment,” 2002. Working Paper.

Deneckere, Raymond and Sergei Severinov, “Mechanism Design with Partial State
 Verifiability,” Games and Economic Behavior, 2008, 64, 487–513.

Erlanson, Albin and Andreas Kleiner, “Costly Verification in Collective Decisions,”
  November 2015. Working Paper.

Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig, “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The
 One-Period Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 1985, 52 (4), 647–663.

Glazer, Jacob and Ariel Rubinstein, “On Optimal Rules of Persuasion,” Economet-
 rica, 2004, 72 (6), 1715–1736.

   and , “A Study in the Pragmatics of Persuasion: A Game Theoretical Approach,”
  Theoretical Economics, 2006, 1, 395–410.

Green, Jerry R. and Jean-Jacques Laffont, “Partially Verifiable Information and
 Mechanism Design,” Review of Economic Studies, 1986, 53 (3), 447–456.

Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared, “Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Persistent
 Shocks,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1557–614.

  and    , “Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Economy,” 2015. Working Paper.



                                        53
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, “The Capital Budgeting Process: Incentives and
 Information,” Journal of Finance, 1996, 51 (4), 1139–1174.

   and , “Capital budgeting and delegation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1998,
  50, 259–289.

Holmström, Bengt, “On Incentives and Control in Organizations,” 1977. Ph.D. Thesis,
 Stanford University. URL: http://economics.mit.edu/files/3856.

  , “On the Theory of Delegation,” in M. Boyer and R. Kihlstrom, eds., Bayesian Models
  in Economic Theory, North-Holland; New York, 1984.

Kartik, Navin and Olivier Tercieux, “Implementation with Evidence,” Theoretical
 Economics, 2012, 7, 323–355.

Lo, Desmond (Ho-Fu), Wouter Dessein, Mrinal Ghosh, and Francine La-
  fontaine, “Price Delegation and Performance Pay: Evidence from Industrial Sales
  Forces,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2016, 32 (3), 508–544.

Malenko, Andrey, “Optimal Dynamic Capital Budgeting,” 2016. Working Paper.

Melumad, Nahum D. and Toshiyuki Shibano, “Communication in Settings with
 No Transfers,” RAND Journal of Economics, 1991, 22 (2), 173–198.

Mookherjee, Dilip and Ivan Png, “Optimal Auditing, Insurance, and Redistribu-
 tion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 104 (2), 399–415.

Mylovanov, Tymofiy and Andriy Zapechelnyuk, “Mechanism Design with Ex-Post
 Verification and Limited Punishments,” 2014. Working Paper.

Reinganum, Jennifer and Louis Wilde, “Equilibrium Verification and Reporting
 Policies in a Model of Tax Compliance,” International Economic Review, 1986, 27,
 739–760.

Ross, Marc, “Capital Budgeting Practices of Twelve Large Manufacturers,” Financial
 Management, 1986, 15 (4), 15–22.

Strausz, Roland, “Deterministic Mechanisms and the Revelation Principle,” Economics
  Letters, 2003, 79, 333–337.



                                         54
Taggart, Robert, “Allocating Capital among a Firm’s Divisions: Hurdle Rates vs.
  Budgets,” Journal of Financial Research, 1987, 10, 177–190.

Townsend, Robert M., “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
  State Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 21, 265–293.

  , “Information Constrained Insurance: The Revelation Principle Extended,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 1988, 21, 411–450.




                                        55
