                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PROJECTIONS AND UNCERTAINTIES ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE IN AN ERA
                     OF MINIMAL CLIMATE POLICIES

                                     William D. Nordhaus

                                      Working Paper 22933
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22933


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                        December 2016, Revised September 2017




The research reported here was supported by the Carnegie Commission of New York, the U.S.
National Science Foundation, and the U.S. Department of Energy. The views are entirely the
responsibility of the author. The author declares that he has no relevant and material financial
conflicts with the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Projections and Uncertainties About Climate Change in an Era of Minimal Climate Policies
William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 22933
December 2016, Revised September 2017
JEL No. C15,F6,Q5,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

Climate change remains one of the major international environmental challenges facing nations.
Up to now, nations have to date adopted minimal policies to slow climate change. Moreover,
there has been no major improvement in emissions trends as of the latest data. The current study
uses the updated DICE-2016R2 model to present new projections and the impacts of alternative
climate policies. It also presents a new set of estimates of the uncertainties about future climate
change and compares the results with those of other integrated assessment models. The study
confirms past estimates of likely rapid climate change over the next century if major climate-
change policies are not taken. It suggests that it is unlikely that nations can achieve the 2°C target
of international agreements, even if ambitious policies are introduced in the near term. The
required carbon price needed to achieve current targets has risen over time as policies have been
delayed.


William D. Nordhaus
Yale University, Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22933
I.      Introduction

            Background

             Climate change remains the central environmental issue of today. While the Paris
     Agreement on climate change of 2015 (Paris Agreement 2016) has recently been ratified, it is
     limited to voluntary emissions reductions for major countries, and the United States has
     withdrawn. No binding agreement for emissions reductions is currently in place following the
     expiration of the Kyoto Protocol in 2012. Countries have agreed on a target temperature limit
     of 2 °C, but this is far removed from actual policies, and is probably infeasible, as will be seen
     below. The reality is that most countries are on a business-as-usual (BAU) trajectory of minimal
     policies to reduce their emissions, taking non-cooperative policies that are in their national
     interest, but far from ones which would represent a global cooperative policy.
             Given the realities of actual climate policies, it is critical to determine the trajectory the
     world is on now, or what the BAU involves. The most recent IPCC report (IPCC Fifth Assessment
     Report, Science, 2013) ignores the BAU; instead, it examines stylized trajectories that are only
     loosely related to actual policies, output, and emissions paths. It would be difficult, reading the
     most recent IPCC reports, to determine the likely outcome for future climate change and
     damages in an unregulated policy space.
             The present study attempts to fill this void by investigating in detail the implications of a
     world in the absence of ambitious climate policies. It does so with a newly revised model, the
     DICE-2016R2 model (DICE stands for Dynamic Integrated model of Climate and the Economy).
     In addition to standard runs, the current study adds a new dimension by investigating the
     impact of uncertainties about several important parameters. The results confirm and even
     strengthen earlier results, indicating the high likelihood of rapid warming and major damages if
     policies continue along the unrestrained path.
             The methods here employ an approach known as integrated assessment models (IAMs).
     These are approaches to the economics of climate change that integrate the different elements
     into a single interrelated model. The present study presents the results of a fully revised
     version of the DICE model (as of 2016). This is the first major revision of the model following
     the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC. This study describes the changes in the model from
     the last round, presents updated estimates of the different variables, and compares the new
     estimates with other models. In addition, the analysis provides uncertainties in the projections
     using new estimates of the underlying uncertainties of major model parameters.




                                                       2
       Overview of results

        I will not attempt to summarize the entire paper here, but will instead provide some
highlights. The first result is that the revised DICE model shows more rapid growth of output in
the baseline or “no-policy” path compared to earlier DICE versions and most other models. This
is also reflected in a major upward revision in the social cost of carbon (SCC) and the optimal
carbon tax in the current period. For example, the estimate of the SCC has been revised
upwards by about 50% since the last full version in 2013. There are several components of this
change – some of methods and some of data – but the change is not encouraging.
        A second result is that the international target for climate change with a limit of 2 °C
appears to be infeasible with reasonably accessible technologies – and this is the case even with
very stringent and unrealistically ambitious abatement strategies. This is so because of the
inertia of the climate system, of rapid projected economic growth in the near term, and of
revisions in several elements of the model. A target of 2½ °C is technically feasible but would
require extreme and virtually universal global policy measures.
        A third point is to emphasize that this study focuses on the business-as-usual trajectory,
or the one that would occur without effective climate policies. The approach of studying
business as usual has fallen out of favor with analysts, who concentrate on temperature-
limiting or concentration-limiting scenarios. A careful study of minimal-policy scenarios may be
depressing, but it is critical in the same way a CT scan is essential for a cancer patient.
Moreover, notwithstanding what may be called “The Rhetoric of Nations,” there has been little
progress in taking strong policy measures. For example, of the six largest countries or regions,
only the EU has implemented national climate policies, and the policies of the EU today are very
modest (about $6/tCO2 in 2017). Moreover, from the perspective of political economy in
different countries as of summer 2017, the prospects of strong policy measures appear to be
dimming rather than brightening.
        The paper also investigates the implications of uncertainty for climate change. When
uncertainties are accounted for, the expected values of most of the major geophysical variables,
such as temperature, are largely unchanged. However, the social cost of carbon (SCC) is higher
(by about 15%) under uncertainty than in the best-guess case because of the asymmetry in the
impacts of uncertainty on the damages from climate change. Note as well that even under
highly “optimistic” outcomes (i.e., ones that have the most favorable realizations of the
uncertain variables) global temperature increases markedly, and there are significant damages.
        An additional important finding is that the relative uncertainty is much higher for
economic variables than for geophysical variables. More precisely, the dispersion of results
(measured, say, by the coefficient of variation (standard deviation relative to the mean) is




                                                3
larger for emissions, output, damages, and the SCC than for concentrations or temperature. This
result is primarily because of the large uncertainty about economic growth. From a statistical
point of view, uncertainty about most geophysical parameters is a level uncertainty and is
roughly constant over time; whereas the uncertainty of economic variables is a growth-rate
uncertainty and therefore tends to grow over time. By the year 2100, this implies a greater
uncertainty for economic variables. Note as well that the output uncertainty implies a
substantial difference between deterministic and uncertain cases.
        This study makes one further important point about uncertainty. It shows that there is
substantial uncertainty about the path of climate change and its impacts. The ranges of
uncertainty for future emissions, concentrations, temperature, and damages are extremely
large. However, this does not reduce the urgency of taking strong climate-change policies today.
When taking uncertainties into account, the strength of policy (as measured by the social cost
of carbon or the optimal carbon tax) would increase, not decrease.
        As a final point, I emphasize that many uncertainties remain. Analysts do not know, and
are unlikely soon to know, how the global economy or energy technologies will evolve; or what
the exact response of geophysical systems will be to evolving economic conditions; or exactly
how damaging climate change will be for the economy as well as non-market and non-human
systems. We also do not know with precision how to represent the different systems in our
economic and scientific models. The best practices have evolved over time as we learn more
about all these systems. But we must take stock of what is known as well as the implications of
our actions. The bottom line here is that this most recent taking stock has more bad news than
good news, and that the need for policies to slow climate change are more pressing and not less
pressing.

   II.     The Structure of the DICE-2016R2 Model

        The analysis begins with a discussion of the DICE-2016R2 model, which is a revised
version of the DICE-2013R model (see Nordhaus 2014, Nordhaus and Sztorc 2013 for a detailed
description of the earlier version). It is the latest version of a series of models of the economics
of global warming developed at Yale University by Nordhaus and colleagues. The first version
of the global dynamic model was published in Nordhaus (1992). The discussion explains the
major modules of the model, and describes the major revisions since the 2013 version. The
current version of the DICE-2016R2 is available at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/homepage/DICEmodels09302016.htm.
        The DICE model views climate change in the framework of economic growth theory. In
the Ramsey-Koopmans-Cass optimal growth model, society invests in capital goods, thereby




                                                 4
reducing consumption today in order to increase consumption in the future. The DICE model
modifies the Ramsey model to include climate investments, which are analogous to capital
investments in the standard model. The model contains all elements, from economics through
climate change, to damages and abatement, in a structure that attempts to represent simplified
best practices in each area.

       Equations of the DICE-2016R2 model2

       Most of the analytical background is similar to that in the 2013R model, and for details
readers are referred to Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013). Major revisions are discussed as the
equations are described.

       Economic sectors

       The model optimizes a social welfare function, W, which is the discounted sum of the
population-weighted utility of per capita consumption. The notation here is that V is the
instantaneous social welfare function, U is the utility function, c(t) is per capita consumption,
and L(t) is population. Time is in five-year periods, so t = 1 for 2015 (2013-2017), and so forth.
The discount factor on welfare is R (t) = (1+ρ)-t, where ρ is the pure rate of social time
preference or generational discount rate on welfare.
           T max                        T max
( 1) W     V[c (t ), L(t )] R(t ) 
            t 1
                                         U[c (t )] L(t ) R(t )
                                         t 1

The utility function has a constant elasticity with respect to per capita consumption of the form
U(c)  c 1 / ( 1   ). The parameter α is interpreted as generational inequality aversion, which
measures the relative importance of consumption levels at different times. In the present
version, the utility discount rate is 1.5% per year and the rate of inequality aversion is 1.45. As
described below, these parameters are set to calibrate real interest rates in the model.
       Net output is gross output reduced by damages and abatement costs:
(2) Q(t)   (t)[ 1  (t)]Y(t)



2
  The equations and description in Section II are included for reference so that readers can refer to the
latest model version and revisions. These have been published in slightly different form in earlier
publications, such as Nordhaus (2013, 2017).




                                                            5
In this specification, Q(t) is output net of damages and abatement, Y(t) is gross output, which is
a Cobb-Douglas function of capital, labor, and technology. The variables Ω(t) and Λ(t) are the
damage function and abatement cost and are defined below. Total output is divided between
total consumption and total gross investment. Labor is proportional to population, while capital
accumulates according to an optimized savings rate.
        The current version develops global output in greater detail than earlier versions. The
global output concept is PPP (purchasing power parity) as measured by the International
Monetary Fund. The growth concept is the weighted growth rate of real GDP of different
countries, where the weights are the country shares of world nominal GDP using current
international US dollars. I constructed a new version of world output, and this corresponds
closely to the IMF estimate of the growth of real output in constant international (PPP) dollars.
The earlier model used the World Bank growth figures, but the World Bank growth rates by
region could not be replicated.
        The present version substantially updates both the historical growth estimates and the
projections of per capita output growth. Future growth is based largely on a survey of experts
conducted by Christensen et al. (2016). Growth in per capita output over the 1980 – 2015
period was 2.2% per year. Growth in per capita output from 2015 to 2050 is now projected at
2.1 % per year, while that to 2100 is projected at 1.9% per year. The revisions now incorporate
the latest output, population, and emissions data and projections. Population data and
projections through 2100 are from the United Nations. CO2 emissions are from the Carbon
Dioxide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC), and updated using various sources. Non-CO2
radiative forcings (that is, the impact of other gases on warming) for 2010 and projections to
2100 are from projections prepared for the IPCC Fifth Assessment.
        The additional variables in equation (2) above are  (t) and (t) , which represent the
damage function and the abatement-cost function, respectively. The abatement cost function,
 (t) in equation (2) above, is the fraction of output devoted to reducing CO2 emissions
(perhaps 3%). It was recalibrated to the abatement cost functions of other IAMs as represented
in the modeling uncertainty project (MUP) study (Gillingham et al. 2015). The resulting
abatement function has slightly higher costs than earlier estimates. The abatement-cost
                                         
function takes the form (t)  1 (t)(t) 2 , where θ1(t) = 0.0741x .0904(t-1) and θ2 = 2.6. The
interpretation here is that at zero emissions for the first period, abatement is 7.41% of output.
That percentage declines at 2% per year. The abatement-cost function is highly convex,
reflecting the sharp diminishing returns to reducing emissions.
        The model assumes the existence of a “backstop technology,” which is a technology that
produces energy services with zero GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions (μ = 1). The backstop




                                                  6
price in 2020 is $550 per ton of CO2-equivalent, and the backstop cost declines at ½ % per year.
Additionally, it is assumed that there are no “negative emissions” technologies initially, but that
negative emissions are available after 2150. The existence of negative-emissions technologies
(μ > 1) is critical to reaching low-temperature targets, as described below.
        The damage function is defined as  (t)= 1- D(t), where3
(3)     D(t) = ψ1 TAT (t)+ ψ2 [ TAT (t) ] 2
Equation (3) describes the economic impacts or damages of climate change. The DICE-2016R2
model takes globally averaged temperature change (TAT) as a sufficient statistic for damages.
Equation (3) assumes that damages can be reasonably well approximated by a quadratic
function of temperature change. The estimates of the coefficients of the damage function are
explained below.
       Uncontrolled industrial CO2 emissions are given by a level of carbon intensity or the CO2-
output ratio, σ(t), times gross output. Total CO2 emissions, E(t), are equal to uncontrolled
emissions reduced by the emissions-reduction rate, μ(t), plus exogenous land-use emissions.
(4)      E(t) =  (t)[1- (t)]Y(t)+ ELand (t)
The model has been revised to incorporate a more rapid decline in the CO2-output ratio (or
what is called decarbonization) to reflect the last decade’s observations. The decade through
2010 showed relatively slow global decarbonization, with the global CO2-output ratio changing
at -0.8 % per year. However, the most recent data indicate a sharp downward tilt, with the
global CO2/GDP ratio changing at -2.1% per year over the 2000-2015 period (preliminary
data). It appears that changes in the global decarbonization rate are largely driven by China’s
performance rather than any significant change in the rest of the world.4 For the DICE model, it
is assumed that the rate of decarbonization going forward is -1.5 % per year (using the IMF
output concept). Figure 1 shows the global trend in the CO2-GDP ratio since 1960. Note the
steeper slope (increased rate of decarbonization) in the last few years.


3
    In early approaches, the damage function was  (t)= D(t) / [ 1  D(t)]. This earlier specification ensured that
damages never exceeded output. However, the damage ratio does not approach 1 in the current
projections, so the quadratic specification is preferred.
4
  Based on preliminary data, the rate of decarbonization of the world-less-China has not changed
appreciably over the last three decades. However, when China is included, the global CO2-output
ratio has declined more sharply in 2010 – 2016 relative to the earlier decade. The reliability of the
Chinese output and emissions data are likely to be low relative to other major countries, so the impact
of the Chinese data on the global total should be treated with reservations.




                                                          7
       Geophysical sectors

        The next set of equations represents the linkage between the economy and climate
change.        The geophysical equations link greenhouse-gas emissions to the carbon cycle,
radiative forcings (defined below), and climate change. Equation (5) represents the equations
of the carbon cycle for three reservoirs.
                                3
(5)   M j (t )  0 j E(t )   i j M i(t - 1 )
                               i 1

       The three reservoirs are j = AT, UP, and LO, which are the atmosphere, the upper oceans
and biosphere, and the lower oceans, respectively. The parameters               ij   represent the flow
parameters between reservoirs per period. All emissions flow into the atmosphere. The 2016
version incorporates new research on the carbon cycle. Earlier versions of the DICE model
were calibrated to fit the short-run carbon cycle (primarily the first 100 years). Because the
new model is in part designed to calculate long-run trends, such as the impacts on the melting
of large ice sheets, it was decided to change the calibration to fit the atmospheric retention of
CO2 for periods up to 4000 years. Based on studies of Archer et al. (2009), the 2016 version of
the three-box model does a much better job of simulating the long-run behavior of larger
models with full ocean chemistry. This change has a major impact on the long-run carbon
concentrations.
        The next relationship is between GHG accumulations and increased radiative forcing.
Radiative forcing is the heat received at the earth’s surface. Increased radiative forcing is the
result of higher accumulations of greenhouse gases, as is shown in equation (6).
(6)   F(t )   { log2 [ M AT (t ) / M AT (1750 )]}  FEX (t )
F(t) is the change in total radiative forcings from anthropogenic sources such as CO2. FEX(t) is
exogenous forcings, and the first term is the forcings due to atmospheric concentrations of CO2.
         Forcings lead to warming according to a simplified two-level global climate model:
(7)   TAT (t)  TAT (t  1 )  1 {F(t) - 2TAT (t  1) - 3 [TAT (t  1) - TLO (t  1)]}
(8)   TLO (t)  TLO (t  1 )   4 [TAT (t  1) - TLO (t  1)]
In these equations, TAT(t) is the global mean surface temperature and TLO(t) is the mean
temperature of the deep oceans. Large-scale ocean circulation models show that there is
substantial thermal inertia in the oceans, which means that the warming of the deep oceans
lags hundreds of years behind warming at the surface.




                                                            8
     The climate module has been revised to reflect recent earth system models. The
equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) is based on the analysis of Olsen et al. (2012). The reasons
for using this approach are provided in Gillingham et al. (2015). The final estimate is mean
warming of 3.1 °C for an equilibrium CO2 doubling. The transient climate sensitivity or TCS
(sometimes called the transient climate response) is adjusted to correspond to models with an
ECS of 3.1 °C, which produces a TCS of 1.7 °C.
        The treatment of discounting is identical to that in DICE-2013R. I distinguish between
the welfare discount rate (ρ) and the goods discount rate (r). The welfare discount rate applies
to the well-being of different generations, while the goods discount rate applies to the return on
capital investments. The former is not observed, while the latter is observed in markets. When
the term “discount rate” is used without a modifier, this will always refer to the discount rate
on goods.
        The economic assumption behind the DICE model is that the goods discount rate should
reflect actual economic outcomes. This implies that the assumptions about model parameters
should generate savings rates and rates of return on capital that are consistent with
observations. With the current calibration, the discount rate (or equivalently the real return on
investment) averages 4¼% per year over the period to 2100. This is the global average of a
lower figure for the U.S. and a higher figure for other countries, and is consistent with estimates
in other studies that use U.S. data.
        This specification used in the DICE model is sometimes called the “descriptive approach”
to discounting. The alternative approach, used in The Stern Review and elsewhere, is called the
“prescriptive discount rate.” (Stern 2007) Under this second approach, the discount rate is
assumed on a normative basis and determined largely independently of actual market returns
on investments. A full discussion of the issues of discounting is contained in Gollier (2013), with
the justification for the DICE-model treatment described in Nordhaus (2008).

       Impacts of revisions

        The DICE model has changed substantially since its development in Nordhaus (1992). In
a parallel study, I have investigated the impacts of model and data revisions over the last
quarter century (Nordhaus 2017a). That study finds that the major revisions are due to
changes in the economic aspects of the model, whereas the geophysical changes have been
much smaller. Particularly sharp revisions have occurred for global output, damages, and the
social cost of carbon. These results suggest that the economic projections are the least precise
parts of integrated assessment models and deserve much greater study than has been the case
up to now, especially careful studies of long-run economic growth (to 2100 and beyond). This




                                                9
point has been emphasized in a recent report of the National Academy of Sciences (National
Research Council 2017).

      III.     Approach to estimating uncertainties

             Background

       The “standard DICE model” uses the expected values (or what I refer to as the “best
guess” or BG) of parameters such as productivity growth or equilibrium temperature
sensitivity. The present study examines uncertainties about major results looking at parametric
uncertainties.
       Developing reliable estimates that incorporate uncertainty has proven extremely
challenging on both methodological and empirical grounds (see Gillingham et al. 2015). Two
major sources of uncertainty are “model uncertainty” and “structural uncertainty.” The
difference across models is called model uncertainty. This approach, also known as ensemble
uncertainty, is convenient for estimating uncertainty because the “data,” which are results of
different models, are readily collected and validated. The concern is that the ensemble
approach is conceptually incorrect, and that there is a degree of arbitrariness concerning the
selection of studies to include in the ensemble.5
       Structural or parameter uncertainty, which refers to uncertainty within models, arises
from imprecision in knowledge of parameters and variables as well as uncertainty about model
structure. For example, climate scientists are unsure about the response of climate to
increasing greenhouse-gas forcings. The present study chiefly examines structural uncertainty
focusing only on uncertainties about parameters.
       It will be helpful to explain the structure of the current approach analytically. The model
can be represented as a mapping from exogenous and policy variables and parameters to
endogenous outcomes. A model can be written symbolically as follows:
(9)                Y  H ( z,  , u )




5
  Ensemble uncertainty is analytically incorrect because it calculates the dispersion as the difference
in the mean values of outcomes or parameters across models. To see this point, assume that models
use the same data and their structures and are identical. They will have zero ensemble uncertainty
even though the actual uncertainty may be large.




                                                   10
In this schema, Y is a vector of model outputs; z is a vector of exogenous and policy variables; 
is a vector of model parameters; u is a vector of uncertain parameters to be investigated; and H
represents the model structure (described above for the DICE model).
        The first step is to select the uncertain parameters for analysis. For the present study, I
have selected five variables: equilibrium temperature sensitivity (ETS); productivity growth;
the damage function; the carbon cycle; and the rate of decarbonization. Each has a probability
density function (PDF) with a joint distribution as g (u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 , u5 ). For this study, the
distributions are assumed to be independent and are denoted as fi (ui ), which implies that
g (u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 , u5 )  f1 (u1 ) f2 (u2 ) f3 (u3 ) f4 (u4 ) f5 (u5 ). 6 The distribution of the uncertain parameters is
then mapped into the distribution of the output variables, given schematically by h(Y ) as
follows based on (9):
(10)     h(Y )  H[ z, , f1 (u1 ) f2 (u2 ) f3 (u3 ) f 4 (u4 ) f5 (u5 )]
       I note that the discount rate is not included as an uncertain variable. The reason is that,
as explained above, this reflects preferences (through the rate of time preference and inequality
aversion). It might be thought that generational preferences are uncertain and might evolve
differently over time. Uncertainties about preferences pose philosophical difficulties that are
not easily represented in economic growth models and are therefore excluded here.
       A critical decision involves how actually to calculate the mapping in equation (10) for
complex systems. One standard approach is a Monte Carlo sampling of the uncertain variables,
but this turns out to be computationally infeasible for the DICE model in the GAMS code given




6
 With five uncertain variables, there are ten potential correlations. Six correlations can be set to zero
by first principles. These are the correlations between economic uncertainties and geophysical
uncertainties. For example, there is no reason to assume that the equilibrium climate sensitivity is
correlated with productivity growth. The covariance between carbon and temperature is highly
complex but has be captured in the calibration of the climate model. The three remaining covariances
are among damages, TFP, and decarbonization. I find a very small negative correlation between TFP
growth and decarbonization in the historical record, but there are no reliable data on the correlation
between damages and the other variables. Evaluating the impact of variable correlation is on the
agenda for future research.




                                                                      11
constraints.7 I have therefore discretized the distributions and performed a complete
enumeration of the states of the world (SOW), as defined by the above parameters. More
precisely, each of the distributions of the uncertain variables is separated into quintiles. The
expected values of the uncertain variables are next calculated for each quintile, obtaining
discrete values for each variable of {ui (1), ui (2), ui (3), ui (4), ui (5)}, where   ui (k ) is the kth quintile of
uncertain variable i.
       There are two adjustments of the discrete distributions for present purposes. First, the
middle quintile is set equal to the expected value of the parameter. This is done so that the
median and mean outcomes can be easily compared. Secondly, because the first adjustment
changes the means and standard deviations for the uncertain variables, the quintile values are
adjusted so that the means and standard deviations are preserved. This second step involves
small adjustments in the non-central quintile values.
       While the algorithm for estimating uncertainty is computationally efficient, an important
question involves its accuracy. If the model in (10) is linear in the uncertain parameters, the
approach is exact. However, to the extent that (10) is non-linear in the parameters, the
algorithm may provide biased estimates of the variability. I have tested the accuracy using an
alternative approach that involves a response surface function or RSF. The basic idea is to fit a
polynomial function of the uncertain variables to the 3125 grid points using a response surface
function (RSF), and then estimate the distribution of the output variables using a Monte Carlo
simulation. These estimates indicate that the discretized probability distributions provide an
accurate representation of the distributions of the uncertain variables. The use of response
surface functions is widespread in engineering systems and has been applied to complex
econometric problems. See online materials, particularly part A, Table A-1, and Annex A, as well
as Mizon and Hendry (1980) for an econometric example.
       The actual computations involved a complete enumeration of the 55 = 3125
combinations of uncertain parameters for each state of the world (SOW). This took about two
hours on a high-end PC workstation.


7
  The constraints are that the modeling should be replicable on a PC and use the GAMS code. A
single run takes about 5 seconds. I estimate that it would require a sample of about 10 million runs to
get reliable estimates using Monte Carlo techniques. GAMS software does not allow this to be done
easily, and using the standard code would require about three months of computer time. Moving to
other platforms would clearly speed up the computations, but this would make replication and use by
other scholars more difficult. The appendix examines an alternative approach using a response
surface method.




                                                         12
       Determination of the probability distributions

         Five probability distributions were selected based on earlier work that suggests the
most important uncertain variables (see the extensive discussion in Nordhaus 1994, 2008) as
well as those in the MUP study for comparison (Gillingham et al., 2015). This section describes
the derivation of the distributions.
         Equilibrium temperature sensitivity (ETS). The distribution for ETS adopts the approach
used in the MUP study. The primary estimates are from Olsen et al. (2012). This study uses a
Bayesian approach, with a prior based on previous studies and a likelihood based on
observational or modeled data. The best fitting distribution is a log-normal PDF. The
parameters of the log-normal distribution fit to Olsen et al. are μ = 1.107 and σ = 0.264. The
major summary statistics of the reference distribution in the study are the following: mean =
3.13, median = 3.03 and standard deviation = 0.843.
         Productivity growth. The scholarly literature on uncertainties about long-run economic
growth is thin. The specification relied on a survey of experts conducted by a team at Yale
University led by Peter Christensen (Christensen et al 2016). The survey utilized information
drawn from a panel of experts to characterize uncertainty in estimates of global output for the
periods 2010-2050 and 2010-2100. Growth was defined as the average annual rate of growth
of global real per capita GDP, measured in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms.
         The resulting estimates of growth were best fit using a normal distribution. The
resulting combined normal distribution had a mean growth rate of 2.06% per year and a
standard deviation of the growth rate of 1.12% per year over the period 2010-2100. The
procedures and estimates will shortly be available in a working paper, and a short description
is in Gillingham et al. (2015). An alternative low-frequency approach developed by Muller and
Watson (2016) gives a significantly lower dispersion at long horizons (a standard deviation of
approximately 0.8% per year for 2010 - 2100). For the calculations, I used the estimate from
the survey.
         Decarbonization. The DICE model has a highly condensed representation of the energy
sector. The most important parameters are the level and trend of the global ratio of
uncontrolled CO2 emissions to output, σ(t), as shown in equation (4). This is modeled as an
initial growth rate with a slow decline over time. While there are several studies that include
something like this ratio (often modeled as autonomous energy efficiency improvement, AEEI),
there are no consensus estimates about its uncertainty because of the differences in IAM
specifications.
         There are two alternative approaches to estimate uncertainty. The first examined was a
time-series approach. For this, I reviewed historical data on the global emissions/output ratio.




                                               13
The simplest approach is to estimate an OLS regression, using data from 1960 to 2015, and
then look at the forecast error for 2100. If an AR1 term is included in the equation, the standard
error of the forecast for 2100 is 13.5% of the logarithm of σ(t). This implies an annual
uncertainty of 0.149% per year. However, a unit root of σ(t) cannot be rejected, so this estimate
is biased downward.
        An alternative approach is to examine the variation in models. This approach examined
the standard deviation of the growth of σ(t) in the six MUP models for the uncontrolled run.
This produced a much higher divergence, 0.32% per year from 2010 to 2100.
        For the uncertainty estimates, I chose a normal distribution using the results from the
MUP differences. This produces an uncertainty of the annual growth of σ(t) of 0.32% per year.
This is higher than the time-series numbers, but seems to capture the errors. The major
advantage is that it is conceptually the correct approach and contains structural elements. The
major shortcoming is that it may underestimate the uncertainty as many ensembles do, but it
seems less prone to clustering than other variables.
        Carbon cycle. The carbon cycle has several parameters, but the most important one is the
size of the intermediate reservoir (biosphere and upper level of the oceans). Changes in this
have major impacts on atmospheric retention over the medium term (a century or more), while
the other parameters affect primarily either the very short run or the very long run.
        Since IAMs generally have primitive carbon cycles, I examined model comparisons of
carbon cycles. A study by Friedlingstein et al. (2014) examined alternative predictions of 11
earth system models (ESMs) by calculating different emission-driven simulations of
concentrations and temperature projections. These used the IPCC high emissions scenario (RCP
8.5). When forced by RCP 8.5 CO2 emissions, models simulate a large spread in atmospheric CO2
concentrations, with 2100 concentrations ranging between 795 and 1145 parts per million
volume (ppm). The standard deviation of the 2100 concentrations (conditional on the
emissions trajectory) is 97 ppm. According to the study, differences in CO2 projections are
mainly attributable to the response of the land carbon cycle, which suggests that the size of the
intermediate reservoir is the uncertain parameter to adjust. While the ensemble standard
deviation is not conceptually appropriate, as mentioned above, it is a useful benchmark for the
purposes at hand. The final estimate uses a log-normal distribution for the carbon-cycle
parameter.

       Damage function: core estimates

    The damage function was revised in the 2016 DICE version to reflect new findings. The
2013 version relied on estimates of monetized damages from the Tol (2009) survey, but it has




                                               14
since been determined that the Tol survey contained several numerical errors (see the Editorial
Note 2015).
     The current version of the DICE model continues to rely on existing damage studies. The
method for estimating the damage function was the following: The new estimates started with
a survey of damage estimates by Andrew Moffat and Nordhaus (2017). The underlying damage
estimates were identified and collected. The survey turned up 27 studies which contained 36
useable damage estimates. For example, a recent version of the PAGE model estimated that the
impact of a 4 °C warming would be to lower global output by 2.9%. Using those 36 estimates as
data points, we then fitted a number of different specifications to the estimates. The central
specification was a one-parameter quadratic equation with a zero intercept and no linear term
and was therefore a one-parameter function. (The weighted OLS version had the highest
damage parameter; it was followed by the weighted median regression that is used; while the
unweighted least squares and unweighted median regressions have the smallest estimated
damage coefficients. “Largest” here means most negative.) Because the studies generally
included only a subset of all potential impacts, we added an adjustment of 25 percent of
quantified damages for omitted sectors and non-market and catastrophic damages, as
explained in Nordhaus and Sztorc (2013). Including all factors, the damage equation in the
model assumes that damages are 2.1% of global income at 3 °C warming and 8.5% of income at
6 °C warming. A full discussion of the estimates and statistical analysis are available in
Nordhaus and Moffat (2017).
        The parameter used in the model was an equation with a parameter of 0.227% loss in
global income per °C squared with no linear term. This leads to a damage of 2.0% of income at 3
°C, and 7.9% of global income at a global temperature rise of 6 °C. This coefficient is slightly
smaller than the parameter in the DICE-2013R model (which was 0.267% of income per °C
squared). The change from the earlier estimate is due to corrections in the estimates from the
Tol numbers, inclusion of several studies that had been omitted from that study, greater care in
the selection of studies to be included, and the use of weighted regressions. Note also that the
revised damage coefficient is the only change from the 2016R model used in Nordhaus (2017).

       Damage function: uncertainties

       The other key question is the uncertainty of the damage function to be used in the
uncertainty analysis. One approach would be the standard error of the coefficient in the
preferred equation above. The standard error from the preferred regression (including the
25% premium for omitted damages) is 0.0303% loss in global income per °C squared (Y/°C2)




                                              15
for a central coefficient of 0.236% Y/°C2. This corresponds to a t-statistic on the estimated
coefficient of 7.8, so it is apparently extremely well-determined.
        However, this estimate does not reflect specification uncertainty, uncertainty about the
studies to be included, or study dependence. A broader approach to estimating the uncertainty
can be taken by taking the calculated damages for all specifications of the damage function
(both linear and quadratic, weighted and unweighted, and with different temperature
thresholds) at a temperature increase of 6 °C. This yields an uncertainty of 0.14% Y/°C2. Yet
another estimate of uncertainty takes the standard deviation of the damage coefficients of the
three models used by the Interagency Working Group, or IAWG (DICE, FUND, and PAGE); this
yields a standard deviation of the damage coefficient of 0.15 % Y/°C2.
        Given the different approaches, I settled on a value for the uncertainty of the damage
parameter which is one-half the mean value of the parameter. More precisely, the distribution
is assumed to be normal, with a standard deviation of 0.118% Y/°C2. This reflects the great
divergence today among different studies.i
        Table 1 shows the major assumptions of the model.

   IV.      Major results for DICE-2016R2

         Central or best-guess (BG) estimates

        It will be useful to begin with results for the central values from the revised model. For
this section, I use a best-guess approach, which has been the standard for the DICE model, most
integrated assessment models, and virtually all earth-systems models. I use the term “best
guess” to designate estimates in which the values of uncertain parameters and exogenous
variables are set at their mean values.
        Figures 2 through 4 show the projections of emissions, concentrations, and temperature
increase for four scenarios with best-guess parameters. The four scenarios are the business as
usual (BAU) or baseline (“Base”), which is the central version of no climate policy studied here;
the cost-benefit economic optimum (“Opt”), which optimizes climate policy over the indefinite
future; a path that limits temperature to 2½ °C (“T<2.5”); and a policy with an extremely low
discount rate as advocated by the Stern Review (“Stern”).
        This study emphasizes the “baseline” or “no-policy” scenario. The baseline path takes
current policy as of 2015, which I estimate to be the equivalent of a carbon price of $2 per ton
of CO2, and projects this price forward at 2% per year. Figure 2 shows the paths of emissions
under the four scenarios. The baseline has rising emissions (although the path is flatter than
most other IAMs). The two ambitious paths require zero emissions of CO2 by mid-century,




                                                16
which is an extremely sharp break in trend. Both have emissions reductions that are far
sharper than are consistent with the policies of any major region. The optimal policy has a flat
trajectory for the next half-century.
        Figure 3 shows the CO2 concentrations paths for the four policies. The interesting
feature is that the two ambitious paths only require stabilization at close to today’s level of 400
ppm. The low levels of concentrations are the result of zero-emissions trajectories in the near
future, yet still have high CO2 concentrations because of the inertia in the carbon cycle.
        Figure 4 shows the temperature trajectories of the scenarios. The Stern and limit
scenario asymptote to 2½ °C by the end of the 21st century. The other paths grow sharply,
either because of no controls (“Base”) or due to inertia even with the adoption of strong policies
(“Opt”). Again, the difficulty of limiting the temperature increase to 2 °C comes because policies
have been deferred for so many years, and because of the great inertia in the carbon cycle and
the climate system.
        A surprising difference found when comparing the current and earlier versions of the
DICE model is that the optimal trajectory is now closer to the base than to the ambitious
scenarios. This is due to a combination of factors, such as climate-system inertia and the high
costs of the limiting scenarios.
        Table 2 shows the overall economic impact of different policies for the best-guess
parameters. The first column is the objective function, using first period consumption as the
numeraire. This is then compared with the sum of abatement costs and damages. The last two
columns show the difference of each policy from the base (no-policy) case. The net effects are in
discounted trillions of US international dollars. The objective function is approximately the
present value of consumption at a constant 4.4% per year discount rate (although the actual
discount rate declines over time). As can be seen, the optimal case raises discounted world
income by $30 trillion, or a little less than 1% of discounted consumption. The other policies
(Stern and temperature-limit) lower discounted world income because they front-load the
abatement relative to the optimal case.
        It should be noted that the optimal policy depends crucially on the assumed damage
function. If the damage function shows higher costs, or has sharp curvature at or around 2 °C,
as is implicitly assumed in international policies that have a 2 °C target, then the revised
optimal policy would have much higher abatement, and the temperature-limit and Stern
policies would be much more economically attractive. However, current damage studies do not
at present display either of these features (see Nordhaus and Moffat 2017).
        Comparison with other studies
        The results of the DICE BG approach can be compared with other models and studies.
Figure 5 shows the projected industrial emissions of CO2 over the coming century for baseline




                                                17
or no-policy scenarios. DICE-2016R2 is at the low end of different projections after mid-
century. The reason (as explained above) is that the projected rate of decarbonization is higher
than in earlier versions or other models. The lower emissions trend is reflected in the 2016
DICE version but not in most other model projections, which are often from models constructed
several years ago.
        Figure 6 shows the projected temperature trajectories in five different approaches. The
IAMs project a temperature increase in the range of 3.3 to 4.2 °C by the year 2100. The results
for DICE-2016R2 are at the higher end of comparable studies. The DICE results are above those
of the EMF-22 modeling exercise, as well as the central projections from the MUP project
(Gillingham et al. 2015). The top line is the ensemble average from the Fifth Assessment Report
of the IPCC (2013) for the RCP 8.5 scenario. However, the IPCC RCP 8.5 projection has a higher
radiative forcing than the baseline DICE-2016R2 model. In summary, the DICE temperature
projection is slightly lower than the last version, is higher than most other IAMs for a baseline
scenario, and is consistent with (although a little lower) than the IPCC RCP 8.5 ensemble
average.

       Social cost of carbon8

        A key finding from IAMs is the social cost of carbon, or SCC. This term designates the
economic cost caused by an additional ton of CO2 emissions or its equivalent. More precisely, it
is the change in the discounted value of economic welfare from an additional unit of CO2–
equivalent emissions. The SCC has become a central tool used in climate-change policy,
particularly in the determination of regulatory policies that involve greenhouse-gas emissions.
Estimates of the SCC are necessarily complex, because they involve the full range of impacts
from emissions, through the carbon cycle and climate change, as well as including the economic
damages from climate change. At present, there are few established integrated assessment
models (IAMs) which are available for the estimation of the entire path of cause and effect and
can therefore calculate an internally consistent SCC. The DICE model is one of the major IAMs
used by scholars and governments for estimating the SCC.
        Table 3 shows alternative estimates of the SCC. The central estimate from the BG
approach is $30/t CO2 for 2015. Other estimates show the SCC for temperature limits and for
different discount rates. We can also compare these estimates with those of the US government
made by the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (IAWG 2015). The IAWG’s

8
 A full discussion is contained in National Research Council (2016) and Nordhaus (2014). The
discussion in this section draws upon Nordhaus (2017).




                                               18
concept is conceptually comparable to the baseline in the first row of Table 3. Nordhaus (2017)
shows that, at comparable discount rates, the DICE-2016R2 estimate would be roughly twice
that of the IAWG. This difference can be explained by the IAWG’s use of an earlier version of the
DICE model, which was then blended with two other models, both of which had lower SCCs
than the earlier DICE model.

   V.      Uncertainties about climate change and policies

        Results for baseline run

        This section presents the results of the uncertainty analysis. To reiterate the approach,
we divided the PDFs for each uncertain variable into quintiles, and then took the expected value
of the parameter in each quintile. Asymmetrical PDFs were transformed slightly to preserve the
means and standard deviations. We then took a full enumeration of all 55 = 3125 equally
probable states of the world. Table A-2 in the Appendix shows the means, standard deviations,
and quintile values for the uncertain variables.
        Table 4 shows key statistics for major variables. There are three statistics for central
values, and three for uncertainty. Look first at the estimates of the temperature increase for
2100 for the baseline in panel A. The best guess (BG) for DICE is 4.10 °C, while the mean is
higher at 4.22 °C, and the median is lower at 4.08 °C. These suggest that the distribution is close
to slightly skewed, and that the BG slightly underestimates the estimates with uncertainty.
        Other variables display considerable asymmetry in the distributions. The SCC for 2015
has a mean of $34.5/t CO2, whereas the BG is about 15% lower at $30.0/t CO2. Most variables
are similarly skewed. Note that output is hugely underestimated in the best-guess case because
of the large variability of the growth rate. The question as to whether the BG is a reasonable
approximation is important, because its use vastly simplifies analysis. The answer is sometimes
yes, sometimes no. Appendix Table A-3 provides a tabulation of variables and the bias from
using the best-guess approach. Note the major bias in output over the longer run, which results
from the high degree of uncertainty of productivity.
        Table 4 also shows three measures of uncertainty: the standard deviation, the
interquartile range (IQR), and the coefficient of variation (CV). Perhaps the most useful of these
is the CV. The interesting feature here is that the CV is relatively low for geophysical variables
such as the 2100 temperature increase and carbon concentrations, but much higher for
economic variables such as output, damages, and the SCC. The high uncertainty of economic
variables comes about largely due to output uncertainty. The long lags in geophysical variables




                                                19
plus the lower uncertainty of geophysical parameters produces lower uncertainty in those
variables.
        We show box plots for several variables in the next figures. Figure 7A is temperature, 7B
is CO2 concentrations, 7C is the damage ratio, and 7D is the social cost of carbon. Notably, even
at the low fence or bar (which is approximately ½% of outcomes), there is substantial climate
change.

       Brief note on uncertainty in optimal runs

        The present study is primarily about the results of uncertainty for a baseline scenario.
The results for the optimal run are broadly parallel, with the central optimal result shown
above, and the uncertainties largely similar. Panel B of Table 4 shows the basic outcomes. One
interesting result is that the SCC for the uncertain and BG cases are much closer in the optimal
than in the baseline case. This arises because policy can adapt to SOWs with higher damages,
reducing the SCC in extreme SOWs. Appendix Tables A-4 and A-5 shows the details for the
baseline and optimal runs with uncertainties, while Appendix Tables A-6 and A-7 show the
averages for the baseline and optimal runs by period.
        One other interesting run concerns the potential for limiting temperature in the
uncertain runs. We have estimated the distribution of outcomes where abatement is at its
maximum (30% in the 2015 period, 70% in the 2020 period, and 100% after that). This is the
outer limit of what would be feasible with maximum abatement, and is unrealistic given the
policies of major countries. The probability that the temperature increase in 2100 would be
less than 2 °C is about 40% for the maximum-effort case (see Appendix Table A-8 for the results
on this run).

       Contributions of individual variables

        Table 5 shows the contribution of the different variables to the overall uncertainty.
These are calculated in two ways. Panel A starts from zero uncertainty, and introduces each
variable one at a time. Panel B starts from full uncertainty, and reduces the uncertainty one
variable at a time.
        The importance of different variables differs for the endogenous variable at hand. The
most important uncertainty across the board is the growth rate of productivity, and this affects
virtually every variable in an important way.
        The impact of productivity growth is generally clear, but paradoxical at times. The major
paradoxes arise because of the effect of productivity growth on the real interest rate. In the




                                               20
Ramsey-Koopmans-Cass model, the real interest rate (or discount rate) is endogenous. With the
current parameters, a higher rate of productivity growth leads to a higher discount rate. This of
course implies that SOWs with higher productivity growth have higher emissions, higher
temperature increases, and higher damages. However, because the discount rate is higher,
higher productivity growth instead leads to a lower social cost of carbon, and conversely. For
example, if productivity growth is high, global temperature in 2100 is 5.3 °C, the 2100 discount
rate is 2.7% per year and the 2015 SCC is $27/tCO2. With low productivity growth, global
temperature in 2100 is 3.3 °C, the 2100 discount rate is 1.6% per year and the 2015 SCC is
$53/tCO2.
        As a central way to view uncertainty, the most useful variable is the SCC. This is
important because it indicates how stringent policy should be today, whereas many other
variables relate more closely to the distant future. For the SCC, three variables are important.
The most significant is the damage coefficient. The other two, roughly equally significant, are
productivity growth and the equilibrium temperature sensitivity. The carbon cycle and the
emissions intensity are relatively unimportant for uncertainty about the SCC. It may be
surprising that the uncertainty about carbon intensity has little effect on many variables,
particularly the SCC. This result arises because changes in carbon intensity affect marginal
damages and marginal costs almost equally, so the two changes largely offset each other.

       Comparisons with other estimates

        There are several other estimates of uncertainty in IAMs. The most convenient
comparison is with the estimates from the MUP project (Gillingham et al. 2015). The MUP
project presented the results of the first comprehensive study of uncertainty in climate change
using multiple integrated assessment models, examining model and parametric uncertainties
for population, total factor productivity, and climate sensitivity. The study also estimated the
PDFs of key output variables, including CO2 concentrations, temperature, damages, and the
social cost of carbon (SCC). A key feature of the study was that the PDFs of the uncertain
variables were standardized, while the models themselves (and the means of all driving
variables) were left at the modelers’ baselines.
        Table 6 shows comparisons of means, standard deviations, and coefficients of variation
for major variables between the current study and the MUP study. Note that the DICE model
used in that study was DICE-2013R, whereas the model used here is DICE-2016R2. As noted
above, there have been several important changes in the specifications between the two
versions of the DICE model, so for DICE there are both methodological differences and model
differences between this study and the MUP study.




                                               21
        The most useful statistic to examine is the coefficient of variation (CV) in the bottom
panel of Table 6. For the DICE model, the CVs are close but generally lower in the present study,
the exception being the SCC. It is likely that the lower growth of emissions is responsible for the
lower CVs for CO2 and temperature. The increased CV for the SCC is unexplained.
        We can also examine the model differences in the same panel. The striking feature here
is the large differences in CVs across models. The CVs differed by a factor of 1½ to almost 3
among the six models.
        The key finding of the present and earlier studies is striking: The uncertainties of
geophysical variables such as CO2 concentrations and temperature are relatively low, in the
order of one-fifth of their best-guess values. On the other hand, the uncertainties of economic
variables are much larger, with CVs around 70% for emissions, damages, output, and the SCC.

       Timing of information and optimal climate policy

         Although the future is uncertain, we will eventually learn which path we are on –
whether damages are high or low, and whether temperature sensitivity is high or low. For the
baseline path, with minimal climate policies, the timing of our learning is unimportant because
it is assumed not to affect policy. However, for the optimal case, policy will depend upon the
scenario, and it is necessary to consider what we know and when we know it.
         The optimal policy described up to now assumes a “learn, then act,” or LtA, structure of
decisions. In other words, the analysis implicitly assumes that the uncertainties about the
future are resolved at the beginning, and then climate policy is decided on a state-contingent
basis. With high damages, carbon prices are high, and conversely. Of course, this approach is
unrealistic since uncertainties are only gradually resolved over time. The alternative approach,
“act, then learn,” or AtL, provides a more realistic approach to decisions – one in which, for
example, abatement or carbon prices are determined without knowledge of the damage
function. For an early path breaking approach to a decision-theoretic approach in which the
structure of learning is examined, see Manne and Richels (1992).
         The AtL approach to decisions cannot be fully incorporated into the current DICE
uncertainty structure in the GAMS framework, because in the full model it requires 3125
parallel states of the world, and is computationally infeasible without an alternative algorithmic
approach. Alternative techniques using recursive methods have made substantial progress in
studying decisions with slowly resolved uncertainties (see Lemoine and Rudik 2017), but they
do not incorporate the full DICE-model structure.
         A small test case examines the impact of learning that is delayed until 2050. For this
analysis, I took the two extreme quintiles for each uncertain variable (so this involves 25 = 32




                                                22
states of the world, rather than 3125 in the full uncertainty model). I then estimated the
optimal carbon prices, assuming an LtA approach similar to the approach used for the full
model. For the AtL example, I assumed that the optimal carbon prices are not state-contingent
(i.e., are the same in all SOW) through 2050, and then are state-contingent after 2050. So, this
alternative approach assumes no learning until 2050 and then complete learning after 2050.
         The results of this simplified example indicate that the policies are relatively insensitive
to late learning, although there is substantial value of learning. The optimal carbon price in the
AtL approach is about 6% higher than for that of the LtA ($36/tCO2 rather than $34/tCO2 in
2015, see Appendix Table A-9). However, there is substantial value of early information, with
the discounted value of consumption $3.7 trillion higher when information is available in 2015
rather than in 2050. This example indicates that using the learn, then act approach to policy is
reasonably accurate in the DICE model with uncertainty. However, if major structural changes
are introduced (particularly sharp discontinuities), then this result would need to be revisited.

   VI.     Conclusion

         The present study presents an updated set of results on the prospects for climate change
using a revised integrated assessment model, DICE-2016R2. It also develops a new and
simplified method for determining the uncertainties associated with climate change, and the
extent to which simplified best-guess (BG) techniques provide an accurate representation of
the revised and more complex model with uncertainty.
         The results pertain primarily to a world without climate policies, which is reasonably
accurate for virtually the entire globe today. The results show rapidly rising CO2
concentrations, temperature changes, and damages. Moreover, when the major parametric
uncertainties are included, there is virtually no chance that the rise in temperature will be less
than the target 2 °C without more stringent and comprehensive climate change policies.
         It is worth emphasizing one further point about the impact of uncertainty on policy. The
future is highly uncertain for virtually all variables, particularly economic variables such as
future output, damages, and the social cost of carbon. It might be tempting to conclude that
nations should wait until the uncertainties are resolved, or at least until the fog has lifted a
little. The present study finds the opposite result. To reiterate, by taking uncertainties into
account, the strength of policy (as measured by the social cost of carbon or the optimal carbon
tax) would increase, not decrease.




                                                 23
References

Archer, David, et al. 2009. “Atmospheric lifetime of fossil fuel carbon dioxide,” Annual Reviews
Earth Planetary Science, 37:117–34

Christensen, Peter, Kenneth Gillingham, and William Nordhaus. 2016. “Uncertainty in forecasts
of long-run productivity growth,” manuscript in preparation.

Clarke, Leon, et al. 2009. “International climate policy architectures: Overview of the EMF 22
international scenarios.” Energy Economics, 31: S64–S81.

Editorial Note. 2015. “Editorial Note: Correction to Richard S. Tol's ‘the economic effects of
climate change’,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 29, no. 1, Winter, 217-20.

Friedlingstein, Pierre, Malte Meinshausen, Vivek K. Arora, Chris D. Jones,
Alessandro Anav, Spencer K. Liddicoat, and Reto Knutti. 2014. “Uncertainties in CMIP5 Climate
Projections due to Carbon Cycle Feedbacks,” Journal of Climate, 27: 511-526.

Gillingham, Kenneth, William D. Nordhaus, David Anthoff, Geoffrey Blanford, Valentina Bosetti,
Peter Christensen, Haewon McJeon, John Reilly, and Paul Sztorc. 2015. “Modeling uncertainty in
climate change: a multi-model comparison.” No. w21637. National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Gollier, Christian. 2013. Pricing the Planet's Future: The Economics of Discounting in an
Uncertain World. Princeton University Press.

IAWG. 2015. Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, United States Government,
Response to Comments: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive
Order 12866, July, available at
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/scc-response-to-comments-
final-july-2015.pdf.

IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Science. 2013. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth




                                                24
Assessment Report of the IPCC, available online at
http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/#.Ukn99hCBm71.

Lemoine, Derek and Ivan Rudik. 2017. “Managing Climate Change under uncertainty: Recursive
integrated assessment at an inflection point,” Annual Review of Resource Economics 9.

Manne, Alan .S. and Richard G. Richels. 1992. Buying greenhouse insurance: the economic costs of
carbon dioxide emission limits. MIT press.

Mizon, Grayham E. and David F. Hendry. 1980. “An Empirical Application and Monte Carlo
Analysis of Tests of Dynamic Specification,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 47, No. 1,
Econometrics Issue, 21-45.Müller, U. and M. Watson. 2016. “Measuring Uncertainty about long-
run predictions,” Review of Economic Studies, 83: 1711-1740.

National Research Council. 2017. Valuing Climate Damages: Updating Estimation of the Social
Cost of Carbon Dioxide, Report of the Committee on Assessing Approaches to Updating the Social
Cost of Carbon, National Academy Press: Washington, D.C.
Nordhaus, William D. 1992. “An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse gases,”
Science, 258, November 20: 1315-1319.

Nordhaus, William D. 1994. Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of Climate Change,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Nordhaus, W. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming Policies.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Nordhaus, William. 2014. "Estimates of the social cost of carbon: concepts and results from the
DICE-2013R model and alternative approaches." Journal of the Association of Environmental and
Resource Economists, 1, no. 1/2: 273-312.

Nordhaus, William. 2015. “Climate clubs: Overcoming free-riding in international climate
policy.” American Economic Review, 105.4: 1339-70

Nordhaus, William. 2017. “The social cost of carbon: Updated estimates.” Proceedings of the U. S.
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 114 no. 7, 1518–1523.




                                               25
Nordhaus, William. 2017a. “Evolution of Assessments of the Economics of Global Warming:
Changes in the DICE model, 1992–2017” (No. w23319). National Bureau of Economic Research
and Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper.

Nordhaus, William and Andrew Moffat. 2017. “A Survey of Global Impacts of Climate Change:
Replication, Survey Methods, and a Statistical Analysis.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper and Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper.

Nordhaus, William and Paul Sztorc. 2013. DICE 2013R: Introduction and User’s Manual, October
2013, available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/homepage/
documents/DICE_Manual_100413r1.pdf.

Olsen, R., R. Sriver, M. Goes, N. Urban, D. Matthews, M. Haran, and K. Keller. 2012. "A Climate
Sensitivity Estimate Using Bayesian Fusion of Instrumental Observations and an Earth System
Model." Geophysical Research Letters 117(D04103): 1-11.

Paris Agreement. 2016. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, The Paris
Agreement, available at http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php.

Stern Review. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, UK.

Tol, R.S.J. 2009. “The Economic Impact of Climate Change,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23
(2): 29–51.




                                               26
                    .8

                                                        Actual
                    .7
                                                        Trend
CO2 emissions/GDP




                    .6



                    .5
                           Trend = -1.5 %
                                  per year
                    .4




                    .3
                    1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010      2020
Figure 1. Global trend and actual history for CO2/GDP ratio




                                                  27
                                            80
                                                        Base      Opt
                                            70
 Global industrial emissions (GtCO2/year)




                                                        T<2.5     Stern
                                            60


                                            50


                                            40


                                            30


                                            20


                                            10


                                            0
                                                 2010     2025   2040     2055    2070   2085   2100

Figure 2. Actual and projected emissions of CO2 in different scenarios
                                                                                                       ii
The two most ambitious scenarios require zero emissions by mid-century.




                                                                                 28
                                                    900
                                                                 Base        Opt
                                                    800
            Atmospheric concentrations, CO2 (ppm)

                                                                 T < 2.5     Stern
                                                    700

                                                    600

                                                    500

                                                    400

                                                    300

                                                    200

                                                    100

                                                     0
                                                          2010    2025     2040         2055   2070   2085   2100

Figure 3.Concentrations of CO2 in different scenarios
The two most ambitious scenarios require concentrations emissions close to current levels.




                                                                                   29
                                                4.5
                                                             Base     Opt
 Global mean temperature increase (from 1900,




                                                4.0
                                                             T<2.5    Stern
                                                3.5

                                                3.0

                                                2.5
                     ◦C)




                                                2.0

                                                1.5

                                                1.0

                                                0.5

                                                0.0
                                                      2010    2025   2040     2055        2070   2085   2100

Figure 4. Temperature change in different scenarios
The most ambitious scenarios cannot limit temperature to 2 ½ °C, and the cost-benefit
optimum with standard parameters has sharply rising temperatures.iii

{?? I see “From 1900” here and for Figure 6, but the data is plotted from approximately 2010.
??}




                                                                                     30
                                                         120
                                                                       DICE-2013R
  Industrial CO2 Emissions (billions of tons per year)




                                                                       MUP (average of 6 models)
                                                         100
                                                                       EMF (average of 11 models)
                                                                       DICE 2016R2
                                                          80



                                                          60



                                                          40



                                                          20



                                                           0
                                                               2000   2010   2020    2030    2040       2050   2060   2070   2080   2090   2100

Figure 5. Projected industrial CO2 emissions in baseline scenario, alternative models
The figure compares the projections of the most recent DICE models and two model
comparison exercises. The estimates from the MUP project are from Gillingham et al. (2015),
while the EMF-22 estimates are from Clarke et al. (2009).




                                                                                                   31
                                     5.0
                                                   RCP 8.5
                                                   DICE-2013R
                                     4.0           DICE-2016R
                                                   MUP
  Global mean temperature increase




                                                   EMF-22
                                     3.0
           (from 1900, ◦C)




                                     2.0




                                     1.0




                                     0.0
                                           2010   2020   2030   2040   2050    2060   2070   2080   2090   2100


Figure 6. Global mean temperature increase as projected by IPCC scenarios and integrated
assessment economic models
The figure compares the projections of the most recent DICE models, the IPCC high scenario
(RCP 8.5), and two model comparison exercises.




                                                                          32
        2,400
                                                   14


        2,000                                      12


                                                   10
        1,600
                                                    8


        1,200                                       6


                                                    4
          800
                                                    2

          400
                                                    0
                  2050    2100       2200                 2050      2100      2200
                  CO2 concentrations (ppm)              Temperature change (deg C)

Figure 7A. Boxplots for major uncertain variables.
The interpretation is that the line in the middle of the box is the median, while the shaded
region around the line is the standard error of the median. The dot is the mean. The box shows
the interquartile range, IQR (= Q3-Q1), while the fences (upper and lower bars) are at Q1 –
1.5×IQR and Q3 + 1.5×IQR. For a normal distribution, the fences contain 99.2% of the
distribution.iv




                                              33
          .24                                    120


          .20                                    100


          .16                                        80


          .12                                        60


          .08                                        40


          .04                                        20


          .00                                         0
                 2050    2100       2200                  2015         2020
                Damages as fraction of output    Social cost of carbon (2010$/GtCO2)

Figure 7B. Boxplots for major uncertain variables.
For interpretation, see Figure 7A.




                                                34
Economic variables                                          2015-2050     2050-2100
          Output growth                                         2.97%         1.92%
          Population growth                                     0.80%         0.25%
          Output per capita growth                              2.15%         1.67%
          Decarbonization rate                                 -1.49%        -1.42%

                                                                 2015          2100
           Real interest rate                                    5.1%          3.6%
           Price of backstop technology                          550           357

Geophysical variables                                        Parameter value
          Equilibrium temperature sensitivity (°C)                              3.1
          Transient temperature sensitivity (°C)                                1.7
          Average carbon retention rate (%)                                      67

Notes on variables
          Output is world output in constant US international $.
          Decarbonization rate is base CO2 emissions per real $ output.
          Real interest rate is the rate of return on capital (% per year).
          Price of backstop technology is the price at which CO2
            emissions are zero.
          Equilibrium temperature sensitivity is the equilibrium rise in
            global mean surface temperature for a doubling of
            atmospheric CO2 concentrations.
          Transient temperature sensitivity is the rise in
            global mean surface temperature for a doubling of
            atmospheric CO2 concentrations after 70 years.
          Average carbon retention rate is the percentage of cumulative
             CO2 emissions that remains in the atmosphere for
             emissions between 2010 and 2100.
Table 1. Key assumptions for DICE-2016R2 model for best-guess casev




                                                     35
                                                                                                   Difference from base
                                                                                    Damages
                                                                       Abatement      plus                     Damages plus
           Scenario                    Objective      Damages             cost     abatement     Objective      abatement
 Base or business as usual              4,491.07          134.2                0.4       134.6           0.0             0.0

 Optimal controls                       4,520.56             84.6            20.1       104.7          29.5            29.9

 2.5 degree maximum
          Maximum (b)                   4,441.32             43.1           134.6       177.8         -49.7            -43.2
          Max for 100 years (b)         4,456.81             45.7           117.6       163.3         -34.3            -28.8

 Stern Review abatement                                      46.2           155.7       201.9            na            -67.3

All figures are trillions of US international $ in 2010 prices.


Table 2. Abatement, Damages, and Net Impacts of Different Policy Scenarios, Best-Guess
Parameters.vi
The estimates in the last two columns represent the present value of the difference in the
scenario from the base or business as usual case. The present values for damages and
abatement use the discount factors from the base case. For this reason, the differences from
base in the last two columns differ slightly for alternative scenarios. Note that the objective
function for the Stern case is not applicable (na) because the preference parameters in that case
differ from the other cases.




                                                                  36
          Scenario                        2015       2020       2025       2030         2050

 Base parameters
         Baseline (a)                      30.0       35.7       42.3       49.5         98.3
         Optimal controls (b)              29.5       35.3       41.8       49.2         99.6

 2.5 degree maximum
         Maximum (b)                     184.1       229.0      284.0      351.0      1,008.4
         Max for 50 years (b)            147.2       183.2      227.2      280.4        773.5

 Stern Review discounting
         Uncalibrated (b)                256.5       299.6      340.7      381.7       615.6

 Alternative discount rates (a)
         2.5%                            111.1       133.4      148.7      162.3       242.6
         3%                                71.6       85.3       94.4      104.0       161.7
         4%                                34.0       39.6       44.5       49.8         82.1
         5%                                18.9       21.7       24.8       28.1         48.4

Table 3. Global social cost of carbon by different assumptions for best-guess parameters
 The social cost of carbon is measured in 2010 international US dollars. The years at the top
refer to the date at which emissions take place. Therefore, $30.0 is the cost of emissions in 2015
in terms of consumption in 2015. (a) Calculation along the reference path with current policy.
In the baseline calculation, welfare is maximized as in (1) but when damages are set to zero for
the optimization but included in the ex post calculation. (b) Calculation along the optimized
emissions path. Note that for the temperature ceilings, the damages are included. By putting a
cap on temperature, this implicitly assumes that the damages are infinite beyond that limit.vii




                                               37
A. Results for Baseline Scenarioviii
                                                  DICE best
                                         Mean                 50%ile   St Dev   IQ range   Coef of Var
Variable                                              guess
 SCC, 2015                                34.5        30.0     25.2     32.5       39.3         0.94
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                   4.22        4.10     4.08     1.12       2.01         0.22
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)       969.6       826.6    829.8    413.3        488         0.12
 World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $)   1,433         759      766    1,660      1,056         0.67
 Emissions 2100                          109.4        70.9     71.1    105.2      114.5         0.63
Damages, 2100 (% output)                  4.3%         3.8%    3.2%     3.7%       4.9%         0.67
Real interest rate, 2100 (%/yr)           3.6%         3.6%    3.6%     1.6%       2.2%         0.33
 Objective (trillions, 2010$)            3,838       4,491    4,513    2,978      6,069         0.62


B. Results for Optimal Scenarioix

                                                DICE best
                                           Mean               50%ile   St Dev   IQ range Coef of Var
Variable                                            guess
 SCC, 2015                                 32.5     29.6        24.3    28.6       37.0        0.88
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                    3.50     3.50        3.43    0.75       2.01        0.22
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)        669.8    633.1       624.8   188.5        488        0.12
 World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $)    1,496      766         772   1,753      1,056        0.67
 Emissions 2100                            20.6     14.1        11.1    34.1      114.5        0.63
Damages, 2100 (% output)                   2.6%      2.8%       2.4%    1.4%       4.9%        0.67
Real interest rate, 2100 (%/yr)            3.7%      3.6%       3.7%    1.7%       2.2%        0.33
 Objective (trillions, 2010$)             3,873    4,519       4,533   2,982      6,069        0.62


Table 4. Statistics for major variables
The table shows statistics for major variables from the discretized uncertainty analysis for
baseline and optimal scenarios. For a more complete tabulation, see appendix tables. “DICE best
guess” sets the uncertain parameters at their expected value.




                                                   38
A. From zero uncertainty
                                                                          Damage                   Global
                                    Temp,    CO2 conc, Output, Emissions,            Interest
                       SCC, 2015                                          fraction,               income
Fraction (if only                    2100      2100     2100     2100               rate, 2100
uncertainty)                                                                2100                    (PV)

Productivity                38%        60%        61%       37%       57%       37%        65%        91%

Damage                      54%         1%         1%        2%        1%       57%         6%         2%

Equil. Temp. Sens.          35%        61%         0%        1%        1%       35%         4%         2%

Carbon cycle                 6%        23%        14%        0%        0%       14%         1%         1%

Emissions intensity          0%        17%        17%        0%       19%       10%         2%         1%

All                        100%       100%       100%      100%      100%      100%      100%        100%


B. From full uncertainty
                                                                           Damage                  Global
                                     Temp,    CO2 conc, Output, Emissions,            Interest
Fraction (if only       SCC, 2015                                          fraction,              income
                                      2100      2100     2100     2100               rate, 2100
uncertainty reduced)                                                         2100                   (PV)
Productivity                  37%       39%        80%       98%       83%       35%       93%        97%
Damage                        51%       20%        43%       64%       50%       64%       37%        19%

Equil. Temp. Sens.            35%       42%        43%       65%       50%       32%       37%        19%
Carbon cycle                  22%       23%        45%       65%       50%       26%       37%        19%

Emissions intensity           16%       21%        44%       67%       50%       24%       41%        18%

Table 5. Impact on uncertainty of individual uncertain variables
Table shows the contribution (as fraction of total uncertainty) for each uncertainty. Panel A
starts from zero uncertainty and then introduces the impact of adding the uncertainty about a
single variable from a base of no uncertainty (one at a time). Panel B shows the reduction in
uncertainty starting from full (five-variable) uncertainty and eliminating the uncertainty about
a single variable (one at a time).x




                                                     39
                                                     Mean of variable
                                     This study
Variable                             DICE-2016 DICE-2013       FUND           GCAM     IGSM   MERGE    WITCH   Average
 SCC, 2015                               34.49    21.87         2.75             na      na       na   15.47    13.36
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                    4.22     3.88        3.72           3.94    3.60     4.31    3.75     3.87
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)       969.6    939.3       906.9           860.7   810.8    998.6   854.1    895.1
 Emissions 2100                          109.4    127.7       142.7            90.2    71.3   168.7     90.5    115.2

                                           Standard deviation of variable
                                     This study
Variable                             DICE-2016 DICE-2013           FUND       GCAM     IGSM   MERGE    WITCH   Average
 SCC, 2015                               32.55       15.25          2.17         na      na       na    4.46     7.30
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                    1.12       1.10          0.77       1.02    0.81     1.01    0.73     0.91
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)       413.3       318.3        353.8       222.1   130.9    325.1   134.2    247.4
 Emissions 2100                          105.2        92.5        145.8        52.7    29.8   130.0     34.6     80.9

                                       Coefficient of variation of variable
                                     This study
Variable                             DICE-2016 DICE-2013             FUND     GCAM    IGSM    MERGE    WITCH   Average
 SCC, 2015                                 0.94         0.70          0.79       na     na       na     0.29     0.55
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                    0.26         0.28          0.21     0.26   0.23     0.23     0.19     0.23
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)         0.43         0.34          0.39     0.26   0.16     0.33     0.16     0.28
 Emissions 2100                            0.96         0.72          1.02     0.58   0.42     0.77     0.38     0.70
Table 6. Comparative statistics from current study and other modelsxi




                                                             40
                                            Appendix.

   A. Response Surface Method to Calculate Distributions

        The study uses an approach with exact discretized distributions of the five
uncertain variables. We test the accuracy of the approach using a response surface
method. This approach is used extensively for the analysis of complex engineering and
biochemical problems (for example, the strength of Roman cement) and was developed
for this purpose in Gillingham et al. (2015). The basic idea is to fit a high-order
polynomial function of the uncertain variables to the 3125 grid points using a response
surface function (RSF), and then estimate the distribution of the output variables using a
Monte Carlo with a large number of draws (N = 1,000,000).
        Table A-1 compares the results of the two approaches. The first four columns
show estimated means and standard deviations for major variables with the discretized
version used in the text (“Discretized”) and in the RSF approach (“Monte Carlo”). The
fifth and sixth columns show the ratios of the means and standard deviations for the
two approaches. All estimates using the discretized distributions are seen to be highly
reliable using this technique. The means are essentially identical. The standard
deviations differ by at most 3%. The SRF tends to have a slightly lower standard
deviation.

                                                                                    Ratio       Ratio
                             Monte Carlo Monte Carlo   Discretized   Discretized
                                                                                   (MC/D)     (MC/D)
      Outcome variable         Mean        St Dev        Mean         St Dev        Mean       St Dev
      Damage fraction 2100      0.0430      0.0361        0.0430       0.0364         1.000       0.994
      Output 2100              1,432.5      1,661.5      1,433.0       1,651.6        1.000       1.006
      Carbon conc 2100         2,064.7        866.2      2,065.3         879.1        1.000       0.985
      Emissions 2100             109.4        103.3        109.4         104.7        1.000       0.986
      Temperature 2100           4.217        1.083        4.216         1.117        1.000       0.970
      SCC 2015                  34.525      32.209        34.489       32.185         1.001       1.001


Table A-1. Comparison of statistics with discretized quintile distribution and response
surface methodxii




                                                 41
   B. Supplementary Tables




                                       Standard
 Uncertain parameter       Average                      Q1       Q2       Q3       Q4       Q5
                                       deviation
Damage coefficient
        2
(Y/(°C)                      0.0023      0.0014     0.0007       0.0017   0.0023   0.0029   0.0039

 Productivity growth
(%/year)                      1.52%        1.12%        -0.05%    0.92%    1.52%    2.12%    3.09%
 Equilibrium
temperature sensitivity
(°C/2xCO2)                     3.10         0.84         2.10      2.63     3.10     3.48     4.41

 Rate of decarbonization
(% per year)                  -1.52%       0.32%        -1.97%   -1.69%   -1.52%   -1.35%   -1.07%

 Carbon in intermediate
reservoir (GtC)               360.0         97.0        241.7     302.2    360.0    400.6    507.7


Table A-2. Means, standard deviations, and quintile values of uncertain variables xiii




                                                   42
                                                                  DICE best    Error of
                  Variable                Mean        50%ile
                                                                   guess      best guess
Damage parameter                            0.0023      0.0023        0.0023         0.0%
ETS                                           3.10        3.10          3.10         0.0%
Productiivity parameter                     0.0760      0.0760        0.0760         0.0%
Carbon cycle parameter                      360.04      360.00        360.00         0.0%
 Decarbonization rate (% per year)         (0.0152)    (0.0152)      (0.0152)        0.0%
SCC, 2015                                    34.49       25.17         29.97       -13.1%
SCC, 2020                                    40.60       29.66         35.75       -12.0%
Temperature, 2050 (°C)                        2.12        2.12          2.13         0.5%
Temperature, 2100 (°C)                        4.22        4.08          4.10        -2.6%
Temperature, 2200 (°C)                        6.56        6.21          6.71         2.4%
Carbon concentrations, 2050 (GtC)         1,205.56    1,198.28      1,176.61        -2.4%
Carbon concentrations, 2100 (GtC)         2,065.30    1,767.47      1,760.67       -14.7%
Carbon concentrations, 2200 (GtC)         2,741.84    2,606.60      2,650.64        -3.3%
Carbon concentrations, 2050 (ppm)           565.99      562.57        552.40        -2.4%
Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)           969.62      829.80        826.61       -14.7%
Carbon concentrations, 2200 (ppm)         1,287.25    1,223.76      1,244.43        -3.3%
World output, 2050 (trillions 2010 $)       334.68      293.56        292.72       -12.5%
World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $)     1,433.02      766.29        758.81       -47.0%
Emissions 2050                               66.95       58.26         58.19       -13.1%
Emissions 2100                              109.42       71.10         70.91       -35.2%
Emissions 2200                               42.37       23.91         60.66        43.2%
 Damages, 2050 (% output)                    1.03%       0.88%         1.03%        -0.7%
 Damages, 2100 (% output)                    4.30%       3.22%         3.82%       -11.0%
 Damages, 2200 (% output)                    8.34%       5.75%         7.35%       -11.9%
Emissions intensity, 2050 (CO2/$)           0.3503      0.3503        0.3503         0.0%
Emissions intensity, 2100 (CO2/$)           0.1047      0.1012        0.1012        -3.3%
Emissions intensity, 2200 (CO2/$)           0.0554      0.0511        0.0511        -7.7%
Real interest rate, 2015 (%/yr)                5.1%        5.1%          5.1%       -0.8%
Real interest rate, 2100 (%/yr)                3.6%        3.6%          3.6%        0.6%
Objective (trillions, 2010$)               3,837.5     4,513.3       4,491.0        17.0%



Table A-3. Error of best guess approach to DICE model
The last column shows the error from using a best guess rather than the uncertain
version of the DICE-2016R model. The error is small where the distribution of the
variable is close to symmetrical, but errors arise from skewed distributions.xiv




                                          43
{?? The entry for “Productivity parameter” in Tables A-3, A-4, and A-5 contains a typo.
??}

      The detailed statistics of the major variables are as follows in Table A-4 for the
baseline run and for the optimal case in Table A-5.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            DICE best
                                         Mean        St Dev      1%ile        5%ile        10%ile        25%ile      50%ile      75%ile      90%ile      95%ile      99%ile      IQ range     Coef of Var
Variable                                                                                                                                                                                                      guess
 Damage parameter                        0.00227     0.00135     0.00061      0.00061      0.00061       0.00141     0.00227     0.00242     0.00464     0.00464     0.00464      0.00181            0.60     0.00227
 ETS                                        3.101       0.843       2.008        2.008        2.008        2.516       3.100        3.388       4.491       4.491       4.491        1.380           0.27        3.100
 Productiivity parameter                    0.076       0.056      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       0.043       0.076        0.098       0.165       0.165       0.165        0.101           0.74        0.076
 Carbon cycle parameter                     360.0        97.0       233.6        233.6        233.6        293.0       360.0        394.4       519.3       519.3       519.3        160.8           0.27        360.0
Decarbonization rate (% per year)            -1.5%        0.3%       -2.0%        -2.0%        -2.0%        -1.7%       -1.5%        -1.3%       -1.1%       -1.1%       -1.1%         0.7%         -0.21         -1.5%
 SCC, 2015                                    34.5       32.5          3.4          5.0          7.1         13.0        25.2         44.3        72.6        99.8      156.1         39.3           0.94        29.97
 SCC, 2020                                    40.6       37.4          4.2          6.1          8.3         15.5        29.7         52.5        85.5      116.1       180.8         46.4           0.92        35.75
 Temperature, 2050 (°C)                       2.12       0.29         1.50         1.64         1.72         1.90        2.12         2.33        2.50        2.60        2.74        0.69           0.14          2.13
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                       4.22       1.12         2.27         2.64         2.88         3.38        4.08         4.88        5.80        6.33        7.16        2.24           0.26          4.10
 Temperature, 2200 (°C)                       6.56       2.29         2.66         3.23         3.76         4.80        6.21         8.12        9.63      10.92       12.29         4.89           0.35          6.71
 Carbon concentrations, 2050 (GtC)          1,206         122          978       1,021        1,057         1,112       1,198       1,287       1,371       1,435       1,506          267           0.10        1,177
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (GtC)          2,065         880       1,086        1,194        1,263         1,436       1,767       2,265       3,651       3,956       4,355        1,071           0.43        1,761
 Carbon concentrations, 2200 (GtC)          2,742       1,116       1,114        1,247        1,338         1,691       2,607       3,828       4,311       4,509       4,751        2,581           0.41        2,651
 Carbon concentrations, 2050 (ppm)             566          57         459          479          496          522         563          604         644         674         707         267           0.10           552
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)             970        413          510          561          593          674         830       1,063       1,714       1,857       2,045        1,071           0.43           827
 Carbon concentrations, 2200 (ppm)          1,287         524          523          586          628          794       1,224       1,797       2,024       2,117       2,231        2,581           0.41        1,244
 World output, 2050 (trillions 2010 $)      334.7       170.1       151.9        155.2        156.5        221.7       293.6        358.4       650.4       655.9       659.9        203.2           0.51        292.7
 World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $)    1,433.0     1,660.0       160.0        167.7        171.0        393.6       766.3      1,231.6     4,759.1     4,982.8     5,139.2      1,063.9           1.16        758.8
Emissions 2050                               66.95       35.04       26.21        29.18        31.04         41.72       58.26       75.54     129.27      138.36      152.28         46.36          0.52        58.19
Emissions 2100                             109.42      105.17        10.55        13.60        15.69         32.21       71.10     131.31      311.76      326.28      335.65       117.71           0.96        70.91
Emissions 2200                               42.37       46.24         0.00         0.00         0.00         5.45       23.91       65.02     116.20      145.93      156.45         65.02          1.09        60.66
Damages, 2050 (% output)                    1.03%       0.70%       0.17%        0.22%        0.27%         0.51%       0.88%       1.36%       2.07%       2.52%       3.13%        1.13%           0.67        1.03%
Damages, 2100 (% output)                    4.30%       3.66%       0.43%        0.70%        0.95%         1.72%       3.22%       5.62%       9.03%      11.51%      18.21%        4.92%           0.85        3.82%
Damages, 2200 (% output)                    8.34%       7.94%       0.59%        1.08%        1.57%         2.92%       5.75%      10.98%      18.03%      24.86%      37.79%        9.89%           0.95        7.35%
Emissions intensity, 2050 (CO2/$)            0.350       0.000       0.350        0.350        0.350         0.350       0.350       0.350       0.350       0.350       0.350        0.000          0.00        0.350
Emissions intensity, 2100 (CO2/$)            0.105       0.027       0.068        0.068        0.068         0.088       0.101       0.118       0.148       0.148       0.148        0.050          0.26        0.101
Emissions intensity, 2200 (CO2/$)            0.055       0.022       0.028        0.028        0.028         0.041       0.051       0.065       0.092       0.092       0.092        0.037          0.40        0.051
Real interest rate, 2015 (%/yr)               5.1%        1.2%        3.3%         3.5%         3.6%          4.4%        5.1%        5.6%        7.0%        7.1%        7.1%         2.1%          0.23          5.1%
Real interest rate, 2100 (%/yr)               3.6%        1.6%        1.3%         1.4%         1.4%          2.6%        3.6%        4.3%        6.1%        6.3%        6.4%         3.0%          0.44          3.6%
Objective (trillions, 2010$)               3,837.5     2,977.5    -1,394.2     -1,167.1     -1,072.7      2,554.3     4,513.3      5,578.5     7,735.1     7,769.6     7,793.5      6,745.6          0.78      4,491.0




Table A-4. Statistics of major variables from uncertainty analysis for the baseline run.
“DICE best guess” is the best guess or standard DICE model.xv




                                                                                                        44
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DICE best
Variable                                 Mean         St Dev      1%ile        5%ile        10%ile       25%ile      50%ile      75%ile       90%ile      95%ile      99%ile      IQ range     Coef of Var
                                                                                                                                                                                                               guess
 Damage parameter                        0.00227      0.00135     0.00061      0.00061      0.00061      0.00141     0.00227     0.00242      0.00464     0.00464     0.00464      0.00181            0.60    0.00227
 ETS                                        3.101        0.843       2.008        2.008        2.008       2.516       3.100        3.388        4.491       4.491       4.491        1.380           0.27       3.100
 Productiivity parameter                    0.076        0.056      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      0.043       0.076        0.098        0.165       0.165       0.165        0.101           0.74       0.076
 Carbon cycle parameter                     360.0         97.0       233.6        233.6        233.6       293.0       360.0        394.4        519.3       519.3       519.3        160.8           0.27       360.0
Decarbonization rate (% per year)            -1.5%         0.3%       -2.0%        -2.0%        -2.0%       -1.7%       -1.5%        -1.3%        -1.1%       -1.1%       -1.1%         0.7%         -0.21        -1.5%
 SCC, 2015                                    32.5        28.6          3.4          5.0          7.1        13.1        24.3         42.1         66.8        90.5      141.0         37.0           0.88       29.56
 SCC, 2020                                    38.3        32.7          4.3          6.2          8.4        15.5        29.2         50.1         78.2      104.0       161.4         44.0           0.85       35.36
 Temperature, 2050 (°C)                       2.03        0.27         1.45         1.59         1.67        1.83        2.03         2.22         2.39        2.48        2.64        0.64           0.13         2.04
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                       3.50        0.75         2.11         2.41         2.59        2.96        3.43         3.95         4.47        4.85        5.68        1.55           0.21         3.50
 Temperature, 2200 (°C)                       4.36        1.18         2.38         2.75         2.99        3.51        4.18         5.00         5.94        6.63        7.80        2.25           0.27         4.18
 Carbon concentrations, 2050 (GtC)          1,133          114          913          957          989       1,048       1,125       1,208        1,285       1,335       1,422          251           0.10       1,104
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (GtC)          1,427          402          941       1,018        1,073        1,179       1,331       1,548        1,839       2,174       3,098          530           0.28       1,348
 Carbon concentrations, 2200 (GtC)          1,461          449          924       1,006        1,063        1,177       1,345       1,604        1,991       2,348       3,222          598           0.31       1,297
 Carbon concentrations, 2050 (ppm)             532           54         428          449          464         492         528          567          603         627         668         118           0.05          518
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)             670         189          442          478          504         554         625          727          864      1,020       1,455          249           0.13          633
 Carbon concentrations, 2200 (ppm)             686         211          434          472          499         552         631          753          935      1,102       1,513          281           0.14          609
 World output, 2050 (trillions 2010 $)      335.0        170.4       152.0        155.1        156.5       221.8       293.6        358.3        650.5       655.7       659.8        203.2           0.51       292.8
 World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $)    1,495.9      1,753.0       163.8        168.9        171.6       397.8       771.8      1,234.6      4,929.7     4,997.9     5,139.4      1,065.7           1.17       765.8
Emissions 2050                               45.58        25.49       11.59        17.20        20.61        27.18       39.20       55.69        84.55     101.76      123.92         38.49          0.56       39.65
Emissions 2100                               20.62        34.06         0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00       11.11       25.75        50.18       72.88     189.27         25.75          1.65       14.08
Emissions 2200                                 4.53        9.30         0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00         5.22       13.08       23.12       47.27         5.22          2.05          -
Damages, 2050 (% output)                    0.93%        0.58%       0.16%        0.22%        0.27%        0.48%       0.82%       1.22%        1.78%       2.12%       2.57%        1.00%           0.63       0.94%
Damages, 2100 (% output)                    2.58%        1.41%       0.40%        0.65%        0.87%        1.47%       2.42%       3.45%        4.48%       5.22%       6.60%        2.81%           0.55       2.78%
Damages, 2200 (% output)                    3.48%        1.79%       0.56%        0.99%        1.36%        2.19%       3.23%       4.47%        5.91%       6.82%       8.84%        3.48%           0.51       3.75%
Emissions intensity, 2050 (CO2/$)            0.350        0.000       0.350        0.350        0.350        0.350       0.350       0.350        0.350       0.350       0.350        0.000          0.00       0.350
Emissions intensity, 2100 (CO2/$)            0.105        0.027       0.068        0.068        0.068        0.088       0.101       0.118        0.148       0.148       0.148        0.050          0.26       0.101
Emissions intensity, 2200 (CO2/$)            0.055        0.022       0.028        0.028        0.028        0.041       0.051       0.065        0.092       0.092       0.092        0.037          0.40       0.051
Real interest rate, 2015 (%/yr)               5.1%         1.2%        3.4%         3.5%         3.6%         4.4%        5.1%        5.6%         7.0%        7.1%        7.1%         2.1%          0.23         5.1%
Real interest rate, 2100 (%/yr)               3.7%         1.7%        1.4%         1.4%         1.4%         2.7%        3.7%        4.4%         6.5%        6.5%        6.6%         3.0%          0.46         3.6%
Objective (trillions, 2010$)               3,872.6      2,981.5    -1,306.7     -1,139.4     -1,061.8     2,591.5     4,533.1      5,587.2      7,755.7     7,776.0     7,794.0      6,726.7          0.77     4,519.1




Table A-5. Statistics of major variables from uncertainty analysis for the optimal run. xvi




                                                                                                         45
Year                                        2015       2020      2025      2030      2035      2040      2045      2050      2055      2060      2065      2070      2075      2080      2085      2090      2095      2100
 Industrial Emissions GTCO2 per year       35.7       39.4      42.9      46.4      49.6      52.7      55.6      58.2      60.6      62.7      64.6      66.3      67.7      68.8      69.7      70.4      70.8      70.9
 Atmospheric concentration C (ppm)        399.5      418.5     438.3     459.2     481.0     503.9     527.7     552.4     577.9     604.1     630.9     658.2     685.8     713.8     742.0     770.2     798.5     826.6
 Atmospheric Temperature                   0.85       1.02      1.19      1.37      1.55      1.74      1.93      2.13      2.32      2.52      2.72      2.93      3.13      3.33      3.52      3.72      3.91      4.10
 Output Net Net)                            105        125       147       172       199       228       259       293       329       367       408       451       497       544       595       647       702       759
 Climate Damages fraction output         0.0016     0.0023    0.0032    0.0042    0.0055    0.0069    0.0085    0.0103    0.0123    0.0145    0.0168    0.0194    0.0222    0.0251    0.0282    0.0314    0.0348    0.0382
 Consumption Per Capita                   10.50      11.84     13.31     14.89     16.61     18.47     20.46     22.59     24.87     27.30     29.87     32.60     35.48     38.51     41.69     45.03     48.52     52.16
 Carbon Price (per t CO2)                  2.00       2.21      2.44      2.69      2.97      3.28      3.62      4.00      4.42      4.88      5.38      5.94      6.56      7.25      8.00      8.83      9.75     10.77
 Emissions Control Rate                    0.03       0.03      0.03      0.04      0.04      0.04      0.05      0.05      0.06      0.06      0.06      0.07      0.08      0.08      0.09      0.10      0.10      0.11
 Social cost of carbon                    29.97      35.75     42.26     49.53     57.60     66.48     76.21     86.81     98.31    110.71    124.05    138.33    153.57    169.77    186.94    205.09    224.23    244.37
 Interest Rate                            0.051      0.050     0.049     0.048     0.047     0.046     0.045     0.044     0.043     0.042     0.041     0.040     0.039     0.039     0.038     0.037     0.037     0.036
 Population                               7,403      7,853     8,265     8,639     8,977     9,280     9,550     9,791    10,004    10,193    10,359    10,505    10,633    10,745    10,844    10,929    11,004    11,069
 TFP                                       5.12       5.54      5.98      6.44      6.93      7.45      7.98      8.54      9.12      9.73     10.36     11.01     11.68     12.38     13.10     13.84     14.60     15.38
 Output gross,gross                         105        125       148       173       200       229       261       296       333       373       415       460       508       558       612       668       727       789
 Change tfp                               0.076      0.074     0.072     0.071     0.069     0.067     0.065     0.064     0.062     0.061     0.059     0.058     0.056     0.055     0.054     0.052     0.051     0.050
 Capital                                    223        268       319       375       437       505       580       660       747       841       941     1,049     1,162     1,283     1,411     1,545     1,687     1,835
 s                                         0.26       0.26      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24
 I                                        27.27      32.07     37.35     43.14     49.44     56.26     63.61     71.51     79.95     88.96     98.52    108.65    119.35    130.62    142.46    154.87    167.86    181.40
 Y gross net                                105        125       147       172       199       228       259       293       329       367       408       451       497       544       595       647       702       759
 damages                                   0.17       0.29      0.47      0.73      1.09      1.58      2.21      3.04      4.08      5.39      6.99      8.94     11.26     14.02     17.24     20.98     25.28     30.18
 damfrac                                 0.0016     0.0023    0.0032    0.0042    0.0055    0.0069    0.0085    0.0103    0.0123    0.0145    0.0168    0.0194    0.0222    0.0251    0.0282    0.0314    0.0348    0.0382
 abatement                                 0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01      0.01      0.02      0.02      0.03      0.03      0.04
 sigma                                     0.35       0.32      0.30      0.28      0.26      0.24      0.22      0.21      0.19      0.18      0.17      0.15      0.14      0.13      0.13      0.12      0.11      0.10
 Forcings                                  2.46       2.74      3.01      3.29      3.57      3.84      4.12      4.39      4.66      4.92      5.18      5.44      5.69      5.93      6.16      6.39      6.61      6.82
 Other Forcings                            0.50       0.53      0.56      0.59      0.62      0.65      0.68      0.71      0.74      0.76      0.79      0.82      0.85      0.88      0.91      0.94      0.97      1.00
 Period utilty                             0.45       0.49      0.53      0.56      0.59      0.62      0.65      0.68      0.70      0.72      0.74      0.76      0.78      0.79      0.81      0.82      0.83      0.85
 Consumption                              77.73      93.00    109.97    128.67    149.14    171.37    195.39    221.21    248.83    278.24    309.46    342.46    377.24    413.80    452.11    492.16    533.93    577.40
 Objective                             4,491.07
 Land emissions                            2.60       2.30      2.04      1.80      1.59      1.41      1.25      1.11      0.98      0.87      0.77      0.68      0.60      0.53      0.47      0.42      0.37      0.33
 Cumulative ind emissions                   400        449       502       561       624       692       764       840       919     1,002     1,087     1,175     1,266     1,358     1,452     1,547     1,643     1,739
 Cumulative total emissions                 500        552       609       670       736       806       880       957     1,038     1,122     1,209     1,298     1,389     1,483     1,577     1,673     1,769     1,866
 Atmospheric concentrations Gt              851        891       934       978     1,025     1,073     1,124     1,177     1,231     1,287     1,344     1,402     1,461     1,520     1,580     1,641     1,701     1,761
 Atmospheric concentrations ppm             400        418       438       459       481       504       528       552       578       604       631       658       686       714       742       770       798       827
 Total Emissions GTCO2 per year                38       42        45        48        51        54        57        59        62        64        65        67        68        69        70        71        71        71
 Atmospheric concentrations upper           460        471       485       501       519       539       561       585       610       636       664       693       723       754       786       819       852       886
 Atmospheric concentrations lower         1,740      1,741     1,741     1,742     1,743     1,744     1,746     1,747     1,748     1,750     1,752     1,754     1,756     1,759     1,762     1,765     1,768     1,771
 Atmospheric fraction since 1850           0.53       0.55      0.57      0.58      0.59      0.60      0.61      0.61      0.62      0.62      0.63      0.63      0.63      0.63      0.63      0.63      0.63      0.63
 Atmospheric fraction since 2010             -        0.77      0.76      0.74      0.73      0.73      0.72      0.71      0.71      0.70      0.70      0.69      0.69      0.68      0.68      0.67      0.67      0.67


Table A-6. Detailed results for baseline run by time periodxvii




                                                                                                           46
Year                                        2015       2020      2025      2030      2035      2040      2045      2050      2055      2060      2065      2070      2075      2080      2085      2090      2095      2100
 Industrial Emissions GTCO2 per year       35.7       33.3      35.3      37.0      38.3      39.2      39.7      39.7      39.2      38.3      36.8      35.0      32.6      29.8      26.6      22.9      18.8      14.3
 Atmospheric concentration C (ppm)        399.5      418.5     434.4     450.8     467.6     484.6     501.6     518.4     534.8     550.7     565.7     579.8     592.7     604.3     614.3     622.7     629.2     633.7
 Atmospheric Temperature                   0.85       1.02      1.18      1.35      1.52      1.70      1.87      2.04      2.20      2.37      2.53      2.69      2.84      2.99      3.13      3.26      3.39      3.50
 Output Net Net)                            105        125       147       172       199       228       259       293       329       367       408       452       498       546       597       651       707       766
 Climate Damages fraction output         0.0016     0.0023    0.0032    0.0042    0.0053    0.0065    0.0079    0.0094    0.0110    0.0127    0.0145    0.0164    0.0183    0.0203    0.0222    0.0241    0.0260    0.0279
 Consumption Per Capita                   10.49      11.83     13.28     14.87     16.58     18.43     20.41     22.54     24.81     27.23     29.81     32.53     35.42     38.46     41.67     45.05     48.59     52.31
 Carbon Price (per t CO2)                  2.01      35.30     41.85     49.20     57.40     66.49     76.52     87.54     99.58    112.70    126.94    142.33    158.93    176.76    195.86    216.27    238.02    261.15
 Emissions Control Rate                    0.03       0.18      0.21      0.23      0.26      0.29      0.32      0.35      0.39      0.43      0.47      0.51      0.56      0.60      0.65      0.71      0.76      0.82
 Social cost of carbon                    29.51      35.30     41.85     49.20     57.40     66.49     76.52     87.54     99.58    112.70    126.94    142.33    158.92    176.75    195.85    216.26    238.01    261.14
 Interest Rate                            0.051      0.050     0.049     0.048     0.047     0.046     0.045     0.044     0.043     0.042     0.041     0.040     0.040     0.039     0.038     0.038     0.037     0.036
 Population                               7,403      7,853     8,265     8,639     8,977     9,280     9,550     9,791    10,004    10,193    10,359    10,505    10,633    10,745    10,844    10,929    11,004    11,069
 TFP                                       5.12       5.54      5.98      6.44      6.93      7.45      7.98      8.54      9.12      9.73     10.36     11.01     11.68     12.38     13.10     13.84     14.60     15.38
 Output gross,gross                         105        125       148       173       200       230       262       296       334       373       416       462       510       561       615       672       732       795
 Change tfp                               0.076      0.074     0.072     0.071     0.069     0.067     0.065     0.064     0.062     0.061     0.059     0.058     0.056     0.055     0.054     0.052     0.051     0.050
 Capital                                    223        269       319       376       439       507       583       664       753       848       950     1,060     1,177     1,301     1,434     1,574     1,722     1,879
 s                                         0.26       0.26      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.25      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24      0.24
 I                                        27.37      32.17     37.49     43.32     49.69     56.59     64.05     72.08     80.70     89.91     99.74    110.20    121.30    133.06    145.49    158.58    172.35    186.75
 Y gross net                                105        125       147       172       199       228       260       294       330       369       410       454       500       549       601       656       713       772
 damages                                   0.17       0.29      0.47      0.72      1.05      1.50      2.07      2.79      3.68      4.76      6.05      7.57      9.34     11.37     13.66     16.22     19.05     22.13
 damfrac                                 0.0016     0.0023    0.0032    0.0042    0.0053    0.0065    0.0079    0.0094    0.0110    0.0127    0.0145    0.0164    0.0183    0.0203    0.0222    0.0241    0.0260    0.0279
 abatement                                 0.00       0.10      0.15      0.21      0.30      0.41      0.55      0.73      0.96      1.24      1.59      2.00      2.50      3.09      3.79      4.61      5.55      6.64
 sigma                                     0.35       0.32      0.30      0.28      0.26      0.24      0.22      0.21      0.19      0.18      0.17      0.15      0.14      0.13      0.13      0.12      0.11      0.10
 Forcings                                  2.46       2.74      2.97      3.19      3.42      3.64      3.85      4.05      4.25      4.43      4.60      4.76      4.91      5.04      5.16      5.26      5.35      5.41
 Other Forcings                            0.50       0.53      0.56      0.59      0.62      0.65      0.68      0.71      0.74      0.76      0.79      0.82      0.85      0.88      0.91      0.94      0.97      1.00
 Period utilty                             0.45       0.49      0.53      0.56      0.59      0.62      0.65      0.68      0.70      0.72      0.74      0.76      0.78      0.79      0.81      0.82      0.84      0.85
 Consumption                              77.63      92.87    109.80    128.45    148.85    171.01    194.95    220.69    248.23    277.58    308.75    341.76    376.60    413.30    451.87    492.33    534.71    579.06
 Objective                             4,520.56
 Land emissions                            2.60       2.30      2.04      1.80      1.59      1.41      1.25      1.11      0.98      0.87      0.77      0.68      0.60      0.53      0.47      0.42      0.37      0.33
 Cumulative ind emissions                   400        449       494       542       593       645       699       753       807       860       913       963     1,011     1,055     1,096     1,132     1,163     1,189
 Cumulative total emissions                 500        552       601       652       705       759       815       871       926       981     1,034     1,086     1,134     1,180     1,221     1,258     1,290     1,316
 Atmospheric concentrations Gt              851        891       925       960       996     1,032     1,068     1,104     1,139     1,173     1,205     1,235     1,262     1,287     1,308     1,326     1,340     1,350
 Atmospheric concentrations ppm             400        418       434       451       468       485       502       518       535       551       566       580       593       604       614       623       629       634
 Total Emissions GTCO2 per year                38       36        37        39        40        41        41        41        40        39        38        36        33        30        27        23        19        15
 Atmospheric concentrations upper           460        471       485       500       516       534       552       571       590       609       629       648       668       686       704       721       736       750
 Atmospheric concentrations lower         1,740      1,741     1,741     1,742     1,743     1,744     1,745     1,747     1,748     1,750     1,751     1,753     1,755     1,757     1,760     1,762     1,764     1,767
 Atmospheric fraction since 1850           0.53       0.55      0.56      0.57      0.58      0.59      0.59      0.59      0.60      0.60      0.60      0.60      0.59      0.59      0.59      0.59      0.58      0.58
 Atmospheric fraction since 2010             -        0.77      0.74      0.72      0.71      0.70      0.69      0.68      0.68      0.67      0.66      0.66      0.65      0.64      0.63      0.63      0.62      0.61


Table A-7. Detailed results for optimal run by time periodxviii




                                                                                                           47
                                                Standard                                                                                              Coef of
                                        Mean                1%ile    5%ile    10%ile   25%ile   50%ile   75%ile   90%ile   95%ile   99%ile    IQ
Variable                                        deviation                                                                                               Var
 SCC, 2015                                28.65    20.84      3.31     5.39     7.38    13.45    23.76    37.99    55.95    70.69    96.71    32.60      0.73
 SCC, 2020                                33.25    23.74      3.66     6.30     8.62    15.81    27.87    44.19    64.53    80.10   111.82    37.89      0.71
 Temperature, 2050 (°C)                    1.63     0.25      1.12     1.25     1.31     1.45     1.65     1.81     1.99     2.00     2.15     0.56      0.15
 Temperature, 2100 (°C)                    2.12     0.49      1.19     1.42     1.48     1.76     2.13     2.50     2.80     2.90     3.20     1.07      0.23
 Temperature, 2200 (°C)                    1.76     0.91      0.04     0.20     0.42     1.13     1.83     2.43     2.91     3.20     3.77     2.23      0.52
 Carbon concentrations, 2050 (ppm)       872.06    66.75    774.07   775.42   775.75   835.56   864.96   912.16   972.80   973.27   973.75   136.74      0.08
 Carbon concentrations, 2100 (ppm)       863.47    73.42    753.32   754.48   754.75   825.06   857.82   908.74   971.77   972.22   972.67   154.27      0.09
 Carbon concentrations, 2200 (ppm)       857.93    73.14    748.32   749.44   749.70   819.66   852.23   902.93   965.91   966.35   966.80   153.49      0.09
 World output, 2050 (trillions 2010 $)   305.99   123.49    157.21   158.11   158.65   223.06   279.22   351.93   518.49   520.14   521.66   193.82      0.40
 World output, 2100 (trillions 2010 $) 1,219.13 1,123.53    194.96   197.78   199.31   454.27   776.86 1,343.30 3,343.80 3,363.75 3,378.19 1,145.52      0.92

Table A-8. Detailed results for maximum abatement runxix




                                                                               48
Learning                             Optimal carbon prices

structure          2015     2020      2025     2030        2035    2040    2045    2050

Learn then act     34.15     39.80    45.52    51.57       58.18   65.53   73.78   83.05

Act then learn     36.10     42.10    48.72    55.19       62.27   70.15   79.00   88.94


Note that Act then learn prices are not state contingent for 2015-2050.


Table A-9. Optimal carbon prices with and without learningxx




                                                      49
