NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTIONS, IDEOLOGY, AND TURNOVER IN THE U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
Alexander Bolton
John M. de Figueiredo
David E. Lewis
Working Paper 22932
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22932

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised February 2019

We thank Tom Balmat, Mauricio Bugarin, Bennett Byerley, Brady Dauzat, Mary Hawkins, John
Johnson, Mark Richardson, Sam Rosso, Jorge Streb, Alan Wiseman and audiences at Duke
University, the 2016 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, and the
2016 Conference on Empirical Legal Studies for help and advice. This work is supported by the
Smith Richardson Foundation and the National Science Foundation under Grants #1061600 and
#1061052. All errors that remain are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Alexander Bolton, John M. de Figueiredo, and David E. Lewis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Elections, Ideology, and Turnover in the U.S. Federal Government
Alexander Bolton, John M. de Figueiredo, and David E. Lewis
NBER Working Paper No. 22932
December 2016, Revised February 2019
JEL No. H11,H83,J45,J63,K29
ABSTRACT
A defining feature of public sector employment is the regular change in elected leadership. Yet,
we know little about how elections influence careers. We describe how elections can alter policy
outputs and disrupt civil servants’ influence over agency decisions, potentially shaping their
career choices. We use new data on federal career records between 1988 and 2011 to evaluate
how elections influence turnover decisions. We find large levels of stability in the civil service
but also pockets of employees that are responsive to presidential transitions. Senior career
employees in agencies with views divergent from the president’s appear most affected. In the first
three years of an administration, political factors such as elections, policy priorities, and political
ideological differences, are estimated to increase turnover in the senior civil service by 30.9% in
some agencies. We also find suggestive evidence that vacancies in high-level positions after
elections may induce lower-level executives to stay longer in hopes of advancing.

Alexander Bolton
Emory University
201 Dowman Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
alexander.bolton@duke.edu
John M. de Figueiredo
The Law School and Fuqua School
Duke University
210 Science Drive, Box 90360
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jdefig@duke.edu

David E. Lewis
Vanderbilt University
333 Commons Center
Nashville, TN 37203-5721
david.lewis@vanderbilt.edu

During President Trump’s first year, numerous media outlets relayed stories about senior
civil servants departing government (e.g., Friedman et al. 2017; Rein and Ba Tran 2017).
According to accounts, the departures were particularly pronounced in agencies such as the
Department of State and the Department of the Interior whose policies were perceived as out of
step with the new administration. The entire senior management team at the State Department
resigned rather than work for the new president (Buncombe 2017). A number of civil servants in
Interior quit in frustration after Secretary Ryan Zinke noted that his department had “30% of the
crew that’s not loyal to the flag” and reassigned scores of the agency’s most experienced
executives to less desirable positions (Rein and Ba Tran 2017; Halper 2018).
The visibility of departures during the Trump transition raises the important question of
how elections influence career decisions in the civil service and whether these stories are part of
a more general phenomenon. One of the defining features of public sector employment is the
regular change in executive leadership that coincides with the electoral cycle. Elections can bring
dramatic changes to the work environments of federal employees, from refocusing the mission of
organizations to the basics of personnel policy (e.g., hiring freezes, new civil service rules). Do
elections create high levels of turnover among career civil servants?
The consequences of electoral politics are potentially important since departures can
diminish expertise in administrative agencies and damage their ability to carry out key

2

functions.1 Substantial turnover in any organization can delay long term planning and disrupt
team production. The consequences of failure in government, however, are often more dramatic
and widely felt for people outside the organization. Veterans do not get good health care and
retirees wait months for benefits. Dangerous problems with infrastructure fester and foreign hot
spots simmer as the people that once worked on solving these problems depart.
Congress created the civil service to minimize the disruptions associated with elections,
specifically the rotation in office associated with the spoils system (Van Riper 1958). Today, the
federal government loses close to 3,000 of its top managers every time a new president takes
office as virtually all political appointees from the previous administration depart prior to
inauguration (Pfiffner 2010). Against this backdrop, career civil servants serving as deputies to
these top appointed officials provide the long term stability for the federal government. They
serve as a buffer between elections and the need for continuous operations of government. If
these deputies depart along with the appointees, the stability and performance of the entire
government is potentially affected.
Unfortunately, we know little about the effect of elections on turnover outside of
appointees. This is surprising since the feature of public sector employment that arguably
distinguishes it most from work in other sectors is the regular presence of politics and elections
in determining the leadership and direction of the organization. While important work has
examined the influence of different factors on turnover in the civil service (e.g., work-life
balance, communication, engagement), scholars have paid less attention to the influence of
1

There is a large literature on this relationship in the private, not-for-profit, and public sectors

(see, e.g., Bolton, Potter, and Thrower 2016; Boylan 2004; Hancock et al. 2013; Hausknecht and
Trevor 2011; Heavy et al. 2013; O’Toole and Meier 2003; Park and Shaw 2013; Shaw 2011).

3

politics on turnover among public sector employees in the United States (see, however, Bertelli
and Lewis 2013; Chen and Johnson 2015; Doherty et al 2016).2 Fewer still have examined how
elections and transitions in particular influence the career choices of federal employees. 3
We take up these questions in this paper. We use two new Office of Personnel
Management datasets on the careers of federal employees between 1973 and 2014 to evaluate
these effects. The results demonstrate that presidential transitions increase the departure rates of
some senior federal employees but have little effect on agency workforces as a whole. We also
show that turnover is somewhat higher in liberal agencies under Republican presidents and
conservative agencies under Democratic presidents. The estimated effects are largest for the
most senior employees in the government and at the start of new presidential administrations.
These empirical findings provide insights into the role that elections can play in the
career decisions of some government employees. While we find large levels of stability in the
civil service in the face of electoral turnover, transitions do appear to affect career decisionmaking at least in part for high level career employees, particularly in agencies that are
ideologically-distant from the new president. Overall, the results have important implications for

2

For works exploring civil service turnover after government changes in other contexts see

Akhtari et al. n.d.; Boyne et al. 2010; Christensen et al. 2014, Ennser-Jedenastik 2014a.
3

While there is widespread acceptance of the role of elections in the careers of political

appointees (see, e.g., Dickinson and Tenpas 2003; O’Connell 2009; Wood and Marchbanks
2008) and an important literature examining the relationships between appointees and career
civil servants (Aberbach and Rockman 1976; Michaels 1997; Golden 2000; Heclo 1977; Resh
2015), little work examines how these career events shape the choices of civil servants.

4

our understanding of presidential politics, bureaucratic effectiveness, public policy, and expertise
in the federal government.

Political Dynamics and Employee Turnover
Given the importance of turnover for agency capacity and the successful implementation
of public policy, scholars have carefully studied its causes and consequences. In particular, past
research has focused on a number of organizational factors, features of employee job contexts,
and individual characteristics that predict turnover. The organizational factors include
characteristics of agencies themselves such as agency prestige, structure, management practices,
and culture (Gailmard and Patty 2007; Kellough and Osuna 1995; Pitts et al. 2011; Wilson
1994).
Looking inside organizations, scholars have examined features of the employee’s job and
work environment—e.g., training, diversity of the workforce, engagement, clarity of goals,
accountability—that influence departure choices (Bertelli 2007; Kim and Fernandez N.d.;
Moynihan and Pandey 2007). Perhaps most visibly, they have examined how the presence of
outside options and wage differentials influence departure choices. Turnover choices are
influenced by the expected stream of compensation inside and outside the agency. The gap
between expected public and private sector wages is determined partly by whether employees’
expertise is valued differentially in the public or private sector (e.g. Borjas 1982; Boylan 2004;
Grissom et al. 2015; Ippolito 1987, Cameron et al 2016). Relatedly, the structure of the labor
contract (e.g., pay for performance; Bertelli 2007), unionization (Chen and Johnson 2014), and
employee-agency fit in the larger labor market influence career choices (Bertelli and Lewis
2013; Cameron et al. 2015). Non-monetary forms of compensation controlled by the agency,

5

such as group affinity or work-life balance, can also influence job satisfaction and the choice to
stay or leave (e.g. Grissom et al. 2015; Saltzstein et al. 2001).
The propensity to stay or leave also varies by individual and is correlated with
characteristics of employees themselves. Researchers have explored the influence of age or
experience (e.g., retirement eligibility, pension vesting), gender, and race on turnover (Ippolito
1987; Lewis 1991; Lewis and Park 1989; Moynihan and Landuyt 2008; Pitts et al. 2011).
Scholars have also evaluated the impact of different individuals’ public service motivation on
factors related to turnover and turnover directly (see, e.g., Bright 2008; Caillier 2011; Gamassou
2015). Collectively, these works provide a rich and complex picture of the different factors that
influence turnover decisions across agencies, work groups, and individuals.
Despite the salience of politics for public sector work, fewer studies explore how politics
itself influences turnover. Some research examines how political intervention into administration
and policy disagreement between career employees and the administration influences turnover
(e.g. Brehm and Gates 1997; Cameron et al. 2015; Gailmard and Patty 2007; Golden 2000;
Richardson 2016; Wilson 1994). In this paper, we extend this work to examine how changes in
the political environment brought about by elections and transitions of power influence the
turnover decisions of career bureaucrats in a systematic manner. Examining the influence of
elections on turnover has been difficult because existing survey data on employee careers and
turnover intention is cross-sectional and observational data on individual employee careers has
been limited (see, however, Chen and Johnson 2015; Doherty et al. 2016). In this paper, we
make use of unique new observational data on all civilian employees working in non-defense
agencies over 24 years to examine this question systematically.

6

Do Elections Influence Turnover Decisions?
The advent of a new presidential administration can lead to significant policy changes
and alterations in employee influence within agencies. Major party candidates run on platforms
promising policy changes. Candidates bolster their case with promises of governing with teams
that will take power away from unelected bureaucrats. Almost all candidates promise to improve
economy and efficiency in government, cutting expenses and improving performance. The
actions that follow these promises may have predictable effects on the stay or leave choices of
federal employees. We delineate how elections may or may not influence these choices below
and more formally in a decision theory framework in Appendix A.
What Civil Servants Want
Understanding the turnover decisions of career employees first requires a set of
assumptions about the utility they derive from government service. We assume that bureaucratic
utility depends upon three primary factors: the degree to which employees are able to influence
policy, the policy outputs of the agency relative to the employee’s ideal policy, and pecuniary
rewards (i.e., wages and benefits). Specifically, we assume:

uij  iij  (1  i )( xˆa  xi )2
where bureaucrat i's utility in period j, is dependent upon their wages and benefits (𝜔𝑖𝑗 ), the
squared ideological distance between the policy implemented by the agency and the bureaucrat’s
ideal point, 𝑥̂𝑎 and 𝑥𝑖 respectively, and the degree to which individuals value wages and benefits
over policy outcomes, which is increasing in 𝜆 𝜖 [0, 1]. In the public sector, particularly at the
higher levels, individuals have influence over the policy choices of their agency. As such, the
agency’s ultimate policy,

7

x̂a , is a function of a base agency ideal point (e.g., one chosen by the president) and the ideal
point of the bureaucrat, weighted by the policy influence of the bureaucrat (which is increasing
in 𝛼 𝜖 [0, 1]), so that xˆa   ij xi  (1   ij ) xa .
Within this formulation it is notable that, in addition to wages and benefits, we assume
that federal employees value the ability to influence their workplace and its choices (𝛼),
particularly since agency actions involve the exercise of public authority (Perry and Wise 1990).
The choices of federal employees become increasingly influential in their organizations as they
advance in their careers (e.g. Brehm and Gates 1997; Downs 1967; Gailmard and Patty 2007).
However, the degree of delegated authority and policy input that career employees enjoy may be
curtailed even for high level employees if administrations distrust careerists and cut them out of
substantive processes (Heclo 1977; Resh 2015).
Federal employees also care about public policy outcomes. Working in government gives
policy issues a salience rarely shared by other voters, particularly about issues in employees’
own agencies. Further, federal employees often self-select into agencies on the basis of their own
support for an agency’s mission (e.g. Clinton et al. 2012; Kaufman 1960, 1981). This influences
the composition of the workforce and the views of agency employees and engenders support for
agency mission over any change a new administration might bring (Aberbach and Rockman
1976; Golden 2000; Kaufman 1960, 1981). For example, environmentalists are more likely to
seek employment in the Environmental Protection Agency than the Office of Surface Mining. It
is important to many employees in these agencies that the leadership makes choices that help the
organization fulfill its mission (Hult and Maranto 2010). The policy choices of the agency
overall can have a significant influence on the attractiveness of public sector employment
relative to other options.

8

Of course, civil servants care about wages and benefits like workers outside the public
sector (𝜔𝑖𝑗 ). Many start and stay in government because of attractive wages and benefits, both
monetized and non-monetized (e.g., prestige, flexibility, security). A public sector employee’s
stay or leave decision will be determined by how her utility for public sector work compares to
life outside government. The basic structure of the utility outside government is the same except
that the wages and benefits will be different and the bureaucrat will presumably have no
influence over agency policy from outside of government. Significant shocks to the utility
bureaucrats get from working in the public sector—whether influence, policy, or
compensation—may influence departure rates in predictable ways. However, whether these
shocks are enough to impel employees to leave their jobs – a major life decision that entails
substantial costs in its own right – is less clear.
Elections and Changes in Employee Utility
Presidential elections and transitions lead to disruptions in the allocation of influence
within agencies and policy changes. New presidents quickly assert control of the executive
establishment through agency review teams established during the transition and by bringing
new decision makers into government (Jones 1998; Pfiffner 1996, 2010). These individuals,
whether White House staff or political appointees, decide whether to delegate important
authority to continuing professional personnel.
Administrations may be reticent to delegate, particularly when career professionals
worked closely with a previous administration. Many presidents enter office wary that career
bureaucrats are, as President Nixon evocatively described, “…dug-in establishmentarians
fighting for the status quo…” In response, some presidential appointees shut careerists out of key
policy decisions or pushing them away from the locus of decision-making (e.g. Light 1995;

9

Nathan 1975; Pfiffner 1987; Resh 2015). This behavior, broadly characterized by the tools of the
administrative presidency, diminishes the policy control and influence of career employees.
Career professionals on the receiving end of suspicion or marginalization by a new
administration may experience a dramatic change in their work life. Career executives
accustomed to deference and empowered with authority are suddenly bypassed and excluded.
For some agencies, the new administration will take these actions to stop existing policies and
initiate new ones more congruent with the administration’s preferences. This loss of policy
control corresponds to a decreasing 𝛼 in the equation above, making the overall utility for the
bureaucrat increasingly negative. Holding the value of private sector work constant, we would
expect that the effects of a new administration on both policy and influence will increase
departures after elections on the margin.
However, the effect of a new administration will not be felt equally across the executive
establishment. The impacts of transitions are most perceptible in agencies where the new
administration wants to dramatically alter policy. There is significant variation across the
government in the ideological orientations of agencies and their employees (e.g. Bertelli and
Grose 2011; Chen and Johnson 2015; Clinton et al. 2012). The election of a new liberal or
conservative president will influence the policy choices of agencies differently depending upon
the policy orientation of the agency, its employees, and its mission. For example, a new
Republican president may instruct the Environmental Protection Agency to reduce regulatory
burdens and rely on voluntary programs to reduce emissions or the release of pollutants. For
other agencies, a new president may simply emphasize some agency priorities over others. A
new Democratic president, for example, might instruct U.S. attorneys to be more attentive to
election law violations that keep voters from the polls rather than violations that suggest

10

fraudulent access to the polls. Given that career employees have policy preferences and often
select into agencies with missions in line with those preferences, ideological divergence between
the new president and the general ideological orientation of the agency will lower the relative
utility of government work. For instance, in the equation above as the distance between x̂a and

xi increases, the policy utility the bureaucrat gets is increasingly negative, reducing the relative
attractiveness of government work.
In addition to impacting the utility of the bureaucrat directly through policy, the effects of
ideological mismatch are likely also indirectly felt through their impact on policy control. In
particular, a well-known result of principal-agent models is the “ally principle,” which suggests
that as preference divergence between principals and agents increases, principals delegate less
often to agents and decrease agent discretion when doing so (see Bendor and Meirowitz 2004 for
an overview). These theoretical results have been supported empirically in the study of the
administrative presidency. For instance, Lewis (2008) demonstrates that politicization increases
in ideologically divergent agencies. This suggests a further reason to expect a link between
turnover and ideological mismatch.
If new administrations decrease the policy influence of career professionals or
dramatically change policies in ways civil servants do not prefer, this should increase departures.
Of course, the vast majority of bureaucrats have little influence over the policy choices of their
agency. Further, most federal employees do not regularly interface with political appointees or
other members of the administration. Because of this, the effects of an administration change will
be most felt by bureaucrats with the greatest influence over and proximity to policy making
(Aberbach and Rockman 2001; Golden 2000; Hult and Maranto 2010). Employees fitting this
description will tend to be those that are nearest to the top of the managerial hierarchy in the
11

agency, such as members of the career Senior Executive Service. This is not to say that the
political dynamics we describe could not diffuse throughout an entire organization (e.g., Resh
2015). However, the effects of presidential transitions and new administrations will be most
perceptible to more senior individuals given their positions in the agency as well as the nature of
their jobs.
Thus, to summarize, if elections and transitions are an important factor in shaping
turnover behavior, we would expect to find that transition periods will be associated with high
levels of turnover, turnover would increase in agencies with missions that are ideologically
divergent from the new president, and that these effects would be most concentrated among
high-level employees that had policy influence in the previous administration.
However, there are strong reasons in favor of the null hypothesis as well, i.e. elections
and transitions would have no impact on turnover. First, bureaucrats may take alternative actions
when dealing with a new administration. While we focus on turnover in this paper, other work
suggests that employees may alter their behavior in different ways. Golden (2000) finds that in
the Reagan-era bureaucracy many federal employees did not leave but rather remained in
agencies, either speaking out and resisting changes or loyally (or passively) implementing the
president’s policies. This may be due to institutional loyalty, perceptions of the role of civil
servants as politically neutral, or public spiritedness (e.g. Dilulio 1994; Rom 1996). In these
cases, employees may seek to remain in government in the face of presidential opposition to their
work to affect policy outcomes “from the inside” by either shaping their development or resisting
their implementation. If these alternative behaviors predominate, then we should not see regular
patterns following transitions.

12

Second, it is possible that transitions in administrations, while having perceptible effects
on federal employees, may nonetheless be insufficient for providing the motivation for them to
exit the government. Leaving a job is a major life decision that leads employees to incur
substantial transaction costs, as they search for a new job, potentially relocate, navigate a new
work place, and so on. Elections, while perhaps lowering utility for some sets of employees, may
not be a strong enough stimulus for employees to actually depart. If that is the case, then we
should expect to see broad patterns of stability and relatively small effects of elections. We now
turn to examining these questions empirically.

Data, Measurement, and Modeling
To evaluate the effects of elections and politics on employee turnover, we use data from
the Office of Personnel Management’s Central Personnel Data File (CPDF) and Enterprise
Human Resources Integration system (EHRI) from 1988-2011.4 This dataset includes the
personnel records from 3,511,824 employees that served in the federal government during the
period of our study.5 The comprehensiveness of the data allows for the estimation of effects
within relatively small segments of the government with confidence. The dataset includes
important demographic indicators (including race, gender, and age) as well as human capital
information. Information about an individual’s a work, including their occupation, salary,
4

In the appendix, we also replicate our models on a related dataset that covers the time period

1973-2014 but lacks a number of the control variables we use in the main text (Table B11).
5

This dataset does not include the Department of Defense, Navy, Army, and Air Force.

Additionally, individuals that work in classified roles, sensitive agencies, and sensitive
occupations (as defined by OPM) are excluded.

13

supervisory status, and their organization, is also in the dataset. Further, the records are
longitudinal, allowing us to characterize an individual’s career dynamics, and importantly, when
they exit the federal government. The unit of analysis in our study is the employee-year, which
reflects the structure of this dataset. We exclude all political appointees from the analyses in this
paper.
The key dependent variable we examine in this analysis is turnover. We define an
employee as turning over in a given year if it is the last one in which they appear in the CPDFEHRI data. We have conducted sensitivity tests on this measure of departure and find it to be
robust in the data.6
6

In the vast majority of cases, this corresponds to employee exit from the federal government.

One caveat, however, is that if an employee transitions into a sensitive occupation or to an
agency that is not included in our dataset (e.g. the Central Intelligence Agency or the Postal
Service), they may be mistakenly coded as turning over. There is no way for us to distinguish
these cases. However, there is no clear reason to believe this type of career transition is
correlated with the variables we examine in this analysis or is a widespread phenomenon.
One may also be interested in the degree to which individuals may be moving in and out
of government and how they are affecting the results of the analysis. While the dataset cannot
tell us anything about why certain individuals leave the government for short periods and come
back, we are able to identify individuals with discontinuous service. When we estimate models
excluding individuals with discontinuous service, the results are unchanged.
Another form of exit that might be of interest would be transfers among agencies.
Unfortunately, transfers are often ambiguous in the dataset and sometimes indistinguishable from
reorganizations of employees. Further, we note that previous studies of top level officials in the

14

To examine average turnover rates in response to transitions, we create a dummy variable
that takes the value “1” in the first year of a presidential administration (i.e. 1989, 1993, 2001,
and 2009) and is coded as “0” otherwise. One might also think that administration changes may
vary in terms of their impacts on employees. In particular, changes in the party of the
administration may be more likely to have the effects discussed above if appointees from a new
party are more suspicious of careerists that were in government during the previous
administration. Because of this, we also examine these partisan transitions (that is, 1993, 2001,
and 2009) in an alternative analysis (Table B1).
We use agency ideology scores developed by Clinton and Lewis (2008) to evaluate
whether turnover responds to divergence between the ideological orientation of an agency’s
mission and presidential ideology. They are derived from surveys of experts on the federal
bureaucracy who were asked to rate the ideology of a wide range of federal agencies as liberal,
conservative, or neither during the period 1988-2005, which overlaps substantially with the
period of our study. These ratings were then used in a multirater item response model to create
ideology scores for each agency on a unidimensional scale. Following other work using these
scores, we segment agencies into three groups – conservative (where the entire 95% credible
interval of the ideology estimate is greater than zero), moderate (where the 95% credible interval
includes zero), and liberal (where the 95% credible interval is wholly less than zero). Agencies
are coded as being “ideologically mismatched” if they are conservative during a Democratic
presidency or if they are liberal during a Republican presidency.
government have found low transfer rates. For instance, a report by the Partnership for Public
Service (2009) found that only between 1.8% and 2.3% of SES employees had left their jobs for
another agency during their careers.

15

We believe that these are the best ideal points for this application for a number of
reasons. They capture the general ideological orientation of an agency and its mission, which is a
key attribute of agencies described in the theoretical discussion. They are also designed to
capture a long time period that substantially overlaps with our dataset. Ideal points based directly
on the preferences of individuals within agencies (e.g. Bonica, Chen, and Johnson 2015; Chen
and Johnson 2015; Clinton et al. 2012) are endogenous to behavior about whether employees
stay within or leave government, which would potentially confound the results of the analyses
below. Second, other ideal points (such as Clinton et al. 2012 and Bertelli and Grose 2011) do
not have nearly the coverage in terms of time or agencies.
If elections and transitions are truly shaping the incentives of bureaucrats, the relationship
between mismatch and turnover should be the largest in the initial years of a new administration.
New presidential administrations are generally suspicious of the bureaucracy in the early years of
power when presidents seek to move their agendas with the greatest vigor. To examine the
possibility that the effects of ideological mismatch may be greater at the start of an
administration, we estimate an additional set of models where we interact the mismatch variable
with year of term indicators to allow the effect of mismatch to vary by year. Support for this
hypothesis would provide further evidence on the specific role of presidential transitions in
influencing these dynamics.
Examining whether employees at different levels of the administrative hierarchy are
differentially responsive to elections requires us to separate out employees by levels of policy
influence. We consider four groups of employees in all of the analyses below: the career Senior

16

Executive Service (SES), individuals in supervisory roles,7 General Schedule (GS) employees in
grades 13-15, and all employees.8 We expect the career SES to have the most policy influence
and work in closest proximity to political appointees and members of the president’s
administration. GS 13-15 employees as well as those in supervisory roles are less likely to have
policy influence relative to the career SES, but they still may be involved in policy decisions and
sometimes interface with administration officials. We expect that the final group, all employees,
to have the least level of policy influence and be the least directly affected by transitions.
In addition to the key independent variables discussed above, we also include a number
of control variables in our analyses that could also impact the propensity of employees to leave
the government and confound the relationships between turnover and our key theoretical
variables. First, to measure outside options9 we use seasonally adjusted September
7

The supervisor category is fairly broad and definitions have changed over time. We code

individuals that are designated as “supervisor or manager,” “supervisor (CSRA),” “management
official (CSRA),” “leader,” or “team leader” in the OPM dataset as supervisors in our analyses.
8

An alternative method would be to interact the Year 1 and Mismatch variables with indicators

for each group, resulting in a specification with six interaction terms (and two omitted ones). We
opt for this setup described above to ease interpretation, which would be made more difficult by
the fact that these groups are not mutually exclusive. It also has the added benefit of allowing
other coefficients to vary by group as well, lending greater flexibility to the analysis and relaxing
equal coefficient assumptions across groups. The results of models with interactions, however,
do corroborate those presented below.
9

One possible concern is that the labor market itself may be endogenous to elections. For

instance, electoral transitions may increase the value of public sector experience and thus the

17

unemployment rate in the states where employees work (only 15% of employees work in the
Washington, DC metro area).10 We use unemployment as a proxy for labor demand in the area
where an employee works. We expect that turnover is decreasing in this variable (i.e., high
unemployment corresponds to fewer outside options). We also include fixed effects for 803
different occupations. These fixed effects account for time invariant occupation characteristics
that may impact turnover, such as private-public wage differentials for given occupations or the
premium placed on government experience in a given occupation.11
We account for differences in presidential priorities using data from president’s State of
the Union (SOTU) address. The Policy Agendas Project matches each statement in the
president’s address to a particular policy area. Each year in our dataset there are between 37 and
wage premium firms are willing to pay to high level career employees. If true, we would expect
that these effects are likely most salient in the Washington, DC/Virginia/Maryland areas where
the influence industry is based. To test this, we first included fixed effects for the location of an
employee’s office but find that this does not alter the results reported here. Second, we interacted
an indicator for working in the DC/VA/MD area with the key independent variables. Though the
results are inconsistent, we find that, if anything, employees in these areas may be somewhat less
sensitive to transitions (see Table B10 and B11 in the appendix).
10

We collected unemployment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Local Area

Unemployment Statistics Reports for 1988-2011.http://www.bls.gov/lau/.
11

We have also estimated models including fixed effects for combinations of more than 800

occupation codes with geographic locations (e.g., lawyers in Tennessee; see Tables B3-B4 in
Appendix B) as a reasonable way of controlling for the labor market for these employees. The
results in these specifications are similar to what is reported in the main text.

18

396 coded policy statements, depending upon how long the speech is. We coded each agency’s
primary policy area and computed the number of statements made by the president pertaining to
that policy area in a given year as a proportion of all statements. We use the natural logarithm of
this measure plus one because it is right-skewed. For instance, the FDA is coded under the
“health” major topic. In 2010, there were 303 coded policy statements in the SOTU, 27 of which
were about health. This amounts to 8.91% of the statements. So the FDA in 2010's priority
variable takes the value Ln(1 + 8.91). In general, the modal number of policy statements in an
agency's area is zero (hence the need to add one before taking the logarithm), the mean is 6.84%,
the median is 4.26%, and the maximum is 57.1%.
We control for demographic factors that have been shown or hypothesized to increase
public sector turnover rates (e.g. Moynihan and Landuyt 2008). In all of the regression models
reported below, we include the employee’s age and its square. Additionally, all models include a
dummy variable for whether or not an employee is a woman to capture any potential genderbased differences in turnover. We also include indicators for four racial groups identified by the
Office of Personnel Management over time: American Indian/Alaska Native (abbreviated
A.I./A.N. in the tables below); Asian; Black; and Hispanic. The omitted category is White.
We also control for educational attainment. The original OPM CPDF-EHRI data divides
education level into twenty-two different categories. In the analyses reported below we create a
single, continuous measure of educational attainment that corresponds to the number of years
past 12th grade completed by employees. This simplifies interpretations, but we also note that
including these 22 categories as indicator variables or in a somewhat more aggregated form (e.g.
high school, B.A., M.A., etc.) does not substantively alter the results that we report below.

19

Finally, all of the models incorporate fixed effects for 416 agencies. These fixed effects
account for time invariant agency characteristics that may impact turnover, such as agency
structure or prestige.
We estimate a series of linear probability models, where the outcome variable is whether
or not an employee chooses to leave in a given year.12 To account for duration dependence, we
include a set of dummy variables for the number of years that an individual has been in
government (i.e., tenure fixed effects). The estimates for these effects are akin to a baseline
hazard rate in a survival model. To capture any global time trends in departure rates, we include
a cubic polynomial in time in all model specifications.13 Finally, to account for the correlated
error structure and dependence that exists when observing the same employees in many different
years, we cluster all standard errors at the employee level. Additional results, with clustering at
the level of agencies and agency-year, are available in Appendix Tables B5 and B6. The results
are substantively similar to those reported here, though less precisely estimated for some

12

We focus on the results of linear probability models primarily because of computational

difficulties with Cox proportional hazards models and logistic regressions when using such a
large dataset and large numbers of fixed effects for, in some cases, relatively small groups. These
factors make the convergence of maximum likelihood estimators difficult and require substantial
computing power for estimation. We do provide estimates from probit regressions with the same
specification as those reported here as well as somewhat pared down Cox survival models in
Tables B6 and B7, with results substantively similar to those reported here.
13

The results we report are robust to other functional forms for the time trend, including a linear

trend or quadratic trend. The results are also not affected by excluding the time trend variable.

20

coefficients, particularly for the “all employees” and “supervisors” sample frames. We now turn
to describing the results of these analyses.
Results
Table 1, below, includes the results of the turnover models described above. All of the
results are separated into four groups of employees – all employees, GS 13-15, supervisors, and
career SES employees. We include coefficient estimates and t-values for all variables.
Understanding the results requires a proper sense of scale. The average annual unconditional
departure rates for federal employees are low, as they are for employees in most large
organizations. The unconditional average departure rates across groups are 6.2%, 4.4%, 5.5%,
and 8.0% for all employees, GS13-15, supervisors, and members of the Senior Executive
Service, respectively. We focus our attention mostly on departures among senior executives
since those departures appear to have the largest effect on policy and performance but include
other groups as a useful reference. The results show some evidence of the influence of elections
on departures, albeit with some interesting nuance that we describe below. Interestingly, for high
level career administrators, the substantive effect of political factors is comparable to factors
normally included in studies of exit. For the other groups, however, we see far more stability in
the face of transitions and changing ideological patterns.
[Insert Table 1 about here.]
At a general level, models of turnover reveal familiar patterns. As expected, wages and
compensation are a significant driver of career choices. When local unemployment is high,
federal employees are less likely to leave government, with the exception of GS13-15 employees
who seem unaffected by the local economy. A one percentage point increase in local
unemployment is estimated to decrease the probability of departure in a given year by anywhere

21

from 0.1% to 0.3% (depending upon the group of employees examined). In the data,
unemployment varies from about 2.2% (Connecticut, September 2000) to 14.0% (Michigan,
September 2009) in the data. A 5 percentage point difference in unemployment, either over time
or across duty stations is estimated to change departure rates by 0.5% to 1.5%, depending upon
the group of employees examined.
The controls reveal a number of other interesting correlates of departure. First, employees
working in agencies whose policies are mentioned by the president are less likely to leave
government. An increase from the modal value of 0.0% to the mean of 6.84% in the percentage
of statements that involve policies carried out by an agency is estimated to decrease the departure
rate of federal employees by 1-2% in a year. Employees in agencies on the president’s agenda
are less likely to depart.14 Employees in these agencies may stay longer because they have an
unusual opportunity to influence new policymaking in the agency, either to set an agenda
moving forward or protect gains made in the last administration. Indeed, presidential attention in
the State of the Union is often associated with budget increases.
Among the demographic characteristics, there were no consistent effects for gender but in
virtually all models, non-whites departed government at lower rates than whites. Not
surprisingly, age has a non-monotonic relationship with departure probabilities. Age is initially
correlated with lower departures but ultimately increasing departures as employees become more

14

This effect is not diminished when the employee works in a mismatch agency. In models

interacting these terms, the interaction term is not estimated precisely but it is negative,
suggesting that employees in mismatch agencies are more likely to stay when their agency’s
policies are on the president’s agenda (see Table B8 in the appendix).

22

likely to retire. The estimates also reveal that the higher educated are less likely to depart
government.
Elections and Turnover
We find a moderately-sized, predictable increase in departures among the most senior
civil servants after a presidential election but not at lower levels of organization. We have long
observed how elections induce departures among political appointees but the results here reveal
an underappreciated level of departures among at least some civil servants as well. Notably, we
also estimate somewhat higher departure rates in “mismatched” agencies, though the magnitude
of this effect is variable across groups. The career choices of civil servants at the highest levels
appear most responsive to changes in policy and influence stemming from elections. Civil
servants at lower levels are more insulated from changes brought by elections as expected. In
fact, some changes may work to their benefit if the departure of their superiors opens up new job
opportunities for them.
We begin with the results of our analyses relevant to estimating the general transition
effect. The estimated coefficients for the Year 1 variable are key in this regard. Among two
groups of employees – individuals in supervisory roles as well as career SES employees – we see
increased turnover. Career SES employees seem to be most sensitive to a new president with an
average increase of 1.6 percentage points in the first year of a new administration relative to
other years (an increase of 21.1% over non-transition years). The number is eight times smaller
for supervisory employees – a 0.2 percentage point increase in the probability of turning over in

23

transition years.15 At least for the career SES, these effects are similar in magnitude to factors
such as unemployment rates, gender, and education.
To put this in perspective, this means the departure of an additional 110 members of
Senior Executive Service (SES) in the first year of a new administration. The estimated departure
rate in the SES non-transition years is about 7.7% per year, corresponding to about 539 annual
departures out of the corps of 7,000 top career managers. This increases to 9.3% in the first year
of a new administration, or about 651 people.
This is obviously not a wholescale hollowing out of the career executive corps. However,
it raises concerns that some experienced executives are departing when they are most needed, i.e.
when political leadership spots are filled with newcomers or are vacant. To illustrate, consider
the dilemma of the Trump administration. At precisely the time the administration was trying to
use sanctions to accomplish foreign policy goals in North Korea and Iran, the top sanctions
experts in the diplomatic service were departing (Lynch et al. 2018). The analog of the sanctions
experts in other agencies is top counterintelligence professionals in the Department of Homeland
Security and emergency response executives in the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
These executives manage the 2.85 million civilian employees day-to-day across administrations
and through transitions.
15

In other specifications, we examined whether the first year of the administration was

associated with the highest turnover rates relative to other years (rather than just higher on
average). In the case of career Senior Executives, all other years of administrations (i.e. 2-8) had
significantly lower turnover rates. For supervisors, the second year of the administration actually
was associated with the highest turnover rate, though the first year had a higher turnover rate
than the average year (which corresponds to the reported effects).

24

Below this level, we see far more stability in the face of transitions, and indeed, results in
the opposite direction during the first year. Turnover propensity decreases by 0.1 percentage
points for all employees, and by 0.4 percentage points for employees in GS grades 13-15. The
effect for all employees is extremely small. The Year 1 effect for GS 13-15 employees is
substantively larger (9% decrease relative to the unconditional average departure rate). This
effect would be consistent with the idea that high levels of churn in the career SES during the
beginning of a new administration, opens new opportunities for promotion for individuals
directly below the Senior Executive Service level, leading GS 13-15 employees to stay in the
government to vie for these new openings. In this sense, transitions may have the opposite
effects on turnover for these mid-level managers.
If the promotion story explains this behavior, we would expect that a significant portion
of career SES employees had previously been at the level of GS 13-15. Further, we would expect
that employees at the GS-15 level would be particularly likely to stay in government during the
first year of an administration. Overall, we found that between 1988 and 2011, 38% of career
SES employees had served in a GS 13-15 position at some point. Further, in line with these
expectations, we found that GS-15 employees had particularly large, negative estimated effects
for the first year when we estimated models separately for that group relative to the 13-15 group
as a whole (-0.011 vs. -0.004, respectively). This implies that the GS-15 employees, those most
likely to move up into the newly vacated positions, are the most likely wait out the transition.
Now, we examine whether departures vary based on ideology – another way in which
transitions may impact employees’ choices. Across all four groups, there is a positive and
statistically significant estimated coefficient for the ideological mismatch variable. However, its
substantive significance is relatively small outside of the career SES and all employee groups. In

25

particular, estimated turnover increases 6.4% relative to the unconditional baseline for all
employees (0.4 percentage points); 2.3% for GS 13-15 employees (0.1 percentage points); 5.5%
for supervisors (0.3 percentage points); and 6.3% for the career SES (0.5 percentage points) in
any given year of ideological mismatch relative to employees in agencies where there is no such
mismatch.
While the results in Table 1 give a sense of the mismatch effect averaged over the course
of a president’s term, they do not necessarily capture the temporal aspects of the mismatch effect
that we would expect in the case that elections are playing a central role in structuring employee
decisions about turnover. In particular, the mismatch effect might be most prominent in
beginning years of a new administration and lessen over the course of a president’s term. To
assess this auxiliary hypothesis, we interacted the mismatch variable with indicator variables for
the year of president’s term --i.e., 1 through 8--and the estimates are included in Table 2.
[Insert Table 2 about here.]
[Insert Figure 1 about here.]
Figure 1 plots the estimated effect of mismatch in a given year of a presidential
administration based on the interaction models. As can be seen, the effect is concentrated at the
beginning of presidential administrations. In particular, we observe the positive mismatch effect
for all four groups being the greatest during the first three years of a president’s administration,
indicating that the temporal dynamics surrounding elections and transitions are driving behavior.
Furthermore, these effect sizes are significantly larger in some cases than the average effect
estimated in Table 1. For example, in the third year of a presidential administration, there is a
22% increase (1.70 percentage points) in the probability a career SES employee will leave the
federal government if they are in a mismatched agency relative to one who is not.

26

After the first three years of an administration, however, the mismatch effect tends
toward zero for all groups of employees that we examine. For two groups of employees,
supervisors and career SES employees, the mismatch effect actually reverses somewhat
substantially at least in some years during the second term. This pattern could suggest 1) career
employees are more empowered by political appointees the longer they remain with an
administration or 2) that the career employees that left have been replaced by careerists better
able to work with the new administration (and who, by ideological compatibility, are less likely
to leave). As before, career SES employees appear to be the most responsive to ideological
mismatch, with the other three groups showing less pronounced effects, though still in the
expected positive direction.
Finally, as the foregoing discussion indicated implicitly, we do find evidence of hierarchy
effects in our analysis of the turnover decision. Career SES employees are most responsive to
both ideological mismatches between their agency and the administration as well as to changes
in administrations. Career SES employees tend to serve at the upper echelons of the agency
hierarchy and are the career employees that are most likely to interact with political appointees in
terms of the substance of their work on a regular basis (see, for example, Resh 2015).
[Insert Figure 2 about here.]
Figure 2 illustrates the total effects of political factors on career SES departures in the
first three years of an administration (taking account of the heterogeneous mismatch effects
estimated in Table 2). The baseline three-year expected turnover rate for career SESers in nonmismatched agencies that are high (90th percentile) presidential priorities in non-transition years
is 19.75%. If one of those three years is a transition year, the estimated three-year departure rate
increases 7% to 21.16%. The additional effect of being a mismatched agency leads to an

27

estimated departure rate of 23.98%, which is 21.4% above the baseline. Finally, if the agency is a
low presidential priority (10th percentile), then the estimated departure rate for the career SES is
25.85%, a 30.9% increase over the baseline rate (elasticity = 0.31).
The effects are far less pronounced when examining the other three groups. In particular,
employees in grades 13-15 of the GS show the least sensitivity to ideological mismatches and are
more likely to stay in government in the first year of a new administration. We see much broader
patterns of stability among these groups. This may suggest that the political effects we explore in
this paper are less perceptible to these employees and/or there are other career concerns at play
that cause employees to act differently than career SES employees in order to obtain promotions.
This suggests that elections and transitions do have some effects, but they are relatively isolated
among the upper echelons of the career civil service. Among the career SES, the size of these
effects is neither negligible nor overwhelming. It is clear that other factors – whether that
individuals find alternative outlets for expressing dissent or the transaction costs associated with
leaving a job – may mute the effects of politics.
In Appendix B, we include the results from a number of robustness checks and
alternative model specifications that account for partisan dynamics in administration changes
(Table B1); more flexible accounting for age using age fixed effects (Table B2); and different
ways of capturing the effects of local labor markets on turnover propensity (Tables B3 and B4).
Across all of these alternative models, we find results that are substantively similar to those
reported in Table 1.
Discussion and Conclusion
Elections and partisan transitions are a central feature of American administration. They
can bring about new policy directions and cast aside old ideas, lending dynamism and

28

uncertainty to public policy. While presidents and their appointees cycle in and out of leadership,
career officials play stabilizing role, supporting new leaders and providing continuity in
governance. This, in theory, allows for organizational effectiveness even in the face of changing
policy priorities, giving new leaders the opportunity to implement their programs.
We find varying degrees of stability in the career civil service after elections. The coming
and going of appointees with new administrations is mirrored (though to a substantially lesser
degree) by departures in the top levels of the civil service. The first years of an administration are
associated with higher levels of turnover for career SES and supervisory employees across the
executive establishment. This is in consistent with the theoretical notion that civil servants from
a previous administration are often viewed with suspicion by new political appointees and thus
cut out of the policy process. These effects are substantively similar to the effects of other factors
in previous work that have been shown to condition turnover, including outside options,
unionization, and demographics.
We also find that ideological mismatches between presidents and the missions of
agencies can impact turnover, again, primarily for high level careerists. By inducing elevated
levels of turnover, particularly at the top of the administrative hierarchy, presidential transitions
may lead to periods of diminished administrative capacity in some cases. These agencies which
have divergent missions from the incoming president’s agenda encounter a double disadvantage:
they lose both funding and expertise making it even more difficult for the government to carry
out its mission in these policy areas.
At the same time, we find that deeper in the civil service (among all employees, GS 1315, and supervisors), there is substantially less responsiveness to presidential transitions. Here,
we find broad patterns of stability. It should be noted that even among career SES employees, the

29

effects we observe are by no means universal or approach turnover among political appointees.
As we discuss above, other factors, such as the ability to channel dissent and the costs of
changing jobs, may deter turnover even among those most impacted by politics.
Overall, this paper makes a number of contributions to our understanding of politics and
administration in the United States. First, it brings elections and ideology to the fore,
demonstrating that they can influence employee career concerns to some degree. Second, we
demonstrate that employees situated throughout the agency hierarchy may be differentially
responsive to these political factors, with high level career employees being most responsive to
transitions while they barely move other groups at all. Finally, our analyses use administrative
records to systematically study actual turnover, an improvement over work that has been forced
to rely on turnover intention in surveys or small groups of employees due to data limitations.
These contributions also have implications beyond better understanding the political
economy of federal careers. The results for the career SES in particular suggest that presidential
transitions may be times of losses in human capital and institutional memory both at the career
and political leadership levels. This implies important political and temporal dynamics for
bureaucratic capacity in the U.S. federal government. At the time in which presidents are most
eager to exploit their political capital and shift policy, they may find the administrative apparatus
that they need to do this diminished in capacity. In this way we observe one possible mechanism
through which the control-competence trade-off manifests. As presidents seek to exert control
over agencies, it may induce turnover in key career positions and ultimately negatively impact
agency performance.
Several additional implications from our results raise a number of questions that could be
profitably pursued in future work. First, the results for GS 13-15 employees raise a number of

30

interesting issues surrounding hierarchy and the potentially different incentives that this group of
workers faces. A more general theory of overall organizational dynamics and career concerns
would be required to illuminate this possibility and would be a fruitful avenue of research.
Another area of potential interest concerns how elected officials and appointees might
respond to negative reactions by careerists in order to stem personnel losses. If turnover,
particularly at top levels of an organization, negatively impacts performance (at least in the
short-term) then actors may employ some management strategies to mitigate the utility losses
associated with turnover. Exploring how employee behavior affects administration incentives
and how appointees respond in this context would be an important contribution to our
understanding of the administrative presidency and public management.

31

Table 1: OLS Models of Turnover for Four Groups of Employees
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education
Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-10.10)
0.004
(25.20)
-0.001
(-21.66)
-0.002
(-28.51)
-0.003
(-24.19)
-0.007
(-14.70)
-0.010
(-31.57)
-0.006
(-39.08)
-0.004
(-17.32)
-0.016
(-280.65)
2.00 x 10-5
(305.11)
-4.20 x 10-4
(-12.25)

Model 2
-0.001
(-4.89)
0.001
(3.53)
4.65 x 10-5
(0.49)
-0.001
(-4.89)
0.001
(3.44)
-0.005
(-3.60)
-0.009
(-17.26)
-0.011
(-28.19)
-0.003
(-4.32)
-0.014
(-87.23)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.01)
-1.15 x 10-4
(-1.62)

Model 3
0.002
(7.01)
0.003
(9.06)
-0.001
(-10.58)
-0.002
(-8.53)
0.001
(2.86)
-0.008
(-6.38)
-0.009
(-10.80)
-0.009
(-21.90)
-0.004
(-6.73)
-0.015
(-77.85)
1.93 x 10-4
(-18.14)
-0.001
(-18.14)

Model 4
0.016
(7.23)
0.005
(2.45)
-0.003
(-4.49)
-0.003
(-2.24)
-3.84 x 10-4
(-0.20)
0.006
(0.50)
-0.012
(-2.03)
-0.017
(-6.01)
-0.007
(-1.38)
-0.012
(-7.23)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.22)
-0.002
(-3.31)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of employees – all, GS
13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive Service employees. T-ratios based on
robust standard errors clustered by employee are reported in parentheses.

32

Variable
Ideological
Mismatch
Mismatch x
Year 2
Mismatch x
Year 3
Mismatch x
Year 4
Mismatch x
Year 5
Mismatch x
Year 6
Mismatch x
Year 7
Mismatch x
Year 8
All Controls
Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Table 2: Conditional Mismatch Effects
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
0.005
2.00 x 10-4
0.004
(15.77)
(0.32)
(5.42)
0.006
0.002
0.009
(13.37)
(2.44)
(9.12)
0.004
0.005
0.004
(7.73)
(5.33)
(3.96)
-0.003
2.45 x 10-4
-0.004
(-5.68)
(0.23)
(-3.92)
-0.007
-2.23 x 10-4
-0.011
(-12.96)
(-0.20)
(-8.54)
-0.008
-0.002
-0.008
(-15.29)
(-1.44)
(-5.96)
-4
-0.007
-3.49 x 10
-0.008
(-12.58)
(-0.33)
(-5.97)
-0.002
0.001
-0.002
(-4.35)
(0.72)
(-1.78)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Model 4
0.013
(3.00)
-0.002
(-0.38)
0.004
(0.58)
-0.010
(-1.56)
-0.034
(-4.46)
-0.022
(-2.81)
-0.018
(-2.40)
-0.013
(-2.00)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from the interaction between the mismatch variable and the
indicators for the year of term for four groups of employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory
role, and career Senior Executive Service employees. All other variables that are used in Table 1 are also
included in these specifications. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by employee are reported
in parentheses.

33

0.01
0.00
-0.01

All Exmployees
GS 13-15
Supervisors
Career SES

-0.02

Estimated Effect of Mismatch

0.02

Ideological Mismatch Effect by
Year of Term

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Year of Term

Figure 1. Ideological Mismatch Effect by Year of Term. This figure plots the interaction
effects that we estimate in Table 2. The mismatch effect appears to be concentrated in the
beginning of new administrations. In particular, the mismatch effect appears to be
concentrated mostly in the first three years of a new administration, further demonstrating
the role that elections and transitions have on employee turnover decisions.

34

30

Career SES Departures Over 3 Years

25

2.82%
e = 0.14

1.87%
e = 0.09

25.85%
e = 0.31

Low Priority
(3 Years)

Total Effect
(3 Years)

20
10

15

19.75%

0

5

Estimated Percent Departing

1.41%
e = 0.07

Base Rate
(3 Years)

Transition
(1 Year)

Mismatch
(3 Years)

Figure 2. This figure plots the three-year estimated departure rate for career SES employees
under a variety of political conditions. Each increment represents the effect of each political
effect separately (as well as elasticities, e, computed from the base rate of turnover). The
maximum estimated effect (i.e. three-year window includes a transition, the career SESers are in
a mismatched agency, and the agency is a low presidential priority) is a 30.8% increase over
baseline turnover.

35

References
Aberbach, Joel D., and Bert A. Rockman. 1976. Clashing Beliefs Within the Executive Branch:
the Nixon Administration Bureaucracy.” American Political Science Review 70(2):45668.
Akhtari, Mitra, Diana Moreira, and Laura Trucco. 2015. “Political Turnover, Bureaucratic
Turnover, and the Quality of Public Services.” Manuscript, Harvard University
(https://scholar.harvard.edu/makhtari/publications/political-turnover-bureaucraticturnover-and-quality-public-services, accessed February 26, 2018).
Bendor, Jonathan and Adam Meirowitz. 2004. “Spatial Models of Delegation.” American
Political Science Review 98(2): 293-310.
Bertelli, Anthony M. 2007. “Determinants of Bureaucratic Turnover Intention: Evidence from
the Department of the Treasury.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory
17(2): 235-258.
Bertelli, Anthony M. and Christian R. Grose. 2011. “The Lengthened Shadow of Another
Institution? Ideal Point Estimates for the Executive Branch and Congress.” American
Journal of Political Science 55(4): 767-781.
Bertelli, Anthony M., and David E. Lewis. 2013. “Policy Influence, Agency Specific Expertise,
and Exit in the Federal Service.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory
23(2): 223-245.
Bolton, Alexander, Rachel Augustine Potter, and Sharece Thrower. 2016. “Organizational
Capacity, Regulatory Review, and the Limits of Political Control. Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 32(2): 242-271.
Borjas, George J. 1982. “Labor Turnover in the U.S. Federal Bureaucracy.” Journal of Public
Economics 19: 187-202
Boylan, Richard T. 2004. “Salaries, Turnover, and Performance in the Federal Criminal Justice
System. Journal of Law and Economics 47(1): 75-92.
Boyne, George, Oliver James, Peter John, and Nicolai Petrovsky. 2010. “Does Political Change
Affect Senior Management Turnover? An Empirical Analysis of Top-tier Local
Authorities in England.” Public Administration 88(1):136-153.
Brehm, John, and Scott Gates. 1997. Working, Shirking, and Sabotage. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Bright, Leonard. 2008. “Does Public Service Motivation Really Make a Difference on the Job
Satisfaction and Turnover Intentions of Public Employees?” The American Review of
Public Administration 38(2):149-166.
Brody, Richard A. 1991. Assessing the President: The Media, Elite Opinion, and Public Support.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Buncombe, Andrew. 2017. “US State Department’s entire senior management team quits as
Secretary Rex Tillerson takes up post,” Independent, January 26, 2017
(http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-state-department-seniormanagement-team-quit-resign-rex-tillerson-secretary-donald-trump-cabineta7547916.html, accessed January 29, 2018).

36

Cailler, James Gerard. 2011. “I Want to Quit: A Closer Look at Factors That Contribute to the
Turnover Intentions of State Government Employees.” State and Local Government
Review 43(2):110-22.
Cameron, Charles, and John M. de Figueiredo. 2018. “Quitting in Protest: A Theory of
Presidential Policy Making and Agency Response.” URL:
https://scholarship.law.duke.edu/faculty_scholarship/3663/
Cameron, Charles, John M. de Figueiredo, David E. Lewis. 2016. “Public Sector Personnel
Economics: Wages, Promotions and the Competence-Control Trade-off.” NBER
Working Paper #22966 (http://www.nber.org/papers/w22966).
Carter, David B. and Curtis S. Signorino. 2010. “Back to the Future: Modeling Time
Dependence in Binary Data.” Political Analysis 18: 271-292.
Chen, Jowei and Tim Johnson. 2015. “Federal Employee Unionization and Presidential Control
of the Bureaucracy: Estimating and Explaining Ideological Change in Executive
Agencies.” Journal of Theoretical Politics 27(1): 151-174.
Christensen, Jorgen Gronnegaard, Robert Klemmensen, and Niels Opstrup. 2014. “Politicization
and the Replacement of Top Civil Servants in Denmark.” Governance 27(2):215-41.
Clinton, Joshua D., David E. Lewis. 2008. “Expert Opinion, Agency Characteristics, and Agency
Preferences.” Political Analysis 16(1):3-20.
Clinton, Joshua D., Anthony M. Bertelli, Christian C. Grose, David E. Lewis, and David Nixon.
2012. “Separated Powers in the United States: The Ideology of Agencies, Presidents, and
Congress.” American Journal of Political Science 56(2):341-54.
Dickinson, M., & Tenpas, K. 2002. Explaining Increasing Turnover Rates among Presidential
Advisers, 1929-1997. The Journal of Politics 64(2):434-48.
Doherty, Kathleen, David E. Lewis, and Scott Limbocker. 2016. “Controlling Agency Choke
Points: Presidents and Regulatory Personnel Turnover.” Working paper.
(www.vanderbilt.edu/csdi/research/WP2015_2FINAL_7_23_15.pdf).
Downs, Anthony. 1967. Inside Bureaucracy. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company.
Dull, Matthew, and Roberts Patrick S. 2009. "Continuity, Competence, and the Succession of
Senate-Confirmed Agency Appointees, 1989-2009." Presidential Studies Quarterly 39:
432-453.
Dull, Matthew, Patrick S. Roberts, Michael S. Keeney, and Sang Ok Choi. 2012. “Appointee
Confirmation and Tenure: The Succession of Federal Agency Appointees, 1989-2009.”
Public Administration Review 72(6):902-13.
Ennser-Jedenastik, Laurenz. 2014a. “Political Control and Managerial Survival in State-Owned
Enterprises.” Governance 27(1):135-61.
Friedman, Lisa, Marina Affo, and Derek Kravitz. 2017. “E.P.A. Officials, Disheartened by
Agency’s Direction, Are Leaving in Droves,” New York Times, December 22, 2017
(https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/22/climate/epa-buyouts-pruitt.html, accessed January
29, 2018).
Gailmard, Sean, and John W. Patty. 2007. “Slackers and Zealots: Civil Service, Policy
Discretion, and Bureaucratic Expertise.” American Journal of Political Science 51(4):
873-889.
Gamassou, Clair Edey. 2015. “What Drives Personnel Out of Public Organizations?” Public
Organization Review 15(3):383-98.
Golden, Marissa Martino. 2000. What Motivates Bureaucrats? Politics and Administration
During the Reagan Years. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.

37

Grissom, Jason A., Samantha L. Viano, and Jennifer L. Selin. 2015. Understanding Employee
Turnover in the Public Sector: Insights from Research on Teacher Mobility. Public
Administration Review 76(2):241-51.
Hahm, Sung Deuk, Kwangho Jung, Sam Youl Lee. 2014. “Exploring the Determinants of the
Entry and Exit of Ministers in Korea: 1980-2008.” Governance 26(4):657-75.
Halper, Evan. 2017. “Civil servants charge Trump is sidelining workers with expertise on
climate change and environment,” Los Angeles Times, October 4, 2017
(http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-civil-servants-201709-story.html,
accessed January 29, 2018).
Hancock, Julie I., David G. Allen, Frank A. Bosco, Karen R. McDaniel, and Charles A. Pierce.
2013. “Meta-Analytic Review of Employee Turnover as a Predictor of Firm
Performance.” Journal of Management 39(3):573-603.
Hausknecht, John P., and Charlie O. Trevor. 2011. “Collective Turnover at the Group, Unit, and
Organizational Levels: Evidence Issues, and Implications.” Journal of Management
37(1):352-88.
Heavy, Angela L., Jacob A. Holwerda, and John P. Hausknecht. 2013. “Causes and
Consequences of Collective Turnover: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Journal of Applied
Psychology 98(3):412-53.
Heclo, Hugh. 1977. A Government of Strangers: Executive Politics in Washington. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Hult, Karen M. and Robert Maranto. 2010. “Does Where You Stand Depend Upon Where You
Sit?” American Review of Politics 31(Summer): 91-112.
Ippolito, Richard A. 1987. “Why Federal Workers Don’t Quit.” The Journal of Human Resource
22(2):281-299
Jones, Charles O. 1998. Passages to the Presidency: From Campaigning to Governing.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kaufman, Herbert. 1960. The Forest Ranger: A Study in Administrative Behavior. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
Kaufman, Herbert. 1981. The Administrative Behavior of Federal Bureau Chiefs. Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution.
Kellough, J. Edward and Will Osuna. 1995. “Cross-Agency Comparisons of Quit Rates in the
Federal Service.” Review of Public Personnel Administration Fall:58-68.
Kim, Sun Young, and Sergio Fernandez. Forthcoming. “Employee Empowerment and Turnover
Intention in the U.S. Federal Bureaucracy. American Review of Public Administration.
Lewis, David E. 2008. The Politics of Presidential Appointments: Political Control and
Bureaucratic Performance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lewis, Gregory B. 1991. “Turnover and the Quiet Crisis in the Federal Civil Service.” Public
Administration Review 51(2):145-155
Lewis, Gregory B. and Kyungho Park. 1989. “Turnover Rates in Federal White-Collar
Employment: Are Women More Likely to Quit Than Men?” American Review of Public
Administration 19(1):13-28.
Light, Paul C. 1995. Thickening Government: Federal Hierarchy and the Diffusion of
Accountability. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Llorens, Jared J., and Edmund C. Stazyk. 2011. “How Important Are Competitive Wages?
Exploring the Impact of Relative Wage Rates on Employee Turnover in State
Government.” Review of Public Personnel Administration 31(2):111-27.

38

Lynch, Colum, Robbie Gramer, Dan De Luce. 2018. “U.S. Government Faces Critical ‘Brain
Drain’ of Sanctions Experts,” Foreign Policy, January 19, 2018
(http://foreignpolicy.com/2018/01/19/united-nations-sanctions-state-department-treasurytrump-s-government-faces-critical-brain-drain-of-sanctions-experts/, accessed January
30, 2018).
Michaels, Judith E. 1997. The President's Call: Executive Leadership from FDR to George
Bush. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Moynihan, Donald P. and Noel Landuyt. 2008. “Explaining Turnover Intention in State
Government: Examining the Roles of Gender, Life Cycle, and Loyalty.” Review of Public
Personnel Administration 28(2):120-43.
Moynihan, Donald P., and Sanjey K. Pandey. 2007. “The Ties that Bind: Social Networks,
Person-Organization Value Fit, and Turnover Intention.” Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory 18(2):205-227.
Nathan, Richard P. 1975. The Plot that Failed: Nixon and the Administrative Presidency. New
York, NY: John Wiley.
Nixon, Richard. 1971. "The President's News Conference," February 17, 1971. Online by
Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project
(http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=3309, accessed January 30, 2018).
O'Connell, Anne Joseph. 2009. “Vacant Offices: Delays in Staffing Top Agency Positions.”
Southern California Law Review 82:913-1000.
O’Toole, Laurence J., Jr., and Kenneth J. Meier. 2003. “Plus ça Change: Public Management,
Personnel Stability, and Organizational Performance.” Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory 13(1):43-64.
Park, Tae-Youn, and Jason D. Shaw. 2013. “Turnover Rates and Organizational Performance: A
Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Applied Psychology 98(2):268-309.
Partnership for Public Service and Booz-Allen-Hamilton. 2009. “Unrealized Vision:
Reimagining the Senior Executive Service,”
(file:///C:/Users/lewisde/Downloads/Unrealized_Vision__Reimagining_the_Senior_Exec
utive_Service-[2009.08.20].pdf, accessed January 30, 2018).
Partnership for Public Service and Booz-Allen-Hamilton. 2011. “Keeping Talent: Strategies for
Retaining Valued Federal Employees
Perry, James. L., and Lois. R. Wise. 1990. “The Motivational Bases of Public Service.” Public
Administration Review 50(3): 367-373.
Pffifner, James P. 1987. “Political Appointees and Career Executives: The DemocracyBureaucracy Nexus in the Third Century.” Public Adminsitration Review 47(1): 57-65.
Pffifner, James P. 1996. The Strategic Presidency: Hitting the Ground Running. University of
Kansas Press.
Pffifner, James P. 2010. “Presidential Transitions” in Oxford Handbook of the American
Presidency, Edwards and Howell, ed. Oxford University Press. Pp. 85-107.
Pitts, David, John Marvel, and Sergio Fernandez. 2011. “So Hard to Say Goodbye? Turnover
Intention among U.S. Federal Employees.” Public Administration Review 71(5):751-760.
Rein, Lisa, and Andrew Ba Tran. 2017. “How the Trump era is changing the federal
bureaucracy,” Washington Post, December 30, 2017
(https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-the-trump-era-is-changing-the-federalbureaucracy/2017/12/30/8d5149c6-daa7-11e7-b859fb0995360725_story.html?utm_term=.83ad3a6d2e7c, accessed January 29, 2018.

39

Resh, William E. 2015. Rethinking the Administrative Presidency: Trust, Intellectual Capital,
and Appointee-Careerist Relations in the George W. Bush Administration. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Richardson, Mark D. 2017. “Politicization and Expertise: Exit, Effort, and Investment.”
Manuscript, Vanderbilt University
(https://my.vanderbilt.edu/markrichardson/files/2015/11/Richardson_Politicization.pdf),
accessed May 20, 2017).
Saltzstein, Alan L., Yuan Ting, and Grace Hall Saltzstein. 2001. “Work-Family Balance and Job
Satisfaction: The Impact of Family-Friendly Policies on Attitudes of Federal Government
Employees.” Public Administration Review 61(4): 452-467.
Shaw, J. D. 2011. "Turnover rates and organizational performance: Review, critique, and
research agenda." Organizational Psychology Review 1(3):187-213.
Ton, Zeynep, and Robert S. Huckman. 2008. "Managing the Impact of Employee Turnover on
Performance: The Role of Process Conformance." Organization Science 19(1): 56–68.
Van Riper, Paul P. 1958. History of the United States Civil Service. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson
and Company.
Wilson, Patricia A. 1994. “Power, Politics, and Other Reasons Why Senior Executives Leave the
Federal Government.” Public Administration Review 54(1):12-19
Wood, B. Dan, and Marchbanks, Miner P. 2008. "What Determines How Long Political
Appointees Serve?" Journal of Public Administration Research & Theory 18(3): 375-96.

40

Appendix A. Formal Representation of Departure Decision
In this Appendix, we outline a slightly more formal approach that underlies the theory
found in the paper. We begin by assuming that individuals value wages and policy outcomes so
that the utility of an individual is given by:

uij = liwij - (1 - li )(xˆa - xi )2

(1)

where uij is the utility of individual i in her job j where j Î {b, p} where b is a job as a
bureaucrat and p is a job in the private sector, li is the weight an individual places on wages (vs.
policy outcomes) such that 0 £ li £ 1 , wij is the wage of individual i in job j, x̂a is the (induced)
ideal point of the agency, and xi is the individual’s ideal policy where xˆa , xi Î Â . Individuals
have single peaked and quadratic preferences over policy outcomes in a unidimensional policy
space. The first term of Equation 1 is the utility the individual receives from wages. The second
term is the utility she receives from policy outcomes—the closer the agency’s policy outcome is
to her ideal point, the better off she is. If the individual only values wages, li = 1 , then the utility
she receives is derived from just the wage; if the individual only values policy ( li = 0 ), then the
utility function depends only upon the difference in the (induced) ideal points of the individual
and the agency.
Individuals may have influence over agency induced ideal points. In particular, the
induced ideal point of the agency is:
xˆa = a ij xi + (1 - a ij ) xa

(2)

where x̂a is the induced ideal point of the agency as before, xi is the ideal point of the individual
as before, and xa is the agency ideal point of agency presidential appointee or administration,

xa Î Â. An individual’s i influence in job j over agency policymaking is characterized by a ij ,
which we will characterize further momentarily.
For notational simplicity going forward, let ( xa - xi ) = X . Substituting equation 2 into
equation 1 and simplifying, we generate the general utility function:

uij = liwij - (1 - li )(1 - aij ) 2 ( X 2 )

(3)

We can now consider two cases. In the first case, consider the individual choosing to
work in government as a bureaucrat (j = b). In this case, the utility function of a bureaucrat can
be characterized very similar to equation 3 as:

uib = liwib - (1 - li )(1 - a ib ) 2 ( X 2 )

(4)

The bureaucrat receives weighted utility from the government wage w ib (first term) and from her
preference relative to the induced agency preference (second term). The influence a bureaucrat
exerts over policy, a ib , is assumed to be inversely related to the distance between the ideal
points of the presidential appointee and the bureaucrat. There are a number of ways to model
such a relationship. We choose here an example that mirrors how careerist influence works in
practice, namely that the influence of the bureaucrat reaches a maximum when the ideal points
are very close, and then the influence stays at that same level as the ideal points of the bureaucrat
and political appointee continue to converge zero (i.e., bureaucrats are always at least weakly
more influential as their ideal points converge to those of appointees). To characterize such an
effect we let the influence a ij = 1

"

X4

if 𝑋 " ≥ $
)
%&√(

*+
"

≈ 1.618, , and a ij = 1 otherwise. We

call this constraint C1. This means for all permissible values of xi and xa , it will be the case that

0 < a ib £ 1 and the bureaucrat will have some influence over agency induced ideal points. As a

general matter, it is important to choose from a class of functional forms that constrain the
influence of the individual over policy to decline faster than the individual’s utility of the policy
(in this case a quadratic utility function) in 𝑋. Intuitively, we need to assume that a careerist’s
influence decreases as the ideological distance between the careerist and the
appointee/administration increases. That is, a careerist is increasingly marginalized as their views
diverge from the administration.
The second case is if the individual instead chooses to go to the private sector. In that
case the utility function is:

uip = liwip - (1 - li )(1 - a ip ) 2 ( X 2 )

(5)

where the p subscript is for a private sector job. Note, however, that by choosing a private sector
job, the individual obtains the private sector wage, but loses her ability to influence the agency’s
ideal point. Said differently, private sector workers have a ip = 0. 1 This then reduces the private
sector utility function to:

uip = liwip - (1 - li )( X 2 )

(6)

An individual will choose to work for the government iff uib ³ uip .
We can now conduct comparative statics. It may be useful at this point to note that the
difference in utility of an individual working in the government and the private sector, using
equations 4 and 6, can be written as:

uib - uip = li (wib - wip ) + [1 - (1 - aib ) 2 ](1 - li )( X 2 )

(7a)

simplifying we obtain:

We assume that in the absence of this individual, the induced policy outcome will be 𝑥3 . One way to interpret this
result is that when a senior person leaves the government, the political appointee has no one to rely on for expertise
and just chooses a policy close to his ideal point. Another way to interpret this is that the second term of the utility
of the function is the utility that the bureaucrat obtains from actually making policy 𝑥43.

1

uib - uip = li (wib - wip ) + (1 - li )(2aib2 - aib2 )
1

3

(7b)

For notational simplicity, we suppress the i subscript where not needed and substitute for
substituting a ib as noted earlier. The first comparative static (first and third hypotheses in the
paper) is to examine how changes in the ability of a bureaucrat to influence the agency’s induced
ideal point affects the bureaucrat’s utility. In particular:

¶(ub - u p )

æ 2X 4 - 3 ö
÷÷
= (1 - l )çç
2
¶a b
2
X
è
ø

(8)

Equation 8 is weakly positive across all ranges of the function with the constraint C1. Said
differently, as a bureaucrat’s influence over policy outcomes increases, her utility rises and
reaches a peak, where her influence stays. This means a bureaucrat in induced to (weakly) stay
in her government job (reducing departure rates) as the bureaucrat’s influence increases.
The second comparative static (second hypothesis in the paper) considers changes in the
distance between the ideal points of the administration and the individuals. We can examine this
by taking the derivative of the utility difference with respect to the squared-distance between the
ideal points of the actors.2 Using the chain rule and implicit function theorem, we can show:

¶(ub - u p )

æ 3 - 2X 4 ö
çç
÷÷
l
=
(
1
)
8
¶( X 2 )
X
è
ø

(9)

The derivative in equation 9 is weakly negative for all values of 𝑋 " with the constraint C1. This
means as xi and xa move apart, that is the distance between the individual’s ideal point and the
administration’s ideal point rises, bureaucrats receive weakly less utility from the policy
component of their utility function and are more likely to leave the government.

2

We use 𝑋 " instead of 𝑋 as a distance measure to ensure the distance measure is always positive.

A final comparative static examines how changes in private sector wages affect the
willingness of the bureaucrat to stay in the government. To analyze this we take:

¶ (ub - u p )

¶w p

= -l < 0

(10)

Equation 10 shows as private sector wages rise, the utility to staying in the government declines
and bureaucrats will tend to leave government and move into the private sector. This final result
is a theoretically heartening check of the model, consistent with the basic tenets of labor
economics.

Appendix B. Additional Empirical Results and Robustness Checks
In this appendix, we provide additional empirical results that employ alternative
measurements of some variables of interest as well as alternative model specifications that are
referenced throughout the paper. A description of each of the additional analyses is provided
below, and the tables are included in the pages following:
In Table B1, we examine an alternative way to measure administration change. In
particular, the most salient type of administration change for career decisions may be those
where the new administration is of a different party. This was the case in 1993, 2001, and 2009.
In order to assess whether there are differences in the Year 1 result when examining party
changes, in this table, we include an indicator for party change in administration rather than the
general administration change variable used in the main text. As can be seen in Table B1, the
results are substantively the same as those reported in Table 1. The results for supervisors and
career SES employees follow the empirical hypotheses derived from the theory (higher departure
rates during administration changes), while the results for all employees and GS 13-15
employees are in the opposite direction. In the main text, we offer one plausible explanation for
these divergent results grounded in the idea that career SES departures open up opportunities for
advancement for other employees lower in the managerial hierarchy in an agency.
Table B2 offers the results of analyses where we include fixed effects for each observed
age in the dataset instead of the quadratic polynomial in age that is included in the results
reported in the main text. While in our main specifications we followed the previous literature by
including both age and its square, in Table B2, we relax any assumptions about functional forms
of the relationship between age and turnover. This, for instance, should alleviate any concerns
about ages where there may be non-monotonicities or big spikes or declines in turnover (e.g.
massive increase in turnover at age 65). As can be seen, the substance of the results reported in

the main text are unaffected by this alternative method of accounting for an employee’s age in a
given year. The magnitudes and precision of the estimates are nearly identical to those reported
in Table 1.
Tables B3 and B4 take different approaches to modeling how the local labor market
might impact the turnover decisions of bureaucrats. In the main text, we use the unemployment
rate in an individual’s location to proxy for the relative labor demand in the area, which has an
impact on decisions about leaving the government for the private sector.
First, Table B3 includes occupation category-state fixed effects. There are six
occupational categories (administrative, blue collar, clerical, professional, other white collar, and
technical) and 51 “states” (including Washington, DC), which leads to 306 total additional
categories. Including this additional set of fixed effects allows us to estimate the effect of
unemployment within these categories given that changes in labor demand may be differentially
felt by individuals in different types of occupations. Even after including these additional fixed
effects, the results from the main analyses hold and are similar again in terms of both magnitude
and precision. Across all groups of employees, ideological mismatches between the
administration and the agency are associated with greater turnover propensities. The first year of
a new administration is associated with higher turnover for career SES employees and
supervisors but not for the other two groups that we examine, consistent with the results reported
in the main text.
In a similar vein, Table B4 includes the estimated coefficients from models in which we
include occupation-specific effects of unemployment in the local area. These effects are created
by including interaction terms between the unemployment variable and each of the 803 specific
occupation codes in our dataset. This allows us to estimate separate effects of unemployment for

every occupation type given that some occupations may be more or less sensitive to changes in
labor demand overall in the economy. The results of these analyses do not appear to change any
of the substantive conclusions that we reach in the paper.
Table B5 includes estimates of standard errors that are clustered by agency, rather than
by individual, as reported in the main text. The results reported here are largely similar, though
standard errors increase in size in all cases. In particular, the Year 1 results become statistically
insignificant at conventional levels for the group of all employees and for supervisors as well.
The mismatch effect is significant at the 10% level for GS 13-15 employees and supervisory
employees. All key results for career Senior Executive Service employees remain significant at
conventional levels. This group continues to appear most responsive to the political dynamics
discussed in the paper. Table B6 clusters standard errors by agency-year. The results there are
similar to those reported in the main text of the paper.
Tables B7 and B8 present two alternative types of models beyond the linear probability
model that are feasible to run with the size of the dataset here and the number of fixed effects
needed in our specifications. Table B7 presents hazard ratios estimated from a Cox regression
model with an extremely pared down specification. Here, we stratify by agency and instead of
including hundreds of occupational fixed effects, we group to six occupational categories
determined by OPM: administrative, blue collar, clerical, other white collar, professional, and
technical. The results for career SES and supervisory employees are unchanged substantively,
though slightly larger in effect size relative to what we estimate in the main text. One key
difference that we see in this table is that we find support for the new administration hypothesis
across all four groups, whereas we only find support for supervisors and career SES in the main
text. The mismatch effect is robust for GS 13-15, supervisors, and SES but the coefficient is very

imprecisely estimated in the models including all federal employees. Finally, Table B8 includes
the results from probit models that correspond to the same specifications as those in the linear
probability models. These estimated effects correspond substantively to what we estimate in the
paper. Together these two supplemental analyses give us confidence that the results of the linear
probability models are not misleading.
Table B9 considers the possibility of interaction effects between the mismatch and
priority variables used in the main specifications. One might imagine that the priority variable
moderates the effects of mismatch. For instance, the Department of Education and its
subcomponents are coded as mismatched during the George W. Bush administration. However,
the passage of the No Child Left Behind Act made the department a place where significant
policy change was happening that career officials might be able to influence. If these dynamics
are at play, we would expect to find that the mismatch effect is diminished as the agency’s work
becomes a priority to the administration. To test this idea, we interacted the two variables with
one another. We find some suggestive evidence of this moderation effect, particularly for the GS
13-15 and career SES populations. There does not appear to be any appreciable interaction effect
for the other two groups of employees.
Another concern that we address in Table B10 and Table B11 is whether elections impact
not only the degree to which employees can impact policy but also outside options available to
them. For instance, a transition might lead to demand among lobbying or other firms for
expertise developed in the executive branch. In Table B11, we include duty-station fixed effects
(i.e. the state in which an employee works) in order to control for this possibility, with the idea
being that the relationship between outside options and transitions are going to be
geographically-based (particularly in the DC, Maryland, and Virginia areas where government

affairs expertise is perhaps most valuable given the concentration of groups and firms in those
areas centered around that industry). The results do not appear to be substantively affected by the
inclusion of these fixed effects. Further, along these lines, in Table B11 we interact the transition
year and mismatch effects with an indicator for whether or not the employee works in DC, MD,
or VA. We find inconsistent effects across these interactions. If anything, it appears that the main
effects in the text are somewhat diminished for employees in these areas, though the estimated
interaction coefficients are imprecisely estimated in many specifications.
Finally, in Table B12, we use an alternative dataset released by OPM to the Buzzfeed
news organization that extends the CPDF data back through 1973. This allows us to increase the
number of transitions that we are able to observe.3 Unfortunately, the Buzzfeed data contains less
information on employees than in our dataset. In particular, it is missing key demographic
variables, such as race and gender, as well as indicators for the supervisory status of employees,
which makes it impossible for us to run the analysis on this group of individuals. Nonetheless,
we use the available data to replicate our analyses for the all, GS 13-15, and career SES groups.
The results of these analyses conform well to the results reported in the main text. This suggests
that the results in the main text are robust to increasing the number of transitions that we
examine.
Overall these results lend additional credence to those presented in the main text. Across
a number of alternative ways of operationalizing key variables, alternative specifications, and
different strategies for accounting for local economies, the results remain consistent with those
reported in Table 1.

3

Note that we only add one new transition for the career SES since it did not exist for the entire time period.

Table B1: Party Change Models
Variable
Party Change
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.003
(-19.75)
0.004
(25.22)
-0.001
(-18.56)
-0.003
(-30.23)
-0.003
(-24.17)
-0.007
(-14.69)
-0.010
(-31.69)

Model 2
-0.006
(-15.13)
0.001
(3.49)
1.69 x 10-4
(1.78)
-0.001
(-5.57)
0.001
(3.44)
-0.005
(-3.59)
-0.009
(-17.29)

Model 3
0.002
(4.45)
0.003
(9.12)
-0.001
(-10.54)
-0.002
(-8.20)
0.001
(2.86)
-0.008
(-6.38)
-0.009
(-10.80)

Model 4
0.019
(6.99)
0.005
(2.55)
-0.004
(-5.13)
-0.002
(-1.56)
-3.49 x 10-4
(-0.18)
0.006
(0.48)
-0.012
(-2.02)

-0.006
(-39.23)
-0.004
(-17.43)
-0.016
(-280.63)
2.00 x 10-4
(305.09)
-4.22 x 10-4
(-12.29)

-0.011
(-28.22)
-0.003
(-4.33)
-0.014
(-87.23)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.02)
-1.16 x 10-4
(-1.64)

-0.009
(-21.90)
-0.004
(-6.72)
-0.015
(-77.85)
1.82 x 10-4
(91.60)
-0.001
(-18.14)

-0.017
(-6.00)
-0.007
(-1.38)
-0.012
(-7.22)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.21)
-0.002
(-3.30)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. Instead of modeling changes in administration, here we use an indicator
for years in which there is a party change. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered
by employee are reported in parentheses.

Table B2: Fixed Effects for Age
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Education

Age FE
Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-10.21)
0.004
(25.03)
-0.001
(-21.24)
-0.003
(-28.73)
-0.003
(-24.01)
-0.007
(-14.82)
-0.010
(-32.67)

Model 2
-0.004
(-11.98)
0.001
(3.46)
6.05 x 10-5
(0.64)
-0.001
(-4.73)
0.001
(4.08)
-0.005
(-3.57)
-0.009
(-17.16)

Model 3
0.002
(6.93)
0.003
(8.85)
-0.001
(-10.37)
-0.002
(-8.69)
0.001
(2.87)
-0.008
(-6.36)
-0.009
(-11.07)

Model 4
0.016
(7.23)
0.005
(2.50)
-0.003
(-4.53)
-0.003
(-4.53)
-3.13 x 10-5
(-0.02)
0.006
(0.54)
-0.012
(-2.15)

-0.006
(-40.77)
-0.005
(-18.14)
-4.02 x 10-4
(-11.73)

-0.011
(-28.64)
-0.003
(-4.42)
-1.51 x 10-4
(-2.14)

-0.009
(-22.35)
-0.004
(-6.70)
-0.001
(-18.21)

-0.017
(-6.01)
-0.007
(-1.35)
-0.002
(-3.62)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by employee are
reported in parentheses.

Table B3: Occupation Category x Duty Station Fixed Effects
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Occ Cat x DS
FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.001
(-8.21)
0.003
(21.28)
-0.002
(-35.73)
-0.003
(-31.77)
-0.003
(-23.76)
-0.009
(-17.54)
-0.011
(-34.66)

Model 2
-0.001
(-5.14)
0.001
(3.03)
-4.76 x 10-4
(-3.97)
-0.001
(-5.14)
0.002
(6.39)
-0.010
(-19.32)
-0.010
(-19.32)

Model 3
0.003
(7.34)
0.003
(8.07)
-0.002
(-13.92)
-0.002
(-8.92)
0.001
(4.97)
-0.008
(-6.57)
-0.010
(-12.31)

Model 4
0.017
(7.50)
0.005
(2.42)
-0.005
(-6.05)
-0.003
(-2.65)
-0.001
(-0.38)
0.003
(0.25)
-0.011
(-1.93)

-0.004
(-21.93)
-0.006
(-23.11)
-0.017
(-283.60)
2.03 x 10-4
(307.01)
-4.75 x 10-4
(-14.84)

-0.010
(-27.02)
-0.003
(5.08)
-0.014
(-87.49)
1.69 x 10-4
(94.27)
-4.48 x 10-5
(-0.69)

-0.008
(-19.93)
-0.005
(-7.75)
-0.015
(-77.16)
1.92 x 10-4
(90.60)
-0.002
(-23.48)

-0.016
(-5.76)
-0.007
(-1.32)
-0.011
(-6.76)
1.41 x 10-4
(8.77)
-0.002
(-4.26)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,027

Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,849

Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,340

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by employee are
reported in parentheses.

Table B4: Occupation-Specific Unemployment Rate Effects
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

OccupationSpecific Unemp
Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Occupation x
Unemployment
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-10.00)
0.004
(24.89)
-0.002
(-26.33)
-0.003
(-24.29)
-0.007
(-14.39)
09,998
(-30.96)

Model 2
-0.004
(-12.08)
0.001
(4.21)
-0.001
(12.08)
0.001
(3.41)
-0.005
(-3.48)
-0.009
(-17.22)

Model 3
0.003
(7.16)
0.003
(8.43)
-0.002
(-9.00)
0.001
(2.76)
-0.007
(-6.32)
-0.008
(-10.57)

Model 4
0.016
(7.09)
0.006
(2.67)
-0.003
(-2.39)
-0.001
(-0.26)
0.005
(0.46)
-0.012
(-1.98)

-0.006
(-38.59)
-0.004
(-17.21)
-0.016
(-280.26)
1.99 x 10-4
(304.78)
-4.12 x 10-4
(-12.00)

-0.011
(-28.33)
-0.003
(-4.37)
-0.014
(-87.20)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.00)
-1.23 x 10-4
(-1.74)

-0.009
(-21.97)
-0.004
(-6.56)
-0.015
(-77.93)
1.93 x 10-4
(91.67)
-0.001
(-18.33)

-0.017
(-6.15)
-0.008
(-1.49)
-0.012
(-7.22)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.21)
-0.002
(-3.28)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by employee are
reported in parentheses.

Table B5: OLS Models of Turnover for Four Groups of Employees – Alternative SEs
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-1.90)
0.004
(2.12)
-0.001
(-2.74)
-0.002
(-1.84)
-0.003
(-3.55)
-0.007
(-0.84)
-0.010
(-5.38)

Model 2
-0.001
(-3.06)
0.001
(1.66)
4.65 x 10-5
(0.20)
-0.001
(-1.85)
0.001
(2.31)
-0.005
(-0.92)
-0.009
(-9.89)

Model 3
0.002
(1.25)
0.003
(1.69)
-0.001
(-2.14)
-0.002
(-0.97)
0.001
(1.07)
-0.008
(-1.12)
-0.009
(-5.38)

Model 4
0.016
(5.16)
0.005
(2.13)
-0.003
(-3.99)
-0.003
(-1.33)
-3.84 x 10-4
(-0.18)
0.006
(0.50)
-0.012
(-2.08)

-0.006
(-4.45)
-0.004
(-6.18)
-0.016
(-20.29)
2.00 x 10-5
(25.31)
-4.20 x 10-4
(-3.14)

-0.011
(-17.13)
-0.003
(-3.29)
-0.014
(-15.48)
1.70 x 10-4
(18.53)
-1.15 x 10-4
(-0.79)

-0.009
(-7.37)
-0.004
(-3.49)
-0.015
(-14.32)
1.93 x 10-4
(-18.05)
-0.001
(-4.76)

-0.017
(-5.36)
-0.007
(-1.37)
-0.012
(-4.74)
1.47 x 10-4
(5.92)
-0.002
(-3.18)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by agency are
reported in parentheses.

Table B6: OLS Models of Turnover for Four Groups of Employees – Alternative SEs
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-0.87)
0.004
(2.63)
-0.001
(-3.32)
-0.002
(-2.60)
-0.003
(-9.35)
-0.007
(-3.74)
-0.010
(-14.87)

Model 2
-0.001
(-3.75)
0.001
(1.46)
4.65 x 10-5
(0.26)
-0.001
(-1.87)
0.001
(3.03)
-0.005
(-2.56)
-0.009
(-16.00)

Model 3
0.002
(1.09)
0.003
(1.55)
-0.001
(-2.62)
-0.002
(-1.38)
0.001
(1.33)
-0.008
(-3.84)
-0.009
(-9.60)

Model 4
0.016
(4.57)
0.005
(1.91)
-0.003
(-3.68)
-0.003
(-1.51)
-3.84 x 10-4
(-0.19)
0.006
(0.48)
-0.012
(-1.94)

-0.006
(-12.24)
-0.004
(-9.27)
-0.016
(-57.40)
2.00 x 10-5
(62.70)
-4.20 x 10-4
(-5.66)

-0.011
(-25.02)
-0.003
(-4.10)
-0.014
(-39.81)
1.70 x 10-4
(46.72)
-1.15 x 10-4
(-1.38)

-0.009
(-12.97)
-0.004
(-5.74)
-0.015
(-41.67)
1.93 x 10-4
(48.25)
-0.001
(-6.00)

-0.017
(-5.30)
-0.007
(-1.34)
-0.012
(-7.69)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.82)
-0.002
(-3.02)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,868

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,346

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by agency are
reported in parentheses.

Table B7: Cox Regression Models of Turnover for Four Groups of Employees
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Occ Cat FE
Group
N

Model 1
1.365
(116.58)
1.002
(0.61)
0.834
(-310.94)
0.989
(-6.91)
0.861
(-55.67)
0.707
(-32.36)
0.772
(-40.61)

Model 2
1.238
(24.51)
1.037
(4.22)
0.779
(-128.24)
1.119
(21.40)
0.874
(-18.51)
0.665
(-11.38)
0.549
(-32.10)

Model 3
1.541
(62.67)
1.047
(5.92)
0.828
(-124.62)
1.047
(10.36)
0.772
(-37.19)
0.694
(-13.50)
0.620
(-22.39)

Model 4
1.549
(14.53)
1.167
(5.19)
0.830
(-24.42)
1.031
(1.64)
0.635
(-14.26)
0.733
(-1.79)
0.586
(-5.01)

0.887
(-36.59)
0.800
(-40.43)
0.805
(-363.34)
1.002
(364.16)
0.976
(-37.13)

0.802
(-20.91)
0.754
(-14.38)
0.873
(-46.24)
1.002
(64.93)
0.966
(-21.51)

0.866
(-15.22)
0.733
(-19.35)
0.967
(-9.45)
1.001
(30.27)
0.933
(-44.98)

0.781
(-5.09)
0.680
(-4.51)
1.142
(5.76)
0.999
(-2.98)
0.959
(-6.25)

Yes
All Employees
17,529,027

Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Supervisors
2,788,849

Yes
Career SES
103,340

This table includes the estimated hazard rations from Cox regression turnover models
stratified by agency for four groups of employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory
role, and career Senior Executive Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors
clustered by bureau are reported in parentheses.

Table B8: Probit Models of Turnover for Four Groups of Employees
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Bureau FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.016
(-11.51)
0.044
(28.52)
-0.008
(-21.88)
-0.022
(-28.83)
-0.032
(-25.00)
-0.059
(-13.64)
-0.089
(-30.58)

Model 2
-0.051
(-12.08)
0.020
(5.40)
0.001
(0.47)
-0.012
(-5.37)
0.027
(7.94)
-0.026
(-1.77)
-0.123
(-15.45)

Model 3
0.022
(6.37)
0.037
(9.63)
-0.010
(-10.67)
-0.020
(-9.53)
0.017
(4.70)
-0.067
(-5.65)
-0.100
(-10.01)

Model 4
0.110
(6.93)
0.033
(2.06)
-0.019
(-3.88)
-0.019
(-2.04)
0.008
(0.50)
0.064
(0.78)
-0.090
(-1.76)

-0.059
(-40.38)
-0.047
(-19.30)
-0.098
(-286.47)
0.001
(323.64)
-0.003
(-10.48)

-0.134
(-27.55)
-0.041
(-4.87)
-0.099
(-68.47)
0.001
(82.60)
-0.002
(-2.77)

-0.100
(-22.33)
-0.053
(-7.16)
-0.064
(-41.06)
0.001
(63.44)
-0.013
(-17.57)

-0.135
(-6.11)
-0.053
(-1.29)
-0.019
(-1.61)
4.64 x 10-4
(4.35)
-0.012
(-3.66)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,259

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,617,861

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,471

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,044

This table includes the estimated probit coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by individual are
reported in parentheses.

Table B9: Interaction of Mismatch and Priority
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Mismatch x
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Bureau FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.002
(-10.03)
0.004
(17.49)
-0.001
(-21.53)
-0.002
(-23.94)
-1.75 x 10-4
(-1.13)
-0.004
(-24.19)
-0.007
(-14.70)
-0.010
(-31.57)

Model 2
-0.004
(-11.90)
0.003
(5.77)
8.25 x 10-5
(0.87)
-3.07 x 10-4
(-1.28)
-0.001
(-4.50)
0.001
(3.45)
-0.005
(-3.58)
-0.009
(-17.26)

Model 3
0.002
(7.03)
0.004
(6.94)
-0.001
(-10.50)
-0.002
(-6.66)
-4.26 x 10-4
(-1.19)
0.001
(2.86)
-0.008
(-6.38)
-0.009
(-10.80)

Model 4
0.016
(7.28)
0.010
(2.99)
-0.003
(-4.29)
-0.001
(-0.78)
-0.004
(-1.88)
-4.06 x 10-4
(-0.21)
0.006
(0.50)
-0.012
(-2.02)

-0.006
(-39.09)
-0.004
(-17.32)
-0.016
(-280.65)
2.00 x 10-4
(305.11)
-4.21 x 10-5
(-12.25)

-0.011
(-28.19)
-0.003
(-4.32)
-0.014
(-87.24)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.02)
-1.16 x 10-4
(-1.64)

-0.009
(-21.90)
-0.004
(-6.73)
-0.015
(-77.85)
1.93 x 10-4
(91.60)
-0.001
(-18.15)

-0.017
(-6.01)
-0.007
(-1.39)
-0.012
(-7.24)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.23)
-0.002
(-3.42)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,259

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,617,861

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,471

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,044

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by individual are
reported in parentheses.

Table B10: Duty Station Fixed Effects
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Occ Cat x DS
FE
Agency FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.001
(-5.77)
0.004
(24.78)
-0.002
(-41.61)
-0.003
(-29.73)
-0.003
(-24.04)
-0.009
(-16.98)
-0.011
(-36.31)

Model 2
-0.004
(-10.63)
0.001
(3.54)
-0.001
(-4.34)
-0.001
(-5.31)
0.001
(3.52)
-0.006
(-4.09)
-0.009
(-17.38)

Model 3
0.003
(7.99)
0.003
(8.86)
-0.002
(-15.29)
-0.002
(-8.93)
0.001
(2.79)
-0.008
(-6.98)
-0.008
(-10.52)

Model 4
0.017
(7.51)
0.005
(2.41)
-0.005
(-6.00)
-0.003
(-2.57)
-0.001
(-0.33)
0.003
(0.25)
-0.012
(-2.02)

-0.005
(-31.72)
-0.006
(-24.11)
-0.016
(-281.71)
2.00 x 10-4
(305.75)
-4.18 x 10-4
(-12.16)

-0.010
(-27.20)
-0.003
(-5.72)
-0.014
(-87.60)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.36)
-9.48 x 10-5
(-1.33)

-0.009
(-21.04)
-0.005
(-7.93)
-0.015
(-78.11)
1.93 x 10-4
(91.83)
-0.001
(-17.86)

-0.016
(-5.88)
-0.008
(-1.50)
-0.012
(-7.23)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.23)
-0.002
(-3.32)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,027

Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,618,289

Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,849

Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,340

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by employee are
reported in parentheses.

Table B11: Interactions with DC/MD/VA indicator
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
DCMDVA
Year 1 x
DCMDVA
Mismatch x
DCMDVA
Female
A.I./A.N.
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Bureau FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.001
(-5.45)
0.006
(30.72)
-0.001
(-23.33)
-0.003
(-28.90)
-0.007
(-36.86)
-0.002
(-6.68)
-0.005
(-18.32)
-0.003
(-24.25)
-0.008
(-15.51)
-0.009
(-31.13)

Model 2
-0.003
(-6.26)
0.002
(3.49)
2.51 x 10-5
(0.27)
-0.001
(-4.91)
-0.002
(-4.96)
-0.002
(-3.43)
-0.001
(-1.45)
0.001
(3.72)
-0.005
(-3.73)
-0.009
(-17.08)

Model 3
0.003
(7.05)
0.005
(11.23)
-0.001
(-10.25)
-0.002
(-8.70)
-0.003
(-6.85)
-0.002
(-2.51)
-0.005
(-6.66)
0.001
(3.01)
-0.008
(-6.62)
-0.009
(-10.84)

Model 4
0.030
(6.41)
0.009
(2.02)
-0.003
(-4.83)
-0.003
(-2.26)
0.009
(2.92)
-0.018
(-3.49)
-0.005
(-0.96)
-4.77 x 10-4
(-0.25)
0.007
(0.58)
-0.012
(-2.01)

-0.005
(-31.40)
-0.005
(-19.45)
-0.016
(-281.38)
2.00 x 10-4
(305.61)
-3.75 x 10-4
(-10.91)

-0.010
(-27.31)
-0.003
(-4.61)
-0.014
(-87.37)
1.70 x 10-4
(94.15)
-1.01 x 10-4
(-1.43)

-0.009
(-20.80)
-0.004
(-7.30)
-0.015
(-77.86)
1.93 x 10-4
(-77.86)
-0.001
(-17.33)

-0.017
(-5.99)
-0.007
(-1.31)
-0.012
(-7.22)
1.47 x 10-4
(9.21)
-0.002
(-3.40)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
17,529,259

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
2,617,861

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Supervisors
2,788,471

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
103,044

This table includes the estimated probit coefficients from turnover models for four groups of
employees – all, GS 13-15, employees in a supervisory role, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by individual are
reported in parentheses.

Table B12: OLS Models of Turnover, 1973-2013
Variable
Year 1
Ideological
Mismatch
Unemployment
Rate
Priority
Age
Age2
Education

Tenure FE
Occupation FE
Bureau FE
Cubic Trend
Group
N

Model 1
-0.006
(-45.36)
0.004
(25.64)
-0.001
(-52.42)
-0.002
(-32.28)
-0.017
(-398.77)
2.05 x 10-4
(8.48)
2.56 x 10-4
(8.48)

Model 2
-0.008
(-27.44)
4.81 x 10-4
(1.64)
6.42 x 10-5
(1.08)
-0.001
(-7.83)
-0.014
(-100.44)
1.72 x 10-4
(108.57)
-3.89 x10-4
(-6.18)

Model 3
0.006
(2.02)
0.004
(1.95)
-1.65 x 10-5
(-0.04)
-0.001
(-1.26)
-0.013
(-9.31)
1.59 x 10-4
(11.32)
-0.001
(-2.59)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
All Employees
30,339,305

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
GS 13-15
3,715,006

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Career SES
126,506

This table includes the estimated coefficients from turnover models for
three groups of employees – all, GS 13-15, and career Senior Executive
Service employees. Here we use the Buzzfeed OPM data release, which
includes additional years of data and presidential transitions (1973-2013).
However, that data is less detailed with respect to control variables than
what is used in the main text. Additionally, there is no indicator for
supervisory employees, so we cannot estimate models for these employees.
T-ratios based on robust standard errors clustered by individual are
reported in parentheses.

