NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GLOBALIZATION AND WAGE INEQUALITY
Elhanan Helpman
Working Paper 22944
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22944

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

This is the background paper for my Keynes Lecture in Economics delivered to the British
Academy on September 28, 2016. I thank Gene Grossman and Stephen Redding for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Globalization and Wage Inequality
Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 22944
December 2016
JEL No. F10,F61,F66
ABSTRACT
Globalization has been blamed for rising inequality in rich and poor countries. Yet the views of
many protagonists in this debate are not based on evidence. To help form an evidence-based
opinion, I review in this paper the theoretical and empirical literature on the relationship between
globalization and wage inequality. While the initial analysis that started in the early 1990s
focused on a particular mechanism that links trade to wages, subsequent studies have considered
several other channels, and the quantitative assessment of the size of these influences has been
carried out in multiple studies. Building on this research, I conclude that trade played an
appreciable role in increasing wage inequality, but that its cumulative effect has been modest, and
that globalization does not explain the preponderance of the rise in wage inequality within
countries.

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu

I. Background
While measures of globalization—which assess the importance of international transactions in the
world’s economic activity—may include international trade in goods and services, international
trade in financial and nonfinancial assets, and international migration, this article centers on the
role of merchandise trade in the globalization process. The role of international commerce in the
evolution of the world’s economy has a long history, dating back to biblical times more than three
thousand years ago and extending to the Roman empire, the Dark Ages, the Middle Ages, and the
post–Industrial Revolution era (see McCormick 2001, Findlay and O’Rourke 2007, and Helpman
2011, chap. 1). Despite this long history, imports plus exports as a share of the value of output
were very small until the beginning of the 19th century. Starting around 1820, when the value of
world imports plus exports amounted to 2% of the value of the world’s output, the value of trade
relative to income started to climb, and it kept climbing until the outbreak of World War I,
exceeding 22% in 1913. Judged by the evolution of the share of international trade in income, there
were two waves of globalization since the beginning of the 19th century; the first started in the
early part of the 19th century and ended with World War I, while the second started after World
War II and continues until this very day. The ratio of trade to output declined between the wars.2
Likewise, the growth rate of income per capita in the world economy was negligible until
the 19th century (see Maddison, 2001). Starting from 1820 it accelerated and remained high until
World War I. The growth rate was lower during the years between the two world wars, and then
reached an unprecedented peak between World War II and the oil crisis of 1973, a period known
as the Golden Age of economic growth. Moreover, even after the oil crisis the rate of growth of
income per capita remained high by historical standards (see Helpman 2004, chap. 1). Evidently,
trade and growth followed similar trajectories during these historical episodes.
Bourguignon and Morrisson (2002) constructed a data set from which they estimated the
evolution of inequality of personal income in the world beginning with the first wave of
globalization and ending in 1992. Using two common measures of inequality, the Gini coefficient

2

The rise in the trade–income ratio (imports plus exports relative to GDP) was temporarily interrupted
after the oil crisis of 1973 and the recession of 2008; see
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/TG.VAL.TOTL.GD.ZS?end=2015&start=1960, accessed on July 31,
2016. According to these data, the trade–income ratio exceeded 50% in 2008. I thank Alan Taylor for
providing the data cited in the text.

1

and the Theil index, they showed that inequality increased dramatically during that time span. In
their data the Gini coefficient was 0.5 in 1820 and close to 0.66 in 1992, while the Theil index was
slightly above 0.52 in 1820 and exceeded 0.85 in 1992. Importantly, they decomposed the
inequality of the world’s distribution of personal income into a within- versus a between-country
component, where the latter is calculated under the counterfactual supposition that the income
level of every individual within a country equals the country’s per capita income. The Theil index
is particularly suitable for this type of decomposition because the within- and between-country
Theil indexes add up nicely to equal the index of the world’s distribution of income. According to
updated data reported in van Zanden, Baten, Foldvari and van Leeuwen (2014), which extends to
the year 2000, overall inequality increased steadily until the middle of the 20th century and reached
a peak in 1975. Importantly, however, the rise in inequality was primarily driven by the rise in
inequality between countries; that is, over time, income per capita increased faster in rich countries
than in poor countries, thereby widening the gap of income per capita between them.
Between the early 1980s and 2000 the Theil index of within-country inequality and the
Theil index of between-country inequality changed little. Nevertheless, due to economic growth,
extreme poverty declined dramatically in the world economy. Extreme poverty was originally
defined as income of less than one dollar a day, and this threshold has been updated to less than
1.25 dollars a day adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2005. In 1981 close to two billion
people, a bit more than half the population, lived in extreme poverty, while by 2008 this number
had declined to less than 1.3 billion, or a little over 22% (see Anand and Segal, 2015, Table 11.8).
Noting that the world’s population increased by about 50% between 1981 and 2008, this reduction
in poverty is impressive indeed.
These long-term trends in the world economy suggest that economic growth, globalization
in the form of expanding foreign trade, and income inequality are intertwined. Recent concerns
about these issues are more narrowly focused, however, because in as much as the contribution of
within-country inequality to total inequality of the world distribution of personal income was stable
between 1981 and 2000, big changes occurred in individual countries afterwards. While inequality
of income declined in a number of emerging economies, particularly in Latin America, it increased
significantly in most OECD countries.3 But earnings gaps between skilled and unskilled workers,

3

Between the mid-1980s and 2013, income inequality declined slightly in Greece and Turkey, and
changed very little in Belgium, the Netherlands and France. In all other OECD countries it increased

2

which played a large role in rising income inequality from the late 1970s to the early 1990s, also
increased in many less-developed countries that managed to significantly close the gap in their
income per capita with the rich countries. The sources of this rise in inequality have been hotly
debated and a great deal of research has attempted to unearth them.

II. The Rise of the College Wage Premium
In 1913 the top 1% of U.S. income earners received 18% of U.S. income. Their share declined to
8% in the mid-1970s, after which it started to climb, reaching 13% in 1990 and 18% in 2008.4
This U-shaped form of the share of top earners in a country’s income is not unique to the United
States, as shown by Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011). In other English-speaking countries, such
as Canada and the United Kingdom, inequality evolved along similar lines. And moreover, this
pattern is not restricted to top incomes; other measures of inequality, such as the Gini coefficient,
show similar trends. For our purposes the more important observation is that inequality has been
rising in many countries since the late 1970s, and this includes not only the English-speaking
countries, the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand, but
also the Nordic countries Sweden, Finland and Norway, as well as poorer countries such as India
and China. An important source of this rise in inequality has been rising inequality of labor income,
which attracted much attention in the early 1990s (see Katz and Autor, 1999).
Katz and Murphy (1992) pointed out that despite the continuous rise in the number of
college graduates relative to high school graduates in the U.S. economy, the college wage premium
rose sharply in the 1980s. This trend continued in later years. Autor (2014) showed that the relative
supply of college graduates, measured by the share of their hours in the aggregate number of hours
worked by the adult population, increased continuously from 1963 to 2012. At the same time, the
college wage premium—which expresses in percentage terms how much more a college graduate
earns than a high school graduate—followed a humped shape between 1963 and 1979 and sharply
increased thereafter. According to these updated data, the college wage premium was 48% in 1979

substantially, and especially so in Finland, Sweden, New Zealand, the United States and Mexico (see
OECD, 2015, Figure 1.3).
4
Source: The World Wealth and Income Database (WID), http://www.wid.world, accessed on September
12, 2015.

3

and had doubled to 96% by 2012.5 In 1987, the last year in the Katz and Murphy sample, the
college wage premium was 63%.6
From the vantage point of 1992, Katz and Murphy asked whether the rise in the college
wage premium during the 1980s was driven by supply or demand factors, and they concluded that
the dominant cause was an increase in the relative demand for skilled workers, and especially for
those with a college degree. Following an analysis of alternative explanations, including the impact
of foreign trade on wage inequality, they concluded: “Although much of this shift in relative
demand can be accounted for by observed shifts in the industrial and occupational composition of
employment toward relatively skill-intensive sectors, the majority reflects shifts in relative labor
demand occurring within detailed sectors. These within-sector shifts are likely to reflect skillbiased technological change” (Katz and Murphy, 1992, p.37). The conclusion that skill-biased
technological change was the principal cause behind the widening gap in the wages of skilled and
unskilled workers was subsequently echoed in additional studies. Other factors, such as the decline
of unionization, the decline of the minimum wage, and deregulation of labor and product markets,
did not appear to play a large role in the rise of the college wage premium.7 Attempts to disentangle
the contribution of trade from the contribution of technology came out in favor of technology.

III. What Does Basic Theory Teach Us?
A celebrated result from the factor proportions trade theory, known as the Stolper-Samuelson
Theorem, was used to interpret the rising college wage premium. According to this theorem, in a
country that trades low-skill-intensive and high-skill-intensive products on international markets

5

I am grateful to David Autor for providing these data.
Measured in constant 2012 dollars, the college wage premium increased from 17.4 thousand dollars in
1979 to about 35 thousand in 2012; see Autor (2014).
7
See Bourguignon (2015, chap. 3) for a review of evidence concerning these factors in a variety of
countries. In the United States, for example, the debate concerning the impact of the minimum wage on
inequality led to a nuanced conclusion. Card and DiNardo (2002) argued that the decline of the real value
of the minimum wage during the 1980s played a dominant role in the rise of wage inequality. On the
other side, Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008) showed that the minimum wage had an impact on inequality
at the lower end of the wage distribution, but not at the upper end where inequality increased most. In an
updated recent analysis, Autor, Manning and Smith (2016) found that the decline in the real minimum
wage explains 30 to 40 percent of the rise in wage inequality at the lower tail (the 50/10 percentile ratio)
in the 1980s. But they also point out that they cannot reject the hypothesis that the spillovers of wages
from the minimum to higher percentiles is spurious due to measurement errors.
6

4

an increase in the price of low-skill-intensive products raises the real wage of the country’s workers
with low skills and reduces the real wages of its workers with high skills.8 And, alternatively, if
the price of low-skill-intensive products falls, then the real wage of low-skilled workers declines
while the real wage of high-skilled workers rises. In the former case the gap between the wages of
low-skilled and high-skilled workers narrows while in the latter case it widens. These wage
outcomes do not depend on the sources of price movements; they can result from a country’s
change in trade policy, such as magnified import protection or trade liberalization, or from changes
that occur in other countries that trade on international markets.9
To interpret the rising college wage premium in light of this theorem, consider the
following scenario. A group of less-developed countries expands its participation in foreign trade
by joining the World Trade Organization or by reducing barriers to trade. Since compared to rich
countries they specialize in low-skill-intensive products, their expanded role in world trade reduces
the relative price of low-skill-intensive products. Under the circumstances the Stolper-Samuelson
Theorem predicts that the wages of low-skilled workers should decline in rich countries relative
to the wages of high-skilled workers. Regarding high-skilled workers as college graduates then
implies that the college wage premium should rise in the rich countries.
There is, however, a flip side to this argument. For less-developed countries to sell more
low-skill-intensive products on world markets the relative price of these goods has to rise in their
home markets. The logic of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem then implies that the college wage

8

In Stolper and Samuelson (1941), where the original theorem is stated, the assumptions restrict the
economies to include two constant-returns-to-scale sectors and two factors of production, and the factors
of production are labeled labor and capital. Moreover, one sector is capital intensive and the other is labor
intensive, in the sense that the former uses more capital per worker for a given wage rate and rental rate
on capital. Under the circumstances an increase in the price of labor-intensive products raises the nominal
and real wage and reduces the nominal and real reward to capital. An increase in the price of capitalintensive products has the opposite effects. The same logic applies, of course, when instead of labor and
capital the economy uses skilled and unskilled workers. An extension of this result is provided in Jones
and Scheinkman (1977); they show that with many types of inputs and many types of sectors, all
producing under constant returns to scale, an increase in the price of a product raises the nominal and real
reward of some inputs and reduces the nominal and real reward of some other inputs.
9
Indeed, an analysis of the impact of trade protection on wages was the original motivation for Stolper
and Samuelson (1941), who assumed that one sector is labor intensive and the other is capital intensive. A
tariff raises the domestic price of import-competing products, as a result of which labor gains when the
import-competing sector is labor intensive and labor loses when the import-competing sector is capital
intensive.

5

premium should decline in these countries. In other words, the relative price of low-skill-intensive
products and the skill premium should change in opposite directions in rich and poor countries.10
Additional implications of this theory concern relative factor use. A higher college wage
premium in rich countries induces manufacturers to economize on skilled workers. By the same
logic a lower college wage premium in poor countries induces manufacturers to economize on
low-skilled workers. For that reason the ratio of high- to low-skilled employees should decline in
rich countries and rise in poor countries. Evidently, once we subscribe to this mechanism we also
buy into certain subsidiary implications. The empirical validity of these subsidiary implications
provides a test of the extent to which the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism is suitable for explaining
the rise in the college wage premium.11

IV. Evidence: The First Pass
The first attempts at empirically evaluating the role of foreign trade in raising the college wage
premium heavily relied on the factor proportions trade theory. Katz and Murphy (1992) used factor
content analysis to compute shifts in labor demand induced by U.S. imports and exports. Factor
content analysis consists of computing the services of various factors of production embodied in a
country’s exports and imports. By adding the net amounts of these services (from exports minus
imports) to the country’s factor endowment one obtains a notional country with the same
characteristics as the original country except for its factor endowment. The autarky equilibrium of
the notional country is then the same as the trade equilibrium of the original country in terms of
prices, factor rewards and consumption levels, which means that the output levels of the notional
country’s exportables equal the original country’s output levels minus exports, and the output
levels of the notional country’s importables equal the original country’s output levels plus imports.
In the absence of trade the country would be in autarky with the original factor endowment.
Therefore the gap between the notional country’s factor endowment and the original factor
endowment, which equals the factor content of trade, represents the implicit addition of factor
availability made possible by foreign trade. This modification of factor supplies affects factor
10

These opposite shifts require the relative prices of low-skill-intensive products to be higher in rich
countries prior to the trade expansion by less-developed countries, which is congruent with the presence
of import protection.
11
Rodrik (2015) provides an excellent discussion of this type of use of models in economics.

6

rewards in contrast to autarky. An increase in supply depresses a factor’s reward, while a reduction
in supply raises its reward.12 A similar analysis applies to changes in trade that result from changes
in world prices by comparing the factor contents of trade before and after the price changes.
Katz and Murphy found that changes in U.S. trade flows embodied flows of factor content
that increased the demand for skilled relative to unskilled workers, thereby contributing to the rise
in the wage gap between them. Yet, “Although trade-induced changes in relative demand move in
the correct direction to help explain rising education differentials in the 1980s, they are quite small
relative to the increase in the relative supplies of more-educated workers over the same period” (p.
65). They therefore concluded that foreign trade did not play a big role in the rise of the college
wage premium. In a more detailed study of the factor content of trade flows with less-developed
countries between 1980 and 1995, Borjas, Freeman and Katz (1997) concluded that trade
accounted for 20 percent of the rise in the U.S. college wage premium. Immigration, which
consisted primarily of workers with less than a college degree, also raised the relative supply of
low-skilled workers. But the impact of these workers on the college wage premium was limited,
not exceeding the impact of trade expansion with less-developed countries.13
The Stolper-Samuelson mechanism was also employed by Krugman (1995) for evaluating
the influence of trade with less-developed countries on wages. Although, he argued, in theory this
mechanism can explain the empirical pattern, reasonable parametrization of the theoretical model
leads to the conclusion that it cannot explain the magnitude of the rise in the college wage
premium.
A quantitative assessment of the impact of trade with less-developed countries on the U.S.
(or some other country’s) college wage premium has to use an estimate of changes in the relative
price of high-skill-intensive products, or prices of exports relative to imports (the terms of trade),
and it has to use an estimate of the impact of such price changes on changes in the relative wage
of skilled workers. The Stolper-Samuelson Theorem implies that an increase in the relative price
of high-skill-intensive products, be it due to the rise in the price of these products or a decline in
the price of low-skill-intensive products, has a positive impact on the relative wage of skilled

12

See Krugman (2008) for a clear exposition. This argument rests on some assumptions that are common
in the factor proportions trade theory, and the last sentence strictly applies to a two-factor environment
only.
13
U.S. imports from less-developed countries were small in the 1980s, about 2% of GDP, which was
about half the import volume from developed countries (see Krugman, 2008, Figure 2).

7

workers. It follows that the extent to which this mechanism explains the rise in the college wage
premium depends on whether relative prices of high-skill-intensive products increased in the 1980s
and how large that increase was, and on the size of the coefficient that translates relative price
changes into changes in relative wages.14 In other words, the impact of trade on the college wage
premium depends on how large this combined effect is in practice.
Lawrence and Slaughter (1993) estimated the relationship between sectoral skill intensity,
measured as the employment of nonproduction relative to production workers, and price changes.
They found no evidence that during the 1980s prices of high-skill-intensive products increased in
the U.S. more than prices of low-skill-intensive products.15 Leamer (1998) tracked sectoral prices
relative to the overall producer price index during three decades: the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.
Textile and apparel were the low-skill-intensive sectors in his sample, and he found that their
relative prices declined markedly, by 30%, only in the 1970s. In the 1980s, when the college wage
premium soared, the relative prices of these products increased only slightly. One could of course
argue that the price changes in the 1970s had the biggest impact on wages only in the 1980s,
because the transmission of price shocks into wages was slow. But the credibility of this
argument—which is not grounded in evidence—is questionable, even if one believes that the
adjustment of wages to prices is not contemporaneous. Leamer (1998) also estimated “mandated”
factor price changes; that is, factor price changes mandated by the zero profit condition in
competitive markets. In this approach prices equal marginal costs and therefore changes in factor
prices result from either product price changes or changes in productivity. Comparing the resulting
estimates of mandated wage changes with wage data provides a test of the soundness of these

14

The size of the coefficient that translates relative price changes into changes in relative wages depends
on a host of characteristics of the model economy deployed for the analysis. For the Stolper and
Samuelson (1941) economic structure it depends only on the factor intensities of the two sectors as
measured by factor shares in production costs (see Jones, 1965). If instead one envisions a sector-specific
structure in which there are two industries and three factors, one of the factors being specific to one
industry and another factor being specific to the other industry and the third factor being mobile between
them, then this coefficient depends on the factor intensity of each sector, the relative size of each sector,
and the elasticity of substitution between the two inputs in each one of them (see Jones, 1971). By
regressing relative factor rewards on relative prices one obtains a reduced-form estimate that depends on
these structural features. This estimate can then be interpreted as a “sufficient statistic” for the impact of
relative prices on relative factor rewards. See Chetty (2009) for a review of the “sufficient statistic”
approach in economics.
15
There was a controversy surrounding these estimates. For example, Sachs and Shatz (1994) found a
positive effect by isolating the computer industry. They justified this formulation with the argument that
computer prices were grossly mismeasured.

8

estimates. It turns out, however, that these estimates are very sensitive to how much of the
productivity growth is assumed to feed into prices, which limits the trustworthiness of the
inferences drawn from this analysis (see Feenstra, 2015, pp. 87–91). Be this as it may, Leamer’s
main conclusion was that Stolper-Samuelson effects were strong in the 1970s but not in the 1980s.
Apparently, other mechanisms are needed to account for the rise of the college wage premium in
the 1980s.16
Another challenge to the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism was presented by evidence from
less-developed countries. A number of these countries implemented unilateral trade reforms in the
1980s and early 1990s, including Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, India and Mexico. Tariff reductions
were far-reaching in these episodes, as they were in Chile’s trade liberalization in the 1970s (see
Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007). According to the theory these policies should have reduced the
reward to skilled relative to unskilled workers (see Section 3), yet relative wages responded in the
opposite direction. And similarly to what happened in the rich countries, the use of skilled workers
increased within sectors despite the rise in their relative cost (see Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2007).

V. Trade vs. Technology
As pointed out in Section 2, Katz and Murphy (1992) concluded that the rise of the U.S. college
wage premium during the 1980s was most likely caused by skill-biased technological change, and
the majority of the shift in relative labor demand occurred within rather than between sectors. What
skill-biased technological change means in this context is that the efficiency of skilled labor
increased faster than the efficiency of unskilled labor.17 If, alternatively, a decline in the relative
price of low-skill-intensive products were the foremost cause of the rise in the college wage
premium, we would have observed a reallocation of factors of production from low-skill- to highskill-intensive sectors on the one hand and a reduction in the employment of high-skilled relative
to low-skilled workers within all manufacturing industries on the other. Since the supply of college
graduates increased markedly during that time period relative to the supply of workers with lower

16

See Slaughter (2000) for a more detailed discussion of these issues and a review of additional evidence.
A simple way to understand this definition is to imagine that output depends on the amounts of
“effective” units of labor and that technological change raises the effective units for a given number of
workers (or hours). Skill-biased technical change then implies that, given a fixed number of low-skilled
and high-skilled workers, the number of effective units rises faster among the skilled.
17

9

education levels, the allocation of college graduates to high-skill-intensive sectors should have
been massive. No such shifts took place, however. According to the evidence in Berman, Bound
and Griliches (1994), the relative employment of skilled workers increased in all manufacturing
industries, and these within-sector changes account for the majority of the rise in the aggregate
employment of skilled relative to unskilled workers in manufacturing. The same type of
employment shifts took place in other rich countries during the 1980s. While in the United States
more than 70 percent of the increase in the employment of skilled (nonproduction) workers
occurred within manufacturing sectors, much larger shares (more than 90 percent) were recorded
in Australia, Belgium and the U.K.
Skill-biased technological change can explain the above-described employment shifts
together with the surge in the college wage premium, at least in theory. Furthermore, considerable
evidence shows that advances in technology shifted factor demand toward highly skilled workers;
sectors with faster increases in the demand for such workers were more innovative, more intensive
in R&D, and more intensive in computer use.18 On the other side, Machin and van Reenen (1998)
found that in seven OECD countries the share of imports originating from less-developed countries
played a minor role in explaining the rise in the employment of skilled workers within industries.
This type of evidence was interpreted to imply that the role of foreign trade in the rise of the college
wage premium was modest at best.
Leamer (2000) objected to this interpretation, arguing that for given world prices the data
on shifts in wages and employment are not consistent with pure skill-augmenting technological
change: that is, a productivity improvement of every skilled worker. If this were the case, wages
of low-skilled workers would not change and wages of high-skilled workers would rise in
proportion to the rate of technological improvement, so that wages per effective unit would not
change. Under these circumstances the growth of effective units of skilled labor should not change
factor proportions within industries, measured in effective units, but should shift resources from
low-skill-intensive to high-skill-intensive sectors.
While theoretically correct, Leamer’s argument relies on the assumption that world prices
of goods do not change, which would be appropriate if the skill-biased technical change were a

18

See Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994) and Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) for the U.S. evidence and
Machin and Van Reenen (1998) for comparable evidence from the U.S., the U.K., France, Germany,
Denmark, Sweden and Japan.

10

localized phenomenon in some small country. As pointed out by Krugman (2000), however, this
assumption is quite inappropriate when the improvement in technology is widespread. In the latter
case there is a direct effect on wages, captured by Leamer’s analysis, and there is an indirect effect
through changes in final product prices set in motion by the resulting supply shifts. Working out a
complete model embodying these considerations, Krugman showed that the final outcomes are
theoretically consistent with the patterns in the data.
Was skill-biased technical change ubiquitous? The evidence points to an affirmative
answer. Berman and Machin (2000) showed that in the 1980s the within-industry contribution to
increases in nonproduction workers’ wage-bill shares was large in all 12 rich countries in their
sample with the exception of Sweden, and that changes in sectoral nonproduction workers’ wagebill shares were positively correlated across these countries. For 9 of them, the upswings in their
wage-bill shares were positively correlated with the U.S. upswings, and only Austria and Belgium
had a few negative correlations with other countries (see their Table 2). Berman and Machin also
showed that during the same time period the within-industry contribution to the increase in
nonproduction workers’ wage-bill shares was large in all of the 18 middle-income countries in
their sample with the exception of Korea, as well as in the poor countries in their sample with the
exception of Bangladesh. Furthermore, sectoral skill upgradings in the poor and middle-income
countries were positively correlated with skill upgradings in the U.S. sectors (see their Table 4),
and sectoral skill upgradings in all these countries—rich, middle-income and poor—were
positively correlated with U.S. computer usage and OECD R&D intensity (see their Table 5).
Evidently, changes in technology were widespread and exhibited similar patterns in countries at
different levels of development.
Do similar patterns of wage changes in rich and poor countries necessarily contradict a
foreign trade–based explanation of the rising college wage premium? Undeniably, this evidence is
at odds with the implications of the theoretical analysis in Section 3. Despite that, Feenstra and
Hanson (1996, 1997) managed to develop a sensible modification of the theoretical model in order
to qualitatively square the theory with this evidence. To this end they proposed to view the
production process as a collection of many activities or intermediate inputs that differ in factor
intensity. In these circumstances rich countries, with a high relative wage of skilled workers, find
it profitable to source low-skill-intensive intermediate inputs from poor countries. In other words,
the rich countries specialize in high-skill-intensive production while poor countries specialize in

11

low-skill-intensive production. When sourcing from foreign countries becomes cheaper, be it due
to a decline in transport costs or improvements in technology, a rich country stops producing some
of its least-skill-intensive intermediates and instead sources them from a poorer country. This
change in the sourcing pattern can take place within firm boundaries by multinational corporations,
as suggested by Feenstra and Hanson, or at arm’s length, as suggested by Zhu and Trefler (2005).
In both cases the reallocated activities are least-skill-intensive in the rich country and most-skillintensive in the poor country. As a result, the demand for high-skilled labor rises in both countries
relative to low-skilled labor, bidding up the relative wage of skilled workers in both. Evidently,
this modified model has a built-in mechanism through which trade can raise the college wage
premium in rich and poor countries alike. And moreover, if all these activities and intermediate
inputs are concentrated in the same industry, it also predicts a rise in the relative use of skilled
workers within industries.
Feenstra and Hanson (1997) used data on U.S. multinational corporations that operated
assembly plants in Mexico during the 1980s to examine these implications. Those assembly plants,
erected along the U.S. border, imported intermediate inputs from the U.S. and shipped back
assembled products. This business strategy was profitable because the assembly could be done
primarily by unskilled Mexican workers. Feenstra and Hanson found that U.S. foreign direct
investment in these plants, known as maquiladoras, was positively correlated with the rise of the
share of skilled labor in Mexico’s wage bill; in regions with larger foreign investment, the wage
share of skilled labor increased more.
While this evidence confirms that offshoring of intermediate inputs affects relative wages
in the destination country, it does not tell us how important this mechanism was in shaping U.S.
wages. The latter was addressed in Feenstra and Hanson (1999). Studying the 1970s and 1980s,
they sought to evaluate the importance of offshoring versus technology in shaping U.S. wages.
Their estimates proved to be sensitive to the measure of sectoral use of high-tech equipment, which
they employed as a proxy for a sector’s technology level. Using the share of high-tech equipment
in the capital stock as a measure of technology led them to conclude that about a quarter of the rise
in the relative wage of nonproduction workers during the 1980s (1979–1990) was due to offshoring
and around 30% was due to technology. But once more weight was given to more recent
equipment, which presumably was more advanced, the contribution of offshoring halved and the
contribution of technology more than tripled. In their review of the literature, Feenstra and Hanson

12

(2003) re-estimated these relationships, giving the trade explanation as good a chance as possible,
but the results did not change much.
My conclusion from the literature discussed so far is that while several mechanisms that
link globalization to the relative wages of skilled workers have affected U.S. wages during the
1980s, their impact on wage inequality was modest. Furthermore, although technological change
has most likely played a bigger role, there is a paucity of quantitative evidence concerning its
effects. In too many cases technological change is used as a default explanation when other
alternatives are not compelling.19

VI. Broadening the Canvas
A vibrant literature has recently re-examined the relationship between foreign trade and wages,
motivated by new theoretical developments on the one hand and new facts on the other. Three
expansions of the standard model are at the core of this enterprise: firm heterogeneity within
industries, worker heterogeneity beyond the classification into two groups of low-skilled and highskilled individuals, and labor market frictions such as unemployment, wage bargaining and costly
mobility. Each of these features adds a distinct facet to the theory, helping to address issues that
were beyond the reach of previous scholarly work.

1. Firm Heterogeneity
Firm heterogeneity was introduced into trade theory in response to the discovery during the 1990s
of new patterns in previously unavailable data sets. In these data firms exhibited substantial
heterogeneity within industries in terms of productivity and size, and only a fraction of firms
exported. Furthermore, exporters differed systematically from nonexporters, with exporters being
larger and more productive.20 Melitz (2003) provided the canonical model that is consistent with

19

In fact, technological change plays a significant role in the Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1997, 1999)
story line concerning the role of foreign trade, because it is used to motivate the rise in offshoring.
20
Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1999) discovered these patterns in U.S. data, while subsequent studies
confirmed them in many other countries, including Canada, Colombia, France, Mexico, Morocco, Spain
and Taiwan (see Helpman, 2011, chap. 5).

13

these patterns, and various elaborations of his approach were applied to the study of trade and
wages.21
Melitz assumed that labor is homogeneous and entrepreneurs pay an upfront “entry” cost
to acquire a manufacturing technology. The entry cost may consist of R&D or the cost of forming
a business enterprise. Importantly, however, the productivity of the manufacturing technology
becomes known only after the entry cost is sunk, and only the distribution of productivity is known
when the entry decision is made. A company’s business strategy is formed after entry, when the
productivity of its technology becomes known. At that stage staying in business entails bearing a
fixed operating cost in every period. For this reason only firms with a high enough productivity
level are profitable, while low-productivity firms are not. The latter cut their losses by closing
shop. Companies that stay in business may also export, except that exporting entails a fixed cost
of establishing a beachhead in every destination country. For this reason only firms with high
enough productivity levels can profitably export. In sum, not all entrants into an industry stay, and
among those who do the more-productive enterprises export while the less productive serve only
the domestic market. This structure replicates the main patterns in the data.22
In Melitz (2003) all workers are paid the same wage, independently of whether they are
employed by high- or low-productivity firms, by exporters or by nonexporters. For this reason
international trade impacts the wage level but not wage inequality. Nevertheless, as we shall see
below, by adding more features firm heterogeneity can generate a nondegenerate wage distribution
that responds to foreign trade.

2. Assortative Matching
Matching has a long tradition in economics, be it for the assignment of firms to locations, of
individuals to houses, or workers to firms. Becker (1973) applied it to marriages, deriving a
condition under which there is Positive Assortative Matching (PAM). For illustrative purposes,
suppose that there are a fixed number of “men” and a fixed number of “women” and the number
of men equals the number of women. Moreover, men can be ranked by a single characteristic from
low to high and so can women. A marriage consists of pairing a man and a woman, and every pair

21

An alternative, less-influential model, was developed by Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003).
See, however, the discussion of Burstein and Vogel (2016) below for an interesting application.
22
See Melitz and Redding (2014) for a review of the original contribution and its many extensions.

14

produces a value based on the characteristic of the man and the characteristic of the woman, and
this value is higher the higher the characteristic of either the man or the woman.
What types of matches maximize aggregate value? Becker showed that if the value of a
match exhibits complementarity, then positive assortative matching maximizes the aggregate
value of marriages; that is, the man with the largest value of the masculine characteristic is matched
with the woman with the largest feminine characteristic, the man with the second largest masculine
characteristic is matched with the woman with the second largest feminine characteristic, and so
on, until the man with the lowest masculine characteristic is matched with the woman with the
lowest feminine characteristic. Complementarity of the values of matches means that the increase
in the value of a match when the masculine characteristic is replaced with a larger one is larger the
larger the feminine characteristic in the match. In other words, the marginal gain from a masculine
characteristic is increasing in the attractiveness of the woman in the match. And symmetrically,
the marginal gain from a feminine characteristic is increasing in the attractiveness of the man in
the match. This property is also known as supermodularity. Becker then showed that in a
“competitive” marriage market the resulting marriages satisfy PAM.
The same logic can be applied to matching workers with managers or firms. All we need
is to identify a worker characteristic, say ability, and a characteristic of managers, say managerial
ability, or a characteristic of firms, say technological sophistication, in order to study the matching
of workers to managers or firms. An important difference between these types of matches and
those in the above-described marriage market is that while one man is typically matched with one
woman in a marriage, many workers are matched with a single manager or a single firm. These
models use a stronger notion of complementarity in order to obtain clear portrayals of inequality;
they assume that the natural logarithm of the value of a match exhibits complementarity. This
property is also known as log supermodularity. This implies that a marginal increase in the
characteristic of one party raises the marginal value of the other party’s characteristic
proportionately more than the value of the match.23
This last feature has the following implication. Suppose, for concreteness, that workers
with ability levels between ܽ and ܾ, measured in appropriate units (e.g., years of schooling) are

23

For this condition to be necessary and sufficient for the inequality results derived in these studies,
characteristics and quantities of the two parties have to interact in specific ways; see Eeckhout and
Kircher (2016).

15

matched with firms whose technological sophistication lies between ܿ and ݀, also measured in
appropriate units. Then workers with higher ability are matched with more-sophisticated firms. In
particular, workers with ability ܽ are matched with firms whose technological sophistication is ܿ
while workers with ability ܾ are matched with firms whose technological sophistication is ݀. In
this event more-able workers are paid higher wages, and the rate at which wages rise with ability
depends on how strong the complementarity between worker ability and firm sophistication is in
the productivity function. The rate of wage increase determines in turn wage inequality in this
ability range.
Now suppose that due to a change in the economic environment (e.g., a change in relative
product prices), the workers with abilities ܽ to ܾ match with more-sophisticated firms, so that
every worker is now employed by a more-sophisticated firm. Under the circumstances the relative
wage gap between any pair of workers with different ability levels is now larger than it was before.
For this reason wage inequality is now higher than it was before.
This illustrates an important property of economies of this type: shifts in matching can
aggravate or mute wage inequality. For this reason, globalization can impact inequality through its
influence on the assortative matching of workers with firms. Ideas of this type have been applied
to models with heterogeneous workers in order to study the impact of trade on wages. They make
it possible to examine the impact of trade on wage inequality at different parts of the distribution,
comparing for example inequality at the top-end with inequality at the bottom-end of the
distribution (see below).

3. Labor Market Frictions
There is little doubt that labor markets are subjected to a variety of frictions that prevent
instantaneous adjustment of employment and wages. Some of these frictions are designed by
governments, such as minimum wages or firing costs, other are ingrained in a functioning
economy, such as the cost of finding a job or the cost of switching jobs. The latter may arise in
turn from costs of moving to a different location, to a different industry, or to a different
occupation. Additionally, in many countries labor unions play a major role in wage determination,
be it within firms, within industries, or at the country level.
Many studies examined the influence of labor market frictions—which vary substantially
across countries—on foreign trade and wages, shedding light on wage inequality (see Helpman,

16

2011, chap. 5 for a review). Two key implications of such frictions are that unemployment emerges
as a natural outcome, providing business firms have leverage over labor compensation. Details of
the mechanism differ, depending on the form of the labor market frictions, but the qualitative
outcomes are often comparable.
Search and matching in labor markets, of the type developed by Mortensen and Pissarides
(1994) and Diamond (1982a,b) for the study of macroeconomic determinants of unemployment,
is a prime ingredient in recent studies of trade and wages. In this framework firms post vacancies
and unemployed workers search for jobs. Workers are matched with vacancies, but only some
workers succeed in finding a job and only some vacancies are successfully filled. The degree of
success of the matching process depends on characteristics of the labor market; in more-efficient
markets more matches are realized and some markets favor workers more. Matched firms and
workers engage in wage bargaining. Failure to reach an agreement is costly to the workers and the
firms, because it raises the number of unfilled vacancies for firms and the number of unemployed
for workers. As a result every party has an incentive to reach an agreement. Understandably, wage
bargaining takes place in the shadow of these costs, which consequently impact the wage
agreement. International trade modifies the choices available to firms and the employment
opportunities available to workers. Through changes in these options trade modifies wages and
employment.
Skills play a noteworthy role in shaping individual earnings, notwithstanding the fact that
luck matters too. Yet skills are difficult to measure, and they depend on a host of individual
characteristics such as ability, talent, schooling, experience, and the like. Since the work of Mincer
(1974), however, three observable worker characteristics—education, experience and gender—
have been used for explaining differences in wages across individuals. As successful as this
approach has been, it explains only a fraction of the variation in wages. The residual fraction—
which cannot be explained by observable worker characteristics—is referred to as “residual
inequality” (see Katz and Murphy, 1992). Residual inequality increased over time and the sources
of this increase are still debated. The next two sections discuss the impact of trade on wages
through observable worker characteristics, while the following section discusses the impact of
trade on residual inequality.

17

VII. Observable Attributes
Needless to say, it is necessary to think about workers as being heterogeneous in order to study
how trade impacts the wages of different types of workers. Whereas most of the discussion has so
far focused on two types of workers, skilled and unskilled, the matching mechanism introduced in
the previous section can encompass richer patterns of worker heterogeneity in order to study wage
inequality across the entire spectrum of wages. Besides, matching can take a variety of forms.
Workers can be matched with capital equipment, with managers, with firms, or with sectors, and
the consequences of trade for wages depend on these particulars. In this section I discuss workers
who have observable attributes and firms that have technologies that cannot be modified. In
particular, firms cannot invest in R&D in order to enhance their productivity. The possibility of
technology upgrading is explored in the next section.
Costinot and Vogel (2010) developed a variant of the factor proportions trade model that
features multiple sectors and multiple types of workers, in which markets are competitive and
workers are matched with sectors. 24 One interpretation of their model is that sectors produce
intermediate inputs that are traded internationally, and every country uses these intermediate inputs
to assemble its own final consumer goods. Another interpretation is that workers are matched with
tasks (i.e., a sector is relabeled to be a task), and the tasks are combined to produce a final product.
In the latter case a country relies on tasks performed in other countries for producing its own
consumer goods. This interpretation might be appropriate, for example, for trade in business
services. Be this as it may, workers differ in a single dimension, call it ability (they call it skill),
and the productivity of a worker with a given ability varies across sectors. Critically, the
productivity of a worker with a specific ability level depends only on her sector of employment
and it does not depend on how many or what type of other workers are employed in this industry.
In addition, sectors can be ordered by a single characteristic, say technological sophistication, so
that the natural logarithm of output per worker, which depends on the worker’s ability and the
sector’s sophistication, exhibits complementarity; i.e., the productivity function is log
supermodular. In these circumstances there is positive assortative matching: higher-ability workers
are matched with more-sophisticated sectors in every country.

24

Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007) is a predecessor that studies trade and wages with an assignment model in
which workers sort across sectors.

18

In this type of world, international trade has an unambiguous effect on wage inequality
when the countries differ in factor endowments in a way that exhibits a clear ranking of relative
ability abundance.25 This means the following: Suppose that the world consists of two countries
and for any two ability levels one country has relatively more workers with the higher ability (this
is known as the monotone likelihood ratio property). In this case we can state unambiguously that
this country is high-ability abundant compared to the other country. The opening of trade between
a high-ability abundant country and a low-ability abundant country improves matches for all
workers in the former and worsens them for all workers in the latter. That is, in the skill-abundant
country trade leads to a reallocation of labor across sectors so that every worker is employed in a
more-sophisticated industry, and the opposite happens in the other country. As explained in the
previous section, when workers are matched with more-sophisticated sectors (or firms) the gap in
wages between every higher-ability and every lower-ability worker rises, leading to more wage
inequality. It follows that trade raises wage inequality in the high-ability abundant country and
lowers wage inequality in the low-ability abundant country. These results are similar in spirit to
the implications of the simple two-sector factor proportions trade model with low-skilled and highskilled workers. Except that here linearity of the technology prevents the mixing of different types
of workers in a single sector.
Trade alters matching in more complex situations as well. Of particular interest is trade
between countries that differ in the diversity of factor endowments (what Costinot and Vogel call
North–North trade).26 For concreteness, suppose that there is an ability level such that one country
is high-ability abundant above this skill level and low-ability abundant below this skill level,
compared to the other country. Then it is reasonable to think about the former country as having a
more diverse factor endowment. To be sure, this is a particular way in which endowments differ
across countries, but it proves to be instructive for the purpose at hand. In these circumstances
trade worsens the matches of low-ability workers and improves the matches of high-ability
workers in the country with a more diverse factor endowment, and the opposite occurs in the
25

Generally speaking, with many ability levels it is possible for one country to have relatively more
higher-ability workers at the lower end of the ability distribution but relatively fewer higher-ability
workers at the upper end of the ability distribution, as well as more complicated patterns of relative
abundance of abilities.
26
Grossman and Maggi (2000) provided the first theoretical analysis of the impact of diversity on trade
flows; Bombardini, Gallipoli and Pupato (2012) provided empirical evidence. See Grossman (2013) for a
review of this literature.

19

country with the less diverse factor endowment. As a consequence, wage inequality declines at the
lower end of the wage distribution and rises at the upper end of the wage distribution in the more
diverse country, and the opposite happens in the less diverse country. This illustrates that
globalization does not have to raise or reduce inequality in a country along the entire wage
spectrum; it can impact inequality differently at different ability intervals.
The last point comes out even stronger in Grossman, Helpman and Kircher (forthcoming),
who study a two-sector economy that employs two factors of production: workers and managers.
Factor intensity differs across sectors, so that one sector is worker intensive and the other is
manager intensive. Unlike the standard model, however, both workers and managers are
heterogeneous, with varying ability levels. As a result, there are two types of matches: matches of
inputs with sectors and matches between inputs within sectors. In other words, certain types of
workers and managers are employed in the worker-intensive sector and the other workers and
managers are employed in the manager-intensive sector. At the same time, within every sector
workers match with managers. To distinguish the matching of inputs with sectors from the
matching of inputs within sectors, the term sorting is used for the former and the term matching is
used for the latter.
The total factor productivity of a firm that employs a manager with workers who share a
common ability level is higher the higher the ability of either the manager or the workers; the
productivity function is log supermodular and it depends only on the attributes of the workers and
the manager, notwithstanding the fact that there is diminishing marginal productivity in the number
of workers per manager. 27 Furthermore, while individual firms have no incentive to mix the
abilities of managers or workers, every sector employs workers and managers with multiple
abilities.
What types of workers and managers are employed in each sector depends on technological
features and product prices. Through product prices international trade affects the sorting of inputs
to sectors and thereby the matching pattern between workers and managers within every sector.
The matching pattern determines in turn the inequality of workers’ wages and managers’ earnings.
While log supermodularity of productivity ensures positive assortative matching within sectors,
sorting across sectors does not necessarily satisfy PAM. In other words, in every sector firms with

27

A firm’s production function is separable in quantities and abilities of inputs in a way that makes total
factor productivity dependent only on abilities, and it exhibits constant returns to scale in quantities.

20

better managers employ better workers, but if, say, a group of the best managers sort into the
exporting sector it is nevertheless possible for a group of the least-able workers to sort into this
sector too. Sufficient conditions for one or the other sorting pattern depend on cross-sectoral
comparisons of factor intensities and features of the productivity functions. In this environment
elements from the factor proportions theory interact with matching and sorting in determining the
impact of globalization on inequality.28
To illustrate the richness of this framework consider an economy in which the best workers
and the best mangers are employed in one industry and the least-able workers and managers are
employed in the other. Also suppose that factor intensities do not differ much between the sectors.
How will inequality change when globalization changes product prices? Suppose that it raises the
price of the product produced by the industry with the least-able factors of production. Then
inequality of earnings across sectors declines, as would be predicted by the factor-specific trade
model (see Helpman, 2011, section 3.3).29 There is indeed an element of factor specificity in this
framework that emanates from the sorting pattern, because the least-able factors of production are
somewhat specific to their sector of employment as are the most-able factors of production. This
semi-specificity is responsible for the narrowing of the inequality of earnings between the
sectors.30 On the other side there is re-matching of workers and managers in every industry. More
workers and managers are attracted to the low-ability sector in response to the price hike. But this
means that the range of abilities expands together with employment in the low-ability sector and
contracts in the high-ability sector, because the former sector attracts the least-able workers and
managers from the latter sector and these employees are more able than the low-ability sector’s
original employees. As a result, matching improves for one factor of production, either workers or
managers, in both sectors, and matching deteriorates in both sectors for the other factor of
production (see Proposition 6). Consequently, within-sector compensation inequality rises in both
sectors for the input whose matching has improved and declines in both sectors for the input whose
28

Grossman, Helpman and Kircher (forthcoming) report in their online appendix that the average
compensations of managers and workers were positively correlated across 12 Brazilian manufacturing
sectors in 1994. One might conclude that at least in this case an equilibrium with PAM across sectors is
more relevant for an analysis of the impact of globalization on inequality than one with the opposite
sorting pattern.
29
The original sector-specific model was developed by Jones (1971).
30
In the sector-specific model the sector-specific inputs cannot change their sector of employment, while
here they can. Except that here the ability level of an input affects its sectoral comparative advantage,
hence the semi-specificity.

21

matching has deteriorated. In short, globalization leads to a negative correlation between the
within-sector inequality of wages and managerial earnings, and it narrows the earning disparities
between sectors.31
Sectoral differences in factor intensity open the door to interesting variations. Suppose, as
above, that globalization raises the price of goods manufactured by the sector with the least-able
employees. Then the semi-specificity of inputs still leads to a reduction of income disparity
between sectors, the low-ability sector expands by hiring more workers and managers whose
abilities are higher than the abilities of its original employees, and the high-ability sector contracts
by shaking off its least-able workers and managers. Now, however, the resulting re-matching of
workers and managers within sectors does not have to improve the matches of one party across the
board. If indeed matches improve for labor in one sector and deteriorate in the other, then the
former sector has to be labor intensive. And similarly for managers.32 In this case factor intensity
interacts meaningfully with matching, unveiling the sector in which a factor’s matching improves.
Improved matching raises the within-sector inequality of a factor’s compensation, while
deteriorated matching reduces its within-sector inequality. For this reason globalization raises
wage inequality in the labor-intensive sector and dampens it in the management-intensive sector,
so that within-sector inequality is negatively correlated between workers and managers, between
workers in different sectors, and between managers in different sectors (see Proposition 7).
Matching between workers and managers is also analyzed in Antràs, Garicano and RossiHansberg (2006). In their framework there is a managerial hierarchy. Every manager has a team
of workers. The ability of a worker determines the range of production problems he can handle.
If he encounters a problem that is outside this range, he forwards it to his manager and she solves
the problem if it happens to be in the range that she can handle. Solving a problem requires a
fixed amount of time on the part of the manager. Every person can handle problems whose upper
bound is determined by her ability, and therefore more-able individuals can solve all the
problems that less-able individuals can solve, and more. A problem without a solution prevents

31

Grossman, Helpman and Kircher (forthcoming) report in the online appendix that the change in the
inequality indexes of worker wages and management earnings between 1986 and 1994, a time interval
that covers a major trade liberalization episode, were weakly negatively correlated across 12 Brazilian
manufacturing sectors, in line with this prediction.
32
Naturally, wherever matching improves for labor it deteriorates for managers, and vice versa.

22

the worker from contributing to output. This structure produces a complementarity between the
ability of the worker and the ability of the manager.
Individuals are heterogeneous in ability and ability is continuously distributed. There is a
single sector that produces homogeneous output by teams of workers and managers. The
economy is competitive, yielding positive assortative matching between workers and managers.
That is, better workers are matched with better managers. And since higher-ability individuals
have a comparative advantage in management, the highest-ability individuals sort into
management and the rest become production workers. The resulting matches generate a wage
distribution among production workers and a distribution of earnings among managers.
Starting with two closed economies, say North and South, Antràs, Garicano and RossiHansberg examine the impact of globalization on wage and earnings inequality. In autarky
workers match with managers that reside in their own country, whereas in a globalized world,
workers in one country can match with managers in another country. As a result, globalization
leads to a rematching of workers and managers around the globe, a form of offshoring, which
changes the distribution of income.
When the ability distributions are uniform between zero and an upper bound, and one
country has a larger upper bound, it is natural to refer to the latter as North and to the former as
South. When other things are the same in these countries, globalization can lead all individuals in
South to be employed by northern managers. And because these workers have the lowest
abilities, they work for the lowest-ability managers in North. Alternatively, depending on
parameter values, some southern individuals can be managers in a globalized world. In this event
the least-able individuals in South are employed by southern managers, while the most able
individuals are employed by the best northern managers. However, in all cases southern workers
improve their matches.
Focusing on the absolute difference in wages of the highest- and lowest-ability workers
as a measure of inequality, Antràs, Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg show that globalization raises
wage inequality within the group of southern workers. It also raises wage inequality within the
group of northern workers if management consumes little time and the skill gap between North
and South is large. Otherwise globalization reduces wage inequality among northern workers.
Moreover, globalization reduces earnings inequality among southern managers but has
ambiguous effects on earnings inequality among northern managers.

23

The role of matching between firms and workers in shaping wage inequality in a Melitzstyle economy was analyzed by Sampson (2014). Recall that the original model was developed to
explain differences between exporting and nonexporting firms within industries, using variation
in productivity across firms as an essential ingredient. But labor was treated as a homogeneous
input and therefore all workers were equally paid. By including workers with diverse abilities,
Sampson’s economy generates a wage distribution and this distribution differs between globalized
and nonglobalized economies. Unlike the competitive environments discussed above, here only
labor markets are competitive, while firms engage in monopolistic competition in product markets.
A firm’s total factor productivity depends on its technology and its workers’ ability level, and the
productivity function exhibits log supermodularity. As a result there is positive assortative
matching between firms and workers; better firms—with more-productive technologies—match
with more-able workers. The matching pattern shapes wage inequality. Inequality of wages within
an ability interval is higher when the workers are matched with more-sophisticated (higherproductivity) firms.
To understand the impact of trade on inequality in this economy, it is necessary to account
for the fact that trade changes the distribution of productivity of active firms. While at entry every
firm draws its technology from the same pool, independently of the degree of globalization, the
productivity level of the least-productive active firms does depend on the degree of trade openness.
The fraction of exporting firms depends on the fixed cost of exporting and when this cost is low
all firms export. Consequently, the productivity distribution of incumbent firms varies with the
fixed cost of exporting.
In a world of symmetric countries with a low fixed export cost, all firms export and trade
leads to an increase in the productivity level of the least-productive firms that remain active in the
industry, bringing about a rightward shift in the productivity distribution of incumbents. This shift
leads in turn to a rematching of workers and firms that improves the matches of all workers. As a
result, wage inequality rises. Moreover, the rightward shift in the technology distribution is larger
the larger the fixed cost of exporting, and therefore wage inequality is larger the larger the fixed
cost of exporting. Although the case in which all firms export is not the most realistic, it helps
isolate a mechanism through which globalization raises wage inequality: the rightward shift in the
distribution of active technologies. The conclusion is that “...at sufficiently high levels of trade

24

integration [that inspire all firms to export] wage inequality is always greater over all workers than
in autarky” (Sampson, 2014, p. 176).
When the fixed export cost is not low enough to induce all firms to export, there is an
additional element that drives inequality: discontinuity in labor demand by firms around the
productivity level that makes exports marginally profitable. This discontinuity arises because firms
that do export at this productivity level have to be measurably larger in order to cover the fixed
export cost, which leads to a break in the slope of the matching function and to shifts in matching
in response to this critical productivity level. Although analytical results are not available for this
case, simulations corroborate the intuition that globalization has now more nuanced effects on
inequality than in the case in which all firms export. First, trade raises inequality among workers
employed by exporters, i.e., in the upper tail of the wage distribution. Second, it raises inequality
at the lower end of the wage distribution when trade raises the productivity level of the leastproductive incumbents. But trade may also reduce the productivity level of the least-productive
incumbents, in which case trade integration would reduce inequality among the low-ability
workers. Third, inequality rises when variable trade costs decline, but it follows an inverted Ushape as the fixed cost of exporting declines, i.e., it rises initially and declines eventually.33 This
is reminiscent of the result in Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010), and very much for the same
reasons to be discussed below.34
Analytical frameworks that embrace rich heterogeneity among workers are needed for
understanding recent developments that exhibit ample patterns of change in earnings inequality.
To illustrate, in the United States the ratio of the fifth to the first decile of the earnings distribution
increased from 2.137 in 2000 to 2.146 in 2007, while the ratio of the ninth to the fifth decile
increased from 2.240 to 2.397, pointing to a rise in inequality above and below middle income
levels.35 Similar rises of inequality between 2000 and 2007 were reported for Ireland, Japan and
Korea. In contrast, in France both ratios declined: the ratio of the fifth to the first decile declined
from 1.561 to 1.521, and the ratio of the ninth to the fifth decile declined from 2.112 to 2.093.
33

This is in contrast to the case in which the fixed export cost is low enough to induce all incumbent firms
to export, a case in which variable trade costs have no effect on inequality and inequality is higher the
larger the fixed cost of exporting.
34
Sampson (2014) also discusses an alternative formulation, in which firms choose how much to invest in
research and development in order to acquire a desired technology, with higher investment securing a
better technology. This is discussed later in this section.
35
These and the following data are from OECD.StatExtracts accessed on February 28, 2014.

25

Moreover, in Canada and the UK the ratio of the fifth to the first decile declined while the ratio of
the ninth to the fifth decile increased, and in Germany and Sweden the former ratio increased while
the latter declined. Evidence of this type confirms the need for analytical frameworks capable of
shedding light on inequality in different segments of the distribution.
Sorting and matching have also been used to study the impact of globalization on growth
and inequality, the main idea being that both growth and inequality respond to trade exposure and
therefore both are endogenous in the long run. This view, developed in Grossman and Helpman
(2016), contrasts with the alternative views that either inequality influences growth or that growth
influences inequality (see Helpman, 2004, chap. 6). This is not to deny that during the transition
to a long-run growth trajectory current inequality can temporarily affect future growth or that
current growth can temporarily affect future inequality; the argument is instead that eventually
growth and inequality are jointly determined by fundamental characteristics of the world economy.
These characteristics include innovation technologies, specialized resources used by these
technologies, the ability to convert research and development experience into usable knowledge,
and the like.
In Grossman and Helpman (2016) individuals differ by ability and they can be employed
either in manufacturing or in innovation, i.e., they can be idea users or idea producers. In
manufacturing, workers are matched with heterogeneous firms that produce varieties of
intermediate inputs and these firms engage in monopolistic competition. In the idea-creating
sector, workers are matched with heterogeneous research labs that generate ideas for new types of
intermediate inputs. An entrepreneur in the manufacturing sector purchases the services of
innovators to develop a new type of intermediate input, but the productivity of the technology to
manufacture this input becomes known only after the cost of R&D services has been sunk. An
entrepreneur in the innovating sector rents a lab for her research projects and the productivity of
the lab becomes known only after the cost of the lab has been sunk. In other words, entrepreneurs
in both sectors face risky investments. The range of intermediate inputs available for
manufacturing evolves over time as new varieties are developed.
The functioning of the manufacturing sector is similar to Sampson (2014), except that there
are no fixed costs of either operating or exporting. For that reason every firm that has a technology
for a specialized intermediate input remains active, and it exports to other countries when trade is
feasible. In the innovation sector the number of new intermediate inputs created by a lab depends

26

on the productivity of the lab, the ability of the workers employed by the lab, the number of these
workers, and—similarly to Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991)—the stock of useful
knowledge available to the country. The stock of useful knowledge evolves over time according
to the country’s cumulative innovation experience, and, if the country also engages in foreign
trade, according to the cumulative innovation experience of its trade partners. The degree to which
a country benefits from R&D investment in other countries may vary across trade partners, and
while the pattern of these spillovers can be rich, it is exogenous.
The productivity functions of manufacturing technologies and research labs are log
supermodular, exhibiting complementarity between workers’ abilities and employers’ productivity
or sophistication levels. As a result there is positive assortative matching between workers and
employers within both the manufacturing sector and the innovation sector. Grossman and Helpman
also assume that for every pair of workers the higher-ability worker has a comparative advantage
in innovation. Under these circumstances workers with abilities above a threshold sort into
innovation and workers with abilities below this threshold sort into manufacturing. This threshold
is endogenous, however, and it plays a key role in clarifying the resulting relationship between
growth and inequality. A lower threshold implies that more workers are employed in innovation,
leading to faster growth, and it provides incentives for workers and employers to rematch. A
critical result is that matches improve for all workers, independently of where they are employed,
thereby leading to a pervasive rise in wage inequality. These relationships between the threshold,
the growth rate, and wage inequality are helpful in understanding the main results that follow.
First, globalization accelerates growth in all countries and brings about convergence of
growth rates, in line with the endogenous growth results in Grossman and Helpman (1991). When
countries trade they benefit from R&D spillovers from other countries, which raises their stocks
of useful knowledge and reduces innovation costs. In consequence, the ability thresholds above
which workers sort into innovation decline, leading to faster growth and more wage inequality in
every country. That is, globalization raises both growth and inequality. Second, ad-valorem
variable trade costs, such as tariffs, do not alter growth rates or inequality within countries,
although they impact relative wages across countries. Third, in a globalized world an increase in
R&D spillovers between any pair of countries accelerates growth in the entire world economy and
raises wage inequality everywhere. Fourth, in a globalized world an increase in any country’s R&D
subsidy raises its wage inequality relative to the other countries and brings about faster growth

27

everywhere. These results underline the high degree of interdependence between countries in a
globalized world. With R&D spillovers, globalization leads not only to trade interdependence but
also to interdependence in growth and inequality.36
A detailed quantitative study of wage determinants in the U.S. economy, which
incorporates workers with multiple attributes that sort into multiple occupations, is provided in
Burstein, Morales and Vogel (2016). In their analytical framework workers differ by education
and gender, and labor productivity varies across occupations as a function of worker type and the
type of equipment combined with the worker’s labor input. Computer usage provides an explicit
channel through which technology impacts wage inequality, because the spread of personal
computers was uneven across occupations as well as across workers with different characteristics
within occupations; it was biased toward more-educated workers and toward women. A rapidly
falling price of computers, a reflection of technological change, encouraged growth in the adoption
of computers in the workplace, which affected in turn the composition of labor demand and the
structure of wages. On the supply side a rising relative supply of more-educated workers also
affected the composition of employment and wages.
Between 1984 and 2003 the log of the skill premium, defined as the average wage of
workers with a college degree relative to those without a college degree, increased by 15.1 log
points (see Table 3 in Burstein, Morales and Vogel, 2016). 37 This skill premium would have
declined by 11.4 log points due to changes in labor supply had there been no changes in labor
demand. Yet shifts in labor demand increased the skill premium by 26.5 log points. About 60% of
this demand effect was due to computer usage, and 18.5% was due to shifts in demand for different
occupations. Labor productivity accounts for the remaining sources of demand shifts, where labor
productivity is estimated as a residual. The large impact of computers on the skill premium
emanated from two sources: the comparative advantage of educated workers in computer use, and
the comparative advantage of educated workers in computer-intensive occupations.

36

See Helpman (2004, chap. 5) for a review of estimates of international R&D spillovers, which are quite
large.
37
This is a bit lower than the college wage premium in Autor’s (2014) data, where the college wage
premium is defined as wages of workers with a college degree relative to workers with a high school
degree. In Author’s data the college wage premium was 58% in 1984 and 86% in 2003, which yields
log(1.86) – log(1.58) = 0.164. I thank Jonathan Vogel for clarifying this point.

28

In order to assess the impact of globalization on the skill premium, it is necessary to assess
how trade impacted labor demand via computer usage and occupational employment. Burstein,
Morales and Vogel found that if the American economy had had no access to international markets
for equipment (including computers), then between 1984 and 2003 the rise in the skill premium
would have been lower by 2.1 percentage points, and if the U.S. economy could not have traded
occupation services the skill premium would have been lower by 1.3 percentage points (see their
Tables 7 and 8). Each of these estimates represents only a fraction, 13% and 27% respectively, of
the contribution of computers and occupations to the rise in the skill premium. In other words,
international trade had a modest impact on wage inequality.

VIII. Observable Attributes and Technology Choice
The previous section described the impact of globalization on wage inequality in the presence of
the matching of heterogeneous workers with heterogeneous firms. The nature of these matches
determined the slope of the wage function, and foreign trade impacted these matches through
changes in the sorting of workers into different activities and the distribution of technologies in
those activities. Nonetheless, firms could not invest in order to improve their technologies.
Although firms acquired manufacturing technologies, the cost of a technology was uniquely
determined by market conditions. The outcome of the investment could be uncertain, yet there was
no way to invest more in order to draw a technology from a more attractive distribution. In this
section I discuss wage inequality that arises when workers are heterogeneous and firms can choose
among technologies of varying quality.
Yeaple (2005) provided an early analysis. In his model workers vary by ability. There is a
traditional sector supplying a homogeneous good in which there is no technology choice and labor
productivity rises with ability. In contrast, two technologies are available in the advanced sector
that supplies varieties of a differentiated product and labor productivity rises with worker ability
for each technology. One of these technologies surpasses the other in terms of productivity, but
the better technology requires higher fixed costs of operation. A firm that enters the industry in
order to produce a brand of the differentiated product can choose one technology or the other.
Finally, higher-ability workers have a comparative advantage in the advanced sector and within
this sector they have a comparative advantage operating the better technology. This leads the least-

29

able workers to sort into the traditional sector, the most-able workers to sort into the advanced
sector in order to operate the better technology, and workers with mid-range abilities to sort into
the advanced sector in order to operate the inferior technology.38 Under the circumstances wage
inequality at the upper end of the distribution is determined by the labor productivity of the better
technology, wage inequality at the lower end of the distribution is determined by the labor
productivity of the traditional-sector technology, and in the middle range wage inequality is
determined by the labor productivity of the inferior technology in the differentiated product sector.
Inequality across these groups depends in turn on the comparative advantage of workers across the
three technologies.
When two symmetric countries trade with each other and there are fixed and variable trade
costs, there is no trade in traditional goods. With low enough fixed export costs there is trade in
differentiated products, however, and if both technologies are employed, then all firms that invest
in the better technology export. Although there are circumstances in which all firms—
independently of their technology—export, the interesting case arises when not all of them do.
Whenever only a fraction of the firms exports, those who adopted the poorer technology serve
only the domestic market.39 That is, with selection into exporting there is a stark contrast between
exporters and nonexporters: the former employ a better technology and hire more-able workers.
A reduction in variable trade costs prompts more firms to adopt the better technology in
the differentiated product sector, the most-able workers among those operating the worse
technology switch employment to firms operating the better technology, and the least-able workers
among those who operate the inferior technology switch employment to the traditional sector.
Relative wage changes conform to changes in employment: they rise for high-ability workers
operating the advanced technology, decline for middle-ability workers operating the inferior
technology, and do not change for workers manufacturing traditional goods.40 The result is wage
and employment polarization. Since labor market polarization has been documented in the United
States and 16 European countries (see Goos, Manning and Salomons, 2009, and Autor, 2014), this

38

Depending on the distribution of skills and the available technologies both technologies are used in the
advanced sector or only one of them. The discussion in the main text proceeds under the assumption that
both technologies are used.
39
This outcome requires restrictions on the structure of the fixed costs.
40
This means that wages rise also for workers who switch from the inferior to the superior technology and
decline for workers who switch from the inferior technology to the traditional sector.

30

analysis identifies a mechanism through which globalization might have contributed to this
outcome, although there is no good evidence to support the claim that globalization played a big
role in causing polarization.41
Sampson (2014) extended this analysis, allowing for a continuous distribution of worker
abilities and a continuum of technology choices but no traditional sector. In this case there is
positive assortative matching between workers and firms when the production function is log
supermodular. Since the choice of technology is endogenous, worker heterogeneity ensures
heterogeneity of firms. In a trading world there is selection into exporting with firm heterogeneity
among exporters and among nonexporters. Exporters are more productive than nonexporters and
they employ higher-ability workers. A decline in variable trade costs in a world of symmetric
countries induces some lower-productivity firms to export and some of the highest-ability workers
employed by nonexporters to switch employment to exporting firms. While inequality of wages
does not change among workers employed by exporters before and after the trade shock, nor
among workers employed by nonexporters before and after the trade shock, it rises among the
workers who switch from nonexporters to exporters and it widens the wage gap between workers
employed by exporters and nonexporters.42
Similarly to Yeaple (2005), Bustos (2011b) also assumed that firms in the differentiated
product industry can adopt one of two technologies: a high-fixed-cost technology, measured in
units of final output, that is efficient at large volumes of output, and a low-fixed-cost technology
that is efficient at low volumes of output. Unlike Yeaple, however, she had no homogeneous
sector. In addition, she assumed that there are only two types of workers, high-ability skilled
workers and low-ability unskilled workers; that both types of workers are essential in production;
and that the technologies differ in factor intensities: the large-scale-efficient technology uses moreskilled relative to unskilled workers.
These features were combined with firm heterogeneity. Every entrant to the industry
acquires a random firm-specific productivity level that affects proportionately its variable
production costs. Higher-productivity firms gain the same variable cost advantage in both
technologies. As a result, higher-productivity firms have a comparative advantage in the use of the

41

This type of polarization is sometimes described as the “hollowing out of the middle class.”
No polarization arises in this case because there is no traditional sector. Without a traditional sector the
lowest productivity level of firms in the differentiated product sector does not depend on foreign trade.
42

31

large-scale-efficient technology. Naturally, whether a firm chooses to use this technology depends
on how productive the firm is and how large the skill premium is. An exceedingly high wage of
skilled workers relative to the unskilled can make the variable cost of production with the largescale-efficient technology so high as to offset the advantage this technology has over the smallscale-efficient technology at high output levels. When the skill premium is not that high, both
technologies are used by incumbents and high-productivity firms adopt the large-scale-efficient
technology.
Fixed export costs lead to selection of the most-productive firms into exporting. And with
suitable parameter restrictions some firms exit the industry after entry, the least-productive
incumbents serve only the domestic market and adopt the small-scale-efficient technology, while
the remaining incumbents export. Among the exporters lower-productivity firms adopt the smallscale-efficient technology while the higher-productivity firms adopt the large-scale-efficient
technology.
Bustos used this framework to study the impact of MERCOSUR—the free trade area
established in 1991 between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela—on
Argentinean firms.43 In her model a reduction in variable trade costs leads to exit from the industry
of some of the least-productive firms and it induces exporters who use the small-scale-efficient
technology to switch to the large-scale-efficient technology. It also leads some of the nonexporters
(at the upper scale of the nonexporters’ productivity distribution) to start exporting, with the most
successful among them adopting the large-scale-efficient technology. Evidently, these withinindustry reallocations raise the relative demand for skilled workers, both because a larger fraction
of firms adopt the large-scale-efficient technology and because market shares are reallocated from
firms that use the low-skill-intensive technology to firms that use the high-skill-intensive
technology. As a result, the skill premium rises.
Brazilian tariff cuts were used to assess the response of the share of skilled workers in the
employment of Argentinian firms (Brazil was Argentina’s largest trade partner). These tariff cuts
varied across sectors and provided a source of variation that differentially affected firms in
different industries. Among firms above median size 76% exported, while only 38% of firms

43

Bustos (2011a) studied the impact of MERCOSUR on the technology upgrading of Argentinean firms.
She found that most of the upgrading occurred within firms that switched from nonexporting to exporting
status in response to the free trade agreement.

32

exported among those below median size. The estimates suggest that the average reduction of the
tariffs, which amounted to 23%, brought about an 8% reduction in the share of skilled workers in
firms below the median and an increase of 6% in the share of skilled workers in firms above the
median. These figures represent a significant shift in labor composition across firms. The skill
composition was affected both among production and non-production workers, with the strongest
effect on the share of skilled workers among nonproduction workers taking place within firms at
the top quartile of the size distribution.
The positive correlation between firm size or productivity and the relative use of skilled
workers is not unique to Argentina. It was documented for the United States by Bernard, Jensen,
Redding and Schott (2007), for Mexico by Verhoogen (2008), and for Chile by Harrigan and
Reshef (2015). In combination with selection into exporting this feature generates an increase in
the relative demand for skilled workers within sectors in response to trade liberalization. Under
the circumstances globalization can raise the relative employment of skilled workers within
industries even when it raises the skill premium. For this reason globalization can lead to a
pervasive rise in the skill premium, and therefore in wage inequality, in both developed and
developing countries. While the Stolper-Samuelson mechanism magnifies the rise in the skill
premium in rich countries and moderates it in poor countries, wage inequality may rise in all of
them. The question is whether this theoretical possibility generates quantitatively substantial
results, however. Burstein and Vogel (2016) provide an answer.
They constructed a quantitative model of international trade with 60 countries and a region
that encompasses the remaining parts of the world’s economy, a large number of traded sectors,
and service sectors that do not engage in foreign trade. Within sectors firms are heterogeneous and
higher-productivity firms employ relatively more-skilled workers (worker heterogeneity is limited
to skilled and unskilled workers). There is oligopolistic competition with limit pricing, as in
Bertrand, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003), that results in variable markups. The model is
calibrated to data in 2005–2007. Holding constant endowments and technologies, they use the
model to carry out counterfactual experiments. In one experiment trade costs are increased so as
to drive all countries to autarky. The differences between autarky and the 2005–2007 outcomes
provide estimates of the impact of globalization.
Importantly, in this counterfactual both skilled and unskilled workers gain from trade; that
is, moving from autarky to trade raises the real wages of both types of labor everywhere. Moreover,

33

in all countries, with the exception of Russia, trade raises the wages of skilled workers
proportionately more than the wages of unskilled workers. As a result, the skill premium rises in
almost all countries (see their Figure 2). This means that the Stolper-Samuelson effects are
overwhelmed by the within-industry reallocations, including selection into exporting. Nonetheless,
the rise of the skill premium varies across countries, being larger in more open economies and in
net exporters of skill-intensive products. The rise in the skill premium is largest in Lithuania,
amounting to 12%, compared to an average of 5.1%. It rises by 2% in the United States and by
0.5% in Brazil.
A comparison of 1975–1977 with 2005–2007 counterfactuals also features a pervasive rise
in the skill premium, with the Philippines experiencing the largest rise, and this largest increase is
a little more than half the rise in Lithuania’s skill premium from autarky to 2005–2007. This
quantitative analysis suggests that the contribution to the rise of wage inequality of within-sectoral
heterogeneity, selection into exporting, and factor proportions, is significant, yet modest.

IX. Residual Inequality
Residual inequality refers to the component of earnings that is not explained by workers’ observed
characteristics. After estimating a wage equation by regressing log wages on worker characteristics
such as education, experience and gender, the inequality of log wages can be decomposed into
inequality due to observed characteristics and inequality due to unobserved characteristics. The
latter component represents residual inequality. While different measures of dispersion can be
used, such as the 90/10 percentile wage ratio, the standard deviation of log wages, or the Theil
index of the distribution of wages, the decomposition into an observed and an unobserved part is
essential for identifying residual inequality.
Katz and Murphy (1992) pointed out the contribution of residual inequality to the rise in
the college wage premium in the 1980s in the United States. But the contribution of residual
inequality to the rise in wage dispersion was challenged by labor economists, and particularly by
Lemieux (2006), who attributed this rise to an “episodic” event and to compositional changes. In
response, Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008) conducted a detailed analysis of the data, concluding
that the rise in inequality was not episodic, and especially so in the upper-tail of the wage
distribution (the 90/50 percentile ratio), where inequality increased nearly consistently from 1980

34

to 2005. Moreover, while changes in the composition of the labor force exerted upward pressure
on residual wage inequality from the late 1980s to 2005, it was concentrated in the lower part of
the wage distribution and “...changes in earning dispersion within narrowly defined demographic
groups, remain a key force in the evolution of both upper- and lower-tail U.S. residual wage
inequality” (p. 301). They found that between 1973 and 2005 the 90/10 percentile ratio of wages
of males increased by 34.6 log points, of which 12.8 log points were attributed to residual
inequality and about two-thirds of the latter resulted from the rise of the 90/50 percentile ratio.
Rising residual wage inequality played a major role in rising wage dispersion in other
countries too. In Sweden, for example, residual wage inequality accounted for 70% of wage
dispersion in 2001 (measured as the standard deviation of log wages) and it contributed 87% to
the rise in wage inequality between 2001 and 2007 (see Table 3 in Akerman, Helpman, Itskhoki,
Muendler and Redding, 2013). Likewise, residual wage inequality accounted for 59% of wage
dispersion in 1994 in Brazil, where it also accounted for 49% of the rise in wage inequality between
1986 and 1995 (see Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding, 2016). Evidently, the importance
of residual wage inequality is not confined to rich countries only.
A number of studies addressed the potential impact of globalization on residual wage
inequality, emphasizing alternative mechanisms of wage determination, such as labor market
frictions in the form of fair wages (Egger and Kreickemeier, 2009; Amiti and Davis, 2012),
efficiency wages (Davis and Harrigan, 2011), and search and matching (Davidson, Matusz and
Shevchenko, 2008; Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding, 2010; Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and
Redding, 2016). Combined with firm heterogeneity, each one of these mechanisms generates a
wage distribution among workers with similar characteristics, because these models predict that
within the same industry firms with higher productivity pay a higher wage to the same type of
workers. The positive correlation between firm size and wages, known as the wage-size premium,
has been known for a long time (see Oi and Idson, 1999). By combining international trade with a
wage-size premium mechanism, recent studies have shown that due to selection into exporting,
exporting firms—which are larger and more productive than nonexporters—pay significantly
higher wages. The relationship between exporting and wages then implies that trade impacts wage
gaps between workers employed by firms with different characteristics, as a result of which trade
impacts residual wage inequality.

35

To illustrate, first consider the model of fair wages employed by Amiti and Davis (2012).
There, wages are assumed to be an increasing function of profits, and since profits consist of a
fraction of revenue minus fixed costs, wages are increasing in a firm’s revenue. But revenue
depends on a firm’s business strategy: it can serve only the domestic market or also export, and it
can choose to purchase only domestic intermediate inputs or also imported intermediates. Since
both exporting and importing entail fixed costs, firms select into exporting and importing, with the
most-productive firms engaging in both. In other words, the most-productive firms pay the highest
wages, they export their final output, and they import intermediate inputs. On the other side there
are firms that do not import intermediate inputs and do not export their output; these are the leastproductive firms that serve only the domestic market. As in Melitz (2003), there is a productivity
threshold above which firms stay in the industry. Under these circumstances trade weeds out the
least-productive firms and shifts market shares toward producers that engage in foreign trade.
Studying a trade liberalization episode in Indonesia during the 1990s, Amiti and Davis
(2012) showed that tariff cuts had different effects on wages paid by firms that were internationally
oriented than firms that were domestically oriented. In addition, cuts in tariffs on final goods had
different effects from cuts in tariffs on intermediate inputs. Since only 5% of the firms imported
inputs and exported a fraction of their output, 10% exported output but did not import inputs, and
14% imported inputs but did not export, the data provided rich variation for examining the
differential effects of the tariff cuts on wages. In these data exporters paid 27.5% higher wages
than domestic firms, importers of intermediate inputs paid 46.8% higher wages, and firms that
both imported intermediates and exported final output paid 66.4% higher wages (see their Table
1A). These wage premia declined to 7.6%, 14.6% and 25.4%, respectively, after controlling for
firm employment and industry fixed effects. And moreover, exporters were larger and more
productive than domestic firms, importers were larger and more productive than exporters, and
firms that imported and exported were the largest and most productive, suggesting selection into
trade in line with the theory. Also in line with the theory, they found that reductions in output
tariffs increased wages paid by exporters and decreased wages paid by nonexporters. In contrast,
cuts in tariffs on intermediate inputs increased wages paid by large importers and reduced wages
paid by nonimporting firms. Since their data allowed them to estimate these effects only on average
wages paid by the Indonesian firms, some of the wage responses might have been related to the
rematching of different types of workers with firms, thereby reflecting changes in worker

36

composition. While they argued that these compositional effects were small, it remains a concern
for evaluating the quantitative outcomes. In any case, Amiti and Davis have not provided a
summary estimate for the impact of this trade liberalization episode on overall wage inequality.
Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) developed a theory of trade and wages that builds
on search and matching in the labor market. In this theory firms post vacancies and unemployed
workers search for jobs. A fraction of the workers are matched with a fraction of the vacancies,
and the productivity of a worker in a specific job is a random draw from a known distribution.
Firms can screen workers in order to improve the mix of their workforce, but this process is costly
and imperfect. As a result, a firm can improve the average productivity of its workers but it cannot
assess the productivity of each one of them. Because firms differ in total factor productivity, moreproductive firms have a stronger incentive to engage in screening and they therefore end up with
higher labor productivity due both to their core productivity and to the better fit of their workers
to the jobs in their firms. Selection into exporting provides firms that have large core productivity
levels with the strongest incentives to screen, which skews the final labor productivity distribution
in comparison to the distribution of core productivity.
This skewness plays an important role in the determination of wage inequality within
sectors populated by heterogeneous firms, because following matching and screening every firm
bargains with its workers over wages, and this multilateral wage negotiation leads to higher wages
being paid by more-productive firms. The more-productive firms are bigger and the most
productive among them select into exporting. As a result, exporters pay higher wages than
nonexporters, in line with the evidence. An important implication of this theory is that ex-ante
identical workers are paid different wages, with those who have been matched and retained by
more-productive firms earning more. In addition, trade liberalization has non-monotonic effects
on wage inequality within sectors. Starting from autarky, sectoral wage inequality rises initially in
response to reductions in trade impediments. In the process, the fraction of exporting firms rises.
But inequality peaks when the fraction of exporters is less than one. Further reductions of trade
impediments reduce wage inequality until—when all firms export—inequality reaches the level of
a closed economy. While real wages are higher than closed-economy wages when all firms export,
wage inequality is the same in both cases. It follows that when only a fraction of the firms export,
wages are always more unequal than they are in autarky.

37

This model yields simple equations that describe the variation across firms in an industry
of wages, employment, and selection into exporting. Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding
(2016) extended this theoretical model to allow firms to differ also in the fixed cost of exporting
and in the ability to screen workers. They then showed how the resulting equations for the cross
sectional variations within industries can be used to estimate employment and wage premia for
exporters, and how these estimates can in turn be used to characterize wage inequality. However,
their estimation methods require rich data sets, because they require data on individual workers
and individual firms, and information on which workers are employed by every firm in the sample.
Fortunately, data sets of this type are now available for a number of countries, and they illustrated
their methodology with Brazilian data.
Brazil liberalized its economy over a number of years, culminating with a major trade
liberalization in 1991 with the formation of the MERCOSUR free trade area. Helpman, Itskhoki,
Muendler and Redding (2016) used administrative data for manufacturing industries, which covers
the formal sector, to estimate the model for every year starting in 1986 and ending in 1998. These
data cover about 6 million workers and over 90 thousand firms. From the workers’ data they
estimated Mincer wage equations, including an occupation-specific component for every firm. The
distribution of these firm-specific and occupation-specific components was then taken to represent
residual wage inequality. While the variation of wages across firms accounted for 55% of wage
inequality in 1994, the variation across firms of the estimated firm-specific components accounted
for 39% of wage inequality (where inequality was measured by the standard deviation of log
wages). In comparison, observable worker characteristics contributed only 13% to wage
inequality. Using the Maximum Likelihood estimates of the model, they calculated that the
standard deviation of log wages predicted by the model was 0.46 in comparison to 0.42 in the data,
that the predicted Gini coefficient was 0.25 in comparison to 0.22 in the data, and that the predicted
90/10 percentile ratio was 3.24 in comparison to 2.95 in the data. Since only between 5% and 9%
of the firms exported, the overall fit for nonexporters was better than for exporters.
Using the 1994 estimates, Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding simulated the impact
of trade impediments on inequality. First, they found that reductions in trade impediments first
raise inequality until it peaks, followed by declines in inequality in response to further declines in
trade frictions, as predicted by the theoretical model. Second, they found that declines in variable
trade costs lead to a higher peak of inequality than declines in fixed export costs. When

38

disregarding the multiple destinations of different exporters, the former peak was 10.7% above
autarky while the latter was 7.6% above autarky. Allowing for multiple destinations raised the
former peak to 23.3% above autarky and the latter to 19.0% (see their Figures 1 and 3). Evidently,
multiple export destinations, which feature in the data, amplify the effects of trade on residual
wage inequality.

X. Conclusions
A major conclusion from my review of the literature is that the prevalent view that globalization
is primarily responsible for the large increase in the inequality of labor compensation has no basis
in the evidence. Yes, globalization impacted the wages of different types of workers to different
degrees, and yes, it contributed to an increase in the wages of skilled relative to unskilled workers
through multiple channels. Yet, in sum, all these effects explain only a fraction of the rise in wage
inequality in rich and poor countries alike.
This conclusion does not deny the fact that foreign trade, foreign investment, and
offshoring have adversely affected certain workers. Trefler (2004) found, for example, that the
U.S.–Canada free trade agreement of 1989 increased temporarily (for about three years) the level
of unemployment in Canada; and Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) found that imports from China
had large differential employment effects across U.S. commuting zones, where employment
declined more in zones whose industries were more exposed to import competition from China.
But these consequences, as painful as they were for the affected workers, do not imply necessarily
that globalization is responsible for the large wage differentials observed in the data.44
44

Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2013) also report wage effects, but their estimates of the impact of
Chinese imports on wage differentials across commuting zones are perplexing. Despite the fact
that imports from China consisted predominantly of manufactured products, they found no
difference in wage impacts across these zones in the manufacturing sector for college graduates
or for non–college graduates (see their Table 7). At the same time, they found somewhat larger
declines in the wages of no-college workers than of college graduates in nonmanufacturing
sectors in zones more affected by Chinese imports, which is puzzling. In a more recent study,
Chetverikov, Larsen and Palmer (2016) found differences across commuting zones in wages of
workers in different quantiles of the wage distribution, with more adverse effects on low-wage
workers in the zones more affected by import competition from China. Yet the largest
differential wage decline at the bottom of the wage distribution amounted to only 2.6% over a
decade for zones with the average rise in exposure to imports from China. Using individuallevel data, Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2014) also found differential impacts across commuting
39

While the finding that globalization has had only moderate effects on wage inequality may
disappoint some observers, the development of research tools in this area has been nothing but
gratifying. To begin with, major methodological advances have been made. While studies of trade
and wages focused initially on effects arising through the neoclassical channel, subsequent work
introduced a host of additional considerations, such as selection into exporting, variation across
firms in productivity and factor intensity, technology upgrading, matching, and residual inequality.
In addition, new data sets became available to study the relationship between trade and wages, and
these data sets were employed to examine trade liberalization episodes in individual countries as
well as to explore quantitatively the interactions between multiple countries. All in all more than
twenty years of research have greatly enhanced our understanding of this important issue and they
have produced a host of quantitative estimates. And while this cumulative knowledge may not be
the last word on the subject, it would be a shame to conduct the debate on the impact of
globalization on inequality without utilizing this body of work.

zones on workers with different earnings levels, where higher earners were affected less
negatively than lower earners. The point remains, however, that the size of these effects is just
not large enough to explain the observed rise in inequality.
40

References
Akerman, Anders, Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler & Stephen Redding.
(2013), ‘Sources of Wage Inequality’, American Economic Review (Papers and
Proceedings), 103: 214–219.
Amiti, Mary & Donald R. Davis. (2012), ‘Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence’, Review
of Economic Studies, 79: 1–36.
Anand, Sudhir & Paul Segal. (2015), ‘The Global Distribution of Income’, Chapter 11 in Atkinson,
Anthony B. and François Bourguignon (eds), Handbook of Income Distribution, vol. 2A
(Amsterdam: North–Holland).
Antràs, Pol, Luis Garicano & Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. (2006), ‘Offshoring in a Knowledge
Economy’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 31–77.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty & Emmanuel Saez. (2011), ‘Top Incomes in the Long Run
of History’, Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1): 3–71.
Autor, David H. (2014), ‘Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the “other
99 percent”’, Science, 344(6186): 843–51.
Autor, David H., David Dorn & Gordon H. Hanson. (2013), ‘The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States’, American Economic Review,
103(6): 2121-2168.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson & Jae Song. (2014), ‘Trade Adjustment: Worker
Level Evidence’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1799-1860.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz & Melissa S. Kearney. (2008), ‘Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Re-assessing the Revisionists’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 90: 300–
23.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz & Alan Krueger. (1998), ‘Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4): 1169–
1214.
Autor, David H., Alan Manning & Christopher L. Smith. (2016), ‘The Contribution of the
Minimum Wage to US Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A Reassessment’, American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8: 58–99.
Becker, Gary. (1973), ‘A Theory of Marriage I’, Journal of Political Economy, 81: 813–46.

41

Berman, Eli, John Bound & Zvi Griliches. (1994), ‘Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor in
U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 367–98.
Berman, Eli, John Bound & Stephen Machin. (1998), ‘Implications of Skill-Biased Technological
Change: International Evidence’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 1245–79.
Berman, Eli & Stephen Machin. (2000), ‘Skill-Biased Technology Transfer around the World’,
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 16: 12–22.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, & Samuel Kortum. (2003), ‘Plants and
Productivity in International Trade’, American Economic Review, 93: 1268–90.
Bernard, Andrew B. & J. Bradford Jensen. (1995), ‘Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S.
Manufacturing, 1976–1987’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics,
67–112.
Bernard, Andrew B. & J. Bradford Jensen. (1999), ‘Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause,
Effect, or Both?’ Journal of International Economics, 47: 1–25.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding & Peter K. Schott. (2007), ‘Firms in
International Trade.’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21: 105–130.
Bombardini, Matilde, Giovanni Gallipoli & Germán Pupato. (2012), “Skill Dispersion and Trade
Flows’, American Economic Review, 102: 2327–48.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman & Lawrence F. Katz. (1997), ‘How Much do Immigration
and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcome?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 1–
90.
Bourguignon, François. (2015), The Globalization of Inequality (Princeton: Princeton University
Press).
Bourguignon, François & Christian Morrisson. (2002), ‘Inequality Among World Citizens: 1820–
1992’, American Economic Review, 92: 727–44.
Burstein, Ariel & Jonathan Vogel. (2016), ‘International Trade, Technology, and the Skill
Premium’, Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).
Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales & Jonathan Vogel. (2016), ‘Changes in Between-Group
Inequality: Computers, Occupations, and International Trade’, mimeo, September 13.

42

Bustos, Paula. (2011a), ‘Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on
the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms’, American Economic Review, 101:
304–40.
Bustos, Paula. (2011b), ‘The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Skill Upgrading: Evidence from
Argentina’, Barcelona BGSE working paper: 559.
Card, David & John E. DiNardo. (2002), ‘Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles’, Journal of Labor Economics, 20: 733–83.
Chetty, Raj. (2009), ‘Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods’, Annual Review of Economics, 1: 451–488.
Chetverikov, Denis, Bradley Larsen & Christopher Parmer. (2016), ‘IV Quantile Regression for
Group-Level Treatments, with an Application to the Distributional Effects of Trade’,
Econometrica, 84 (2): 809–833.
Costinot, Arnaud & Jonathan Vogel. (2010), ‘Matching and Inequality in the World Economy’,
Journal of Political Economy, 118: 747–85.
Davidson, Carl, Steven J. Matusz & Andrei Shevchenko. (2008), ‘Globalization and Firm Level
Adjustment with Imperfect Labor Markets’, Journal of International Economics, 75: 295–
309.
Davis, Donald R. & James Harrigan. (2011), ‘Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization’,
Journal of International Economics, 84: 26–36.
Diamond, Peter A. (1982a), ‘Demand Management in Search Equilibrium’, Journal of Political
Economy, 90: 881–94.
Diamond, Peter A. (1982b), ‘Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium’, Review
of Economic Studies, 49: 217–27.
Eeckhout, Jan & Philipp Kircher. (2016), ‘Assortative Matching with Large Firms’, mimeo.
Egger, Hartmut & Udo Kreickemeier. (2009), ‘Firm Heterogeneity and the Labor Market Effects
of Trade Liberalization’, International Economic Review, 50: 187–216.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz & Alan M. Taylor. (2003), ‘The Rise and Fall of World Trade:
1870–1939’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118: 359–407.
Feenstra, Robert C. (2015), Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press).

43

Feenstra, Robert C. & Gordon H. Hanson. (1996), ‘Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative
Wages’, in Feenstra, Robert C., Gene M. Grossman and Douglas A. Irwin (eds.), The
Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati (Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press).
Feenstra, Robert C. & Gordon H. Hanson. (1997), ‘Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages:
Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras.” Journal of International Economics, 42: 371–
393.
Feenstra, Robert C. & Gordon H. Hanson. (1999), ‘Productivity Measurement and the Impact of
Trade and Technology on Wages: Estimates for the U.S., 1972–1990’, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 114: 907–40.
Feenstra, Robert C. & Gordon H. Hanson. (2003), ‘Global Production Sharing and Rising
Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages’, in Choi, Kwan and James Harrigan (eds),
Handbook of International Trade (New York: Basil Blackwell).
Findlay, Ronald & Kevin H. O’Rourke. (2007), Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World
Economy in the Second Millennium (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Goldberg, Pinelopi K. & Nina Pavcnik. (2007), ‘Distributional Effects of Globalization in
Developing Countries’, Journal of Economic Literature, 45: 39–82.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning & Anna Salomons. (2009), ‘Job Polarization in Europe’, American
Economic Review, 99: 58–63.
Grossman, Gene M. (2013), ‘Heterogeneous Workers and International Trade’, Review of World
Economics, 149: 211–45.
Grossman, Gene M. & Elhanan Helpman. (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).
Grossman, Gene M. & Elhanan Helpman. (2016), ‘Growth, Trade, and Inequality’,
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/helpman/files/growth_trade_and_inequality_063016.pdf.
Grossman, Gene M., Elhanan Helpman & Philipp Kircher. (2015), ‘Matching, Sorting, and the
Distributional Effects of International Trade’, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Grossman, Gene M. & Giovanni Maggi. (2000), ‘Diversity and Trade’, American Economic
Review 90 (5): 1255–1275.
Harrigan, James & Ariel Reshef. (2015), ‘Skill-Biased Heterogeneous Firms, Trade Liberalization
and the Skill Premium’, Canadian Journal of Economics, 48: 1024–66.

44

Helpman, Elhanan. (2004), The Mystery of Economic Growth (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).
Helpman, Elhanan. (2011), Understanding Global Trade (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press).
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki & Stephen J. Redding. (2010), ‘Inequality and Unemployment
in a Global Economy,’ Econometrica, 78: 1239–83.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki & Stephen J. Redding. (2016), ‘Trade and Inequality: From
Theory to Estimation’, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Jones, Ronald W. (1965), “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models’, Journal of
Political Economy, 73: 557–72.
Jones, Ronald W. (1971), ‘A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History.’ In Jagdish N.
Bhagwati, Ronald W. Jones, Robert A. Mundell and Jaroslav Vanek (eds), Trade, Balance
of Payments and Growth: Papers in International Economics in Honor of Charles P.
Kindleberger (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Jones, Ronald W. & Jose A. Scheinkman. (1977), ‘The Relevance of the Two-Sector Production
Model in Trade Theory’, Journal of Political Economy, 85: 909–935.
Katz, Lawrence F. & David H. Autor. (1999), ‘Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings
inequality’, in Orly Ashenfelter and David Card (eds), Handbook of Labor Economics,
Vol. 3, 1463–555 (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Katz, Lawrence F. & Kevin M. Murphy. (1992), ‘Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987: Supply
and Demand Factors’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107: 35–78.
Krugman, Paul R. (1995), ‘Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences’, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1: 327–362.
Krugman, Paul R. (2000), ‘Technology, Trade and Factor Prices’, Journal of International
Economics, 50: 51–72.
Krugman, Paul R. (2008), ‘Trade and Wages, Reconsidered’, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2: 103–38.
Lawrence, Robert & Matthew J. Slaughter. (1993), ‘International Trade and American Wages in
the 1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?’ Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1: 161–211.

45

Leamer, Edward E. (1998), ‘In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Linkages between International
Trade and Lower Wages’, in Susan M. Collins (ed), Imports, Exports, and the American
Worker (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press).
Leamer, Edward E. (2000), ‘What’s the Use of Factor Content?’ Journal of International
Economics, 50: 17–50.
McCormick, Michael. (2001), Origins of the European Economy: Communications and
Commerce, AD 300–900 (New York: Cambridge University Press).
Lemieux, Thomas. (2006), ‘Increased Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effect, Noisy Data,
or Rising Demand for Skill’, American Economic Review, 96: 461–498.
Machin, Stephen & John van Reenen. (1998), ‘Technology and Changes in Skill Structure:
Evidence from Seven OECD Countries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113: 1215–44.
Maddison, Angus. (2001), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective (Paris: OECD).
Melitz, Marc J. (2003), ‘The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity’, Econometrica, 71: 1695–1725.
Melitz, Marc J. & Stephen Redding. (2014), ‘Heterogeneous Firms and Trade’, in Gopinath, Gita,
Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics
(Amsterdam: North Holland).
Mincer, Jacob A. (1974), Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: The National Bureau
of Economic Research).
Mortensen, Dale T. & Christopher A. Pissarides. (1994), ‘Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment’, Review of Economic Studies, 61: 397–415.
OECD. (2015), In It Together: Why Less Inequality Benefits All (Paris: OECD Publishing).
Ohnsorge, Franziska & Daniel Trefler. (2007), ‘Sorting It Out: International Trade with
Heterogeneous Workers’, Journal of Political Economy, 115: 868–92.
Oi, Walter Y. & T. L. Idson. (1999), ‘Firm Size and Wages’, in Orly Ashenfelter and David Card
(eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3 (Amsterdam: Elsevier).
Rodrik, Dani. (2015), Economics Rules: The Rights and Wrongs of the Dismal Science (New York:
W. W. Norton & Company).
Romer, Paul M. (1990), ‘Endogenous Technological Change’, Journal of Political Economy, 98:
S71-S102.

46

Sachs, Jeffrey D. & Howard Shatz. (1994), ‘Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing’, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1–84.
Sampson, Thomas. (2014), ‘Selection into Trade and Wage Inequality’, American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, 6 (3): 157–202.
Slaughter, Matthew J. (2000), ‘What are the Results of Product-Price Studies and What Can We
Learn from Their Differences?’ in Feenstra, Robert C. (ed), The Effects of International
Trade on Wages (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press).
Stolper, Wolfgang W. & Paul A. Samuelson. (1941), ‘Protection and Real Wages’, Review of
Economic Studies, IX: 58–73.
Trefler, Daniel. (2004), ‘The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement’,
American Economic Review, 94: 870-895.
Van Zanden, Jan Luiten, Joerg Baten, Peter Foldvari & Bas van Leeuwen. (2014), ‘The Changing
Shape of Global Inequality 1820–200: Exploring a New Dataset’, The Review of Income
and Wealth, 60(2): 279–297.
Verhoogen, Eric. (2008), ‘Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
Manufacturing Sector: Theory and Evidence from an Exchange Rate Shock’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123: 489–530.
Yeaple, Stephen R. (2005), ‘A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and
Wages’, Journal of International Economics, 65: 1–20.
Zhu, Susan Chun & Daniel Trefler. (2005), ‘Trade and Inequality in Developing Countries: A
General Equilibrium Analysis’, Journal of International Economics, 65: 21–48.

47

