                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PRIVATE SAVING IN THE UNITED STATES:
                                    1950—85




                            Patric H. Hendershott

                                  Joe Peek




                           Working Paper No. 2294




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1987




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Income and Wealth
Conference on the Measurement of Saving, Investment and Wealth, March 28,
1987. Joe Peek thanks the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, where he is
a visiting economist, for financial support and George Houlihan and Edward
Lyon for their assistance with the graphics. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research
                               program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2294
                                                  June 1987




                 Private Saving in the United States: 1950-85




                                   ABSTRACT



      The official personal and private saving statistics contain a number of
conceptual measurement errors. In this paper we develop and analyze personal
and private saving measures adjusted for the difference between income tax
payments and actual liabilities, saving via net purchases of government pension
assets (including social security) and consumer durables, and that part of
after-tax interest income attributable to inflation.

      We find that the adjusted personal and
                                             private saving rates in recent
years are only slightly below their post—1950 averages, not at all time lows as
reported in the official NIPA statistics.
                                           Furthermore, over the past 35 years,
personal saving has been more volatile and corporate saving less volatile than
the official measures. Also, the inflation premium corrections remove the
negative correlation between personal and
                                          corporate saving. That is, the often
observed negative correlation between the official measures of personal and
corporate saving is due solely to measurement errors in the two series.
Finally, the decrease in federal government saving in the 1980s is the
continuation of a 30-year trend, not a one-time aberration.




Patric H. Hendershott
                                                     Joe Peek
Hagerty Hall
The Ohio State University                            Department of Economics
                                                     141 Carney Hall
1775 College Road
                                                     Boston College
Columbus, Ohio 43210
(614) 292—0552
                                                     Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
                                                     (617) 552—3686
                  Private Saving in the United States: 1950—85



                        Patric H. Hendershott and Joe Peek


       Many researchers define saving synonymously with the change in real

 wealth: net worth at the end of the period less net worth (revalued to current

 prices) at the beginning of the period.'    Saving, then, would be the change in
 real resources available for future consumption.2    While this change is
 certainly an important variable worthy of serious
                                                     investigation, the ex post
 change in real wealth in most periods is largely the result of unexpected

wealth changes (stock market gains or losses, housing and land booms, etc.).

That is, the change in real wealth is
                                         generally dominated by real asset price
changes, not planned decisions to increase or decrease the accumulation of
          3
wealth.


      Alternatively, and more customarily, saving is defined in flow terms as

income less consumption and taxes. Given initial wealth and expectations

regarding after—tax income and real capital
                                              gains, saving and consumption are
simultaneously determined. Movements in saving rates, then, lead observers to

conclusions regarding the impacts of policies on behavior. For example, a

decline in the personal saving rate
                                      immediately following both the introduction
of IRA accounts and a sharp increase in
                                          real interest rates might lead one to
conclude that IRAs have not encouraged
                                         saving and that saving is highly

interest inelastic. However, if the saving decline were due to mismeasurement,

then one or both of these conclusions could be incorrect.

     The proper conceptual measurement of personal and private saving is the

subject of this paper. The official National Income and Product Accounts

(NIPA) saving series are increased to
                                        reflect saving via net purchases of
                                      —2—



The need for these adjustments is well understood (see Blades and Sturni 1982,

for example); our intended contribution is the careful implementation of the

adjustments and analysis of the resulting adjusted saving series.

      The plan of the paper is as follows. We begin with a discussion of the

problems in the official measurement of personal and corporate saving and then

propose adjustments to correct the official series. Next, the adjusted

personal and private saving rates are computed and analyzed. Finally, personal

saving equations are estimated on annual data for the 1952—85 period to verify

that the proposed conceptual adjustments are consistent with the data, i.e.,

the estimated coefficients on the adjustments are significantly different from

zero and not significantly different from their expected values (plus or minus

unity). While such macro relationships are subject to the Auerbach-Kotlikoff

critique (1986), the estimates seem appropriate for the task at hand.

      A number of interesting findings are obtained. First, correctly measured

personal and private saving rates in recent years (1983-85) are 5% (not

percentage points) below their averages since 1950, not, as reported in the

official statistics, at all time lows and 20% below their post—1950 averages.

Second, the personal saving rate has been more volatile over the past 35 years

than the official data indicate. Third, corporate saving has been less

volatile, as Auerbach (1982) found. Fourth, the often observed negative

correlation between personal and corporate saving is due solely to measurement

error (the negatively correlated inflation premia in the two saving

components). Fifth, both personal and private saving have rebounded somewhat

in recent years (1983-85), again in contrast to the official series.
                                                — 3-.




                 I. Adjustments to Personal and Corporate Saving

        Saving is generally calculated residually as the difference between

 income received and certain outlays made.              For personal saving, income received
 includes wages and salaries, dividends, rents, interest, and transfers; for

 business saving, income is profits.        Outlays for both include consumption
 expenditures ("dividends" and "depreciation" for businesses), taxes and

 interest paid. For our purposes, it is convenient to define saving as


       SNIA = INC — CEXP   —   TAX   — NINTP,
                                                                              (1)


 where SNIA is NIPA saving, INC is income other
                                                           than interest received, CEXP is
 consumption expenditures, TAX is tax payments and NINTP is net interest

 payments (interest paid less interest received).             Thus, measurement errors in
 income or in any of the terms subtracted from it will be embedded in saving,

 dollar-for—dollar. Significant conceptual errors are generally made in the

measurement of personal income, consumption, and net interest income of both

persons and businesses. Before turning to the adjustments necessary to correct

these errors, we explain why and how noncorporate business saving is included

in personal saving rather than being
                                           aggregated with corporate saving into a
broad total business category.


           A. Integration of Households and Noncorporate Businesses

      Private saving is the sum of household and business saving, but the

components of saving reported in the NIPA are personal and corporate saving.

That is, saving of noncorporate businesses
                                                    is integrated with that of
households into personal saving. Thus corporate and noncorporate business

saving are treated decidedly different.
                                        ——




      In   the NIPA, two categories of noncorporate nonfinancial business are

delineated: sole-proprietorships-and-partnerships and other-private-business.

The first category is further subdivided into farm and nonfarm, the second into

real estate and other. The other—private distinction is apparently 'for

household "portfolio" rental activities, such as owning a small duplex or

shares in rental or oil and gas partnerships. Such portfolio activities, being

analogous to purchases of REIT5 and other corporate shares, certainly should be

integrated with household personal accounts. However, farm and nonf arm sole

proprietorships and partnerships are businesses, and the retention of earnings

within these enterprises seems no different than the retention within

corporations .

      Unfortunately,   the division of proprietorship and rental income between

wages earned and capital income is unclear. Moreover, following the residual

definition of saving as income less outlays, one would need to allocate

household expenditures, taxes, and interest paid between personal and business

activities. Given the impossibility of separating any of the right—hand side

variables in equation (1) into their personal and business components,

"household" and noncorporate business income and expenses are fully integrated

and the resulting saving measure is labelled personal saving.

      Table 1 illustrates the effects of integration on the 1985 household

balance sheet. The underlying data, which include market values of tangible

assets and corporate equity, are from the Board of Governors (1986). In these

data, nonfinancial business activity is divided among corporate, farm

(including a small amount of corporate), and nonf arm noncorporate. Longer-term

financial asset and liability series have been converted from par to market

values (the data in parentheses are par values) using updated bond price

indices from Eisner and Pieper (1984). The first column in the table contains
                                Table 1: Balance Sheets of Households &
                                                                         Nonprofits,
                            Noncorporate Businesses, and Nonfinancial Corporations, 1985
                                                (billions of dollars)
                                        (1)                    (2)                (3)                    (4)
                                   Households          Noncor. Business           + (2)
 Tangible Assets                                                            (1)                   Nonfinancial
                                  and Nonprofit        & Cor. Farms
   Owner—Occupied Housing           2381                                                          Corporations
                                                           65              2446
   Consumer Durables                1393
   Plant & Equipment                                                       1393
                                     251a                667                918
   Rental Housing                                                                                  2701
                                      60                 883                943
   Inventories                                                                                       47
                                                         116                116                     789
  Land
    Owner—Occupied                   952                                    952
    Other                             65a               1504               1569                    526
Financial Assets
  Demand Deposits & Cur. b           303                  21                324
  Other Dep. & Cr. Mkt. Assetsb     3525
                                                                                                    78
                                              (3506)      53               3549         (3559)     933
  Life Ins. & Pension Res.          1992                                                                       (933)
  Net Other Assets                                                         1992
                                     107                  61                168                    173
Equity
  Corporate                         1949                —43                1906                  —3238 (—3234)
  Noricorporate                     2388    (2434)     —2388 (—2434)
—Debt
  Home Mortgages                    1570 (—1495) d                        —1540 (—1495)
  Other                             —982 (—946)         —939     (—893)   —1885 (—1839)          —2009 (—2013)
                                   12814 (12952)           0         0    12851 (12952)              0           0
  Assets of nonprofit
                      organizations (largely private schools, churches and
  NOW Accounts included in other                                           hospitals).
                                 deposits; credit market instruments defined broadly to include
c security and trade credit.
d Equity of noncorporate farms.
  Includes $44 billion of other
                                mortgages.
Source: Board of Governors, 1986 and authors'
                                               adjustments of book to market values for debt instruments
  (book values are in parentheses).
                                      —6—



the basic household data (plus nonprofit organizations and personal trusts);

the second column is the noncorporate data (plus a small amount for corporate

farms); and the third column is the integrated household—noncorporate accounts.

For comparison purposes, the data for nonfinancial corporations (excluding

farms) are listed in the fourth column. As can be seen, the basic household

sector has about $5 trillion in tangible assets (two—thirds is owner—occupied

housing and the land it is on and over three-quarters of the rest is consumer

durables), almost $6 trillion in financial assets, nearly $4½ trillion in

corporate and noncorporate equity, and $2½ trillion in debt ($1½ trillion of

which is mortgages). Household net worth is thus about $13 trillion.

      The nearly $2½ trillion of household noncorporate equity represents

claims on over $3 trillion of tangible assets, as well as nearly a trillion of

net debt. Almost half of the tangible assets is land, largely for farming, and

half of the remainder is rental housing. Thus, the merged household—

noncorporate balance sheet in column 3 looks far different than the basic

household balance sheet,

      The balance sheet of nonfinancial corporations differs greatly from that

of nonfinancial noncorporate business, owing to the large role of corporations

in manufacturing and their small roles in rental housing (less than 5 percent

of the stock) and farming (which is in the noncorporate accounts anyway). In

addition, corporations have far larger holdings of financial assets than do

noncorporate businesses. Noteworthy is the large difference between the net

worth of corporations computed residually from the balance sheet ($3238

billion) and the market value of household corporate equity holdings ($1906

billion). About half the difference reflects indirect household equity
                                         — 7..




 holdings via their life insurance and pension reserves. The other half is the

 oft noted difference between the replacement cost and market value of corporate

 assets (Tobin's q being less than unity).


                        B. Conceptual Saving Adjustments

       Household retirement transactions with the private sector are accounted

 for correctly in the computation of saving. A dollar "contributed" to a

 retirement plan is a dollar of income not consumed and thus a dollar of saving.

 Similarly, a dollar of interest earned on retirement accounts and not consumed

 is a dollar of saving. Finally, a dollar of benefits received and not consumed

 does not affect measured saving; cumulated wealth
                                                       is simply being transferred
 from one asset form to another.
                                   Unfortunately, the treatment of government
 retirement accounts in the official NIPA saving statistics is far different.5

A dollar contributed to a government retirement plan or social security, or

accrued as interest on either, is not included in personal income and thus is

not counted as a dollar of saving. Also, all benefits received are classified

as income (transfer payments), and thus raise saving, even though a part of

benefits are certainly a return of principal or interest. Because

contributions and interest earned exceed benefits paid in a growing retirement

system, the net result of this asymmetric treatment is
                                                            an understatement of
income and thus of saving.

      Theoretical models of consumption and
                                                 saving behavior (for example, the
Life Cycle Hypothesis, the Permanent Income Hypothesis, and their derivatives)

are stated in terms of the consumption of service
                                                      flows. These flows, rather
than consumption expenditures, are a determinant of household utility. Thus

saving is the deferral of consumption of service flows.
                                                             To be consistent with
theory, only the consumption of service flows should be subtracted from income;

the component of consumer expenditures
                                         representing net investment in consumer
                                        —8—



durable goods should properly be considered saving. Official NIPA measures of

personal saving, however, are based upon the subtraction of all consumption

expenditures, rather than service flows only, and thus understate personal

saving.

      A major problem with both household and business saving statistics is the

measurement of interest income received and paid during inflationary periods.

The expectation of net capital losses on fixed—dollar financial assets due to

inflation leads to the incorporation of an inflation premium in nominal

interest rates to compensate investors for the expected losses. Part of

household and business stocks of fixed—dollar assets are being converted into

flows (the inflation premium component) that are recorded inappropriately as

interest income received. Conversely, part of household and business stocks of

financial liabilities are being eroded, and the associated inflation premium is

wrongly recorded as interest paid. These inflation premia obviously rise with

the inflation rate. Because households are net creditors, the overstatement of

interest paid is less than the overstatement of interest received. Thus

personal saving is overstated. Because corporations are net debtors, corporate

saving is understated.

      The above discussion is summarized in Table 2: line 1 contains the

official measure of the various variables used to compute saving, line 2 lists

the conceptual error, line 3 indicates the effect of the error on the saving

measures, and line 4 states the required corrections to the official series.

Note that business income is defined to include the NIPA capital consumption

and inventory valuation adjustments.6
                         Table   2:   Conceptual Errors in the Calculation of Personal and Corporate
                                                                                                     Saving
                                      Income
 1.    Official Series                                       Consumption             Net Interest Paid
       Personal             personal income less         all consumption outlays     interest paid less
                            interest received                                        interest received
      Corporate             profits (with IVA & CCA)     dividends plus capital      interest paid less
                            less interest received       consumption                 interest received
2.    Error
      Personal              net govt. pension            some outlays are            some net interest received
                            purchases excluded           net investment              is return of
                                                                                                  principal
      Corporate
                                                                                     some net interest paid
                                                                                     is erosion of principal
3.    Effect of Error
      Personal              saving understated           saving understated          saving overstated
      Corporate
                                                                                     saving understated
4.    Correction
      Personal             add net govt.                add net consumer            subtract return of
                           pension purchases            durable outlays             principal
      Corporate
                                                                                    add erosion of
                                                                                    principal
                                          —10—




      One final point: corporate income taxes are measured on an accrual

basis, while personal income taxes are on a cash basis. Because individuals

plan consumption and saving over a period of years, not weeks, the appropriate

measurement convention is the accrual method (see Peek 1982). Thus household

tax payments need to be converted to an accrual basis.

                    C. Actual Consumption, Income and Tax Adjustments

    Some of the adjustments to the official saving series are straight-forward.

For the personal consumption mismeasurement, net (of depreciation) purchases of

consumer durables (SCDOR) are added;7 for the government employee life

insurance and pension adjustment to personal income, net purchases of

government life insurance and pension reserves (SGPEN) are added. Each of

these series is available from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds Accounts.

      As for social security, Blades and Sturm (1982) argue that contributions

plus accrued interest less benefits should be added to personal saving.8 This

procedure seems appropriate if social security promises a fair market return.

However, if social security is a bad investment, then some of the contribution

should be viewed as a tax paid, and if social security is an extraordinary

investment, then households are receiving a transfer payment above and beyond

their contribution. More generally, the addition to personal saving should be


            (l+8)cON + ImACCON - BENE,


where CON is current contributions, ACCON is the implicit cumulated stock of

contributions and past interest earned, BENE is benefits paid, m is the fair

market interest rate, and the sign (and magnitude) of 8 depends on how much the

promised return on social security, i5, exceeds or falls short of the market

rate of return:


            8
                >        .s>
                    0 as 1
                               .51
                               1
                                            —11—



 Unfortunately, 8 and ACCON are not known. Thus, our adjustment for social

  security is more conjectural than our other adjustments.

         Munnefl, speculating that households might view social security Old-Age

 and Survivors Insurance (OASI) contributions
                                                   as saving, added them to official

 saving (1977, Figure 6—1, P. 115). Adding contributions to saving is the

 correct adjustment if one assumes that the transfer component of contributions,

 8CON, plus accrued interest at the market interest rate equals benefits

 received. This equality may     have   held approximately during the 1950s, 1960s
 and l970s. For example, the equality would hold if contributions equaled

 benefits (approximately correct since the middle 1950s), accumulated

 contributions equalled 25 times benefits paid, the market interest rate were

 0.03, and the return on social security
                                              were perceived to be sufficiently above
 market that 25 cents of transfers
                                        accompanied every dollar of contributions (8
 =   0.25).   We adopt this assumption as a working hypothesis and thus add OASI

Contributions (both employee and employer) to personal saving, denoting the

adjustment as SSSEC. The contributions data
                                                   are from U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 1986, Table 15, P. 81.

        In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the need to revise benefits downward

and contributions upward (lower is relative to         and thus lower 8) became
clear. Declining birth rates, increased
                                              life expectancy, and likely slower
real growth were all contributing factors
                                               (McSteen, 1985). Legislation in
1983, which advanced scheduled tax rate increases, taxed half of benefits above

a fixed nominal total income level, and raised
                                                    the retirement age for future
retirees, confirmed expectations of a reduced 8. To account for a decline in

8, we freeze the OASI adjustment at its 1980 real level of $119.5 billion

(SSSEC8O) for the entire 1981—85 period. The
                                                   difference between SSSEC and
SSSEC8O is roughly $10 billion in 1981—83 and $35 billion in 1984—85.
                                          12



      Figure 1 contains SGPEN, SGPEN plus SSSEC (or SSSEC8O), and the sum   of
SGPEN, SSSEC (or SSSEC8O) and SCDUR in constant 1982 dollars. Net purchases of

government life insurance and pension reserves and social security OASI

contributions have risen monotonically from $6 and $10 billion, respectively,

in the early l950s to $60 and $155 billion ($120 billion with the 1980s

adjustment) in the middle l980s. The net durables series has a strong cyclical

component as well as an upward trend. On a trend basis, the series has risen,

erratically, from $30 billion in the early 1950s (1950 and 1951 data were

greatly affected by the outbreak of the Korean War) to $90 billion in the

middle 1980s.

      The personal income tax timing adjustment (STAX) is the difference

between NIPA federal personal income tax payments and federal personal income

tax accruals as calculated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The latter

series is based on individual income tax return data adjusted for liability

changes due to audits, amended returns, and additional assessments.9 Most of

the difference between payments and accruals (which has fluctuated between —7

and +16 billion 1982 dollars) arises because the net refund for tax year t is

included in the liabilities of year t and in the cash payments of year t+l.

The major fluctuations in the net refund series are due to differences in the

timing and magnitude of the changes in income tax rates and the corresponding

withholding schedules.

                         D. Inflation Premium Adjustments

      A simple specification of the inflation premium is the product of the

anticipated inflation rate and the stock of net fixed—income assets (see, for

example, Jump 1980)      This   specification implies immediate, complete

adjustment of interest income to the current anticipated inflation rate. In

fact, net interest income included in personal saving did not adjust anywhere

near this rapidly during the 1965—79 period of rising inflation. First,
                                        —13—



 binding interest rate ceilings on at least some demand and savings accounts

 have existed in the United States since the early l960s. Once these nominal

 interest rate ceilings became binding, the monetary interest payments on such

 assets incorporated an additional inflation premium only as rapidly as ceiling

 interest rates were raised. Second, while additional interest from financial

 institutions was imputed to individuals when interest rates (inflation) rose,

 imputed interest responded sluggishly to interest rate increases. Third, a

 significant part of fixed-coupon household assets and liabilities are long-

 term. For these instruments, coupon
                                       receipts/payments adjust to an increase in
 interest rates only over time as new bonds are issued to replace maturing bonds

 (yields adjust immediately via a decline in the market price of the

 instruments). Thus, the inflation component of NIPA interest income and

 expenses substantially lagged the increase in the anticipated inflation rate.

 (The adjustment to a decrease in inflation will occur more rapidly to the

extent that refinancing results in high coupons being replaced by lower coupons

and deposit rate floors do not exist.) Another problem with this simple

specification of the inflation premium is that the tax liabilities incurred on

monetary interest income are ignored: only the net—of—tax inflation premium

component is available to individuals to maintain the real value of their net

financial assets during an inflationary period. If the real value falls by

more than the net—of-tax premium, then an
                                            uncompensated real capital loss is
incurred.

      Similar arguments can be made against such a specification for the

inflation premium in business net interest paid. Interest payments increase

sluggishly when interest rates rise because some debt is long term. Moreover,

interest is fully tax deductible, so the cost of the erosion of outstanding

debt is only the net-of-tax inflation premium.
                                     — 14—




      We have constructed inflation premium adjustments for personal and

corporate saving that are based on the relevant measures of NIPA net interest

income (persons) and net interest expense (businesses). Table 3 presents the

components of the net interest measures for 1985. Household net interest

received equals monetary interest paid to persons and noncorporate businesses,

plus imputed interest received by persons from life insurance carriers and

private noninsured pension plans, less monetary interest paid by consumers

(excluding mortgage interest on owner—occupied housing and nonprofit capital).

Mortgage interest on owner occupied housing and nonprofit capital is excluded

in this calculation because this interest is included in both personal income

and consumer expenditures (housing services) and thus nets out in the

calculation of personal saving. Imputed interest received by persons from

banks, credit agencies, and investment companies is omitted because it, too, is

included in both personal income and consumer expenditures (in the latter as

services furnished without payment by financial intermediaries). Finally,

imputed interest received by noncorporate business is not included in their net

income (and hence in personal income), being both an income item and an expense

item and thus irrelevant to the saving calculation. Turning to nonfinancial

corporations, their net interest paid is simply monetary interest paid less

monetary interest received. Imputed interest received by nonfinancial

corporations from financial institutions is omitted because it is both an

income and expense item.

      In general, the before.'tax inflation premium component added to personal

saving is calculated as:


      SINFPERBT = (RINTPER   RINTPER5O)APER,          (2)



where APER represents the stock of the relevant household net fixed—income

assets at the beginning of the period,11 RINTPER represents the ratio of the
                                         —J. 5—




                 Table 3: Interest Income Received and Paid, 1985
                               (billions of dollars)

                                      Households                 Nonfinancial
                               as Persons as Business            Corporations
 Interest Received
                                                                    1053b
 Interest Paid                   82.6             251.5             219.4
 Net Received                   318.5

 Net Paid
                                                  243.1             114.1
Less Interest Paid
as Business to Business                                   C
                                                  150.0
Net Paid after Adjustment
                                                   93.1             114.1
Net Household
Interest Received                       225.4


aIld 91.0 billion      of imputed interest from life insurance carriers and

 private pension plans, but not $63.9 billion from banks, credit agencies and

 investment companies. These figures
                                        come from an unpublished BEA series (the
 interest component of Table 8.8, line 50).

bIncludes Only monetary interest received.

Clncludes interest
                   on mortgages financing owner-occupied housing and capital
 owned and used by nonprofit organizations.


Source: MIPA, Table 8.8.
                                      —16—




household net interest series just discussed to APER, and RINTPER5O is the 1950

value of RINTPER. This procedure allocates any increase in interest income

(adjusted for the growth in net financial assets) to our inflation component

measure. It is likely that the inflation premium component in 1950, if any,

was extremely small. To the extent that this component was nonzero, our

measure differs from the true component by a small constant.

      To obtain the after—tax inflation premium, SINFPER, we divide the

inflation premium into its taxable and nontaxable components and multiply the

former by (l-TXINT), where TXINT is the assumed tax rate on interest income)2

The nontaxable portion is associated with the interest income from life

insurance and private pension fund reserves and net holdings of state and local

government bonds. The after-tax inflation premium is the sum of the nontaxable

portion and the after-tax taxable portion.

      The above equation implicitly assumes that the real interest rate built

into interest income was constant during the 1950—85 period.13 Because an

increase in the real interest rate in the early 1980s is well documented

(Clarida and Friedman 1983 and Hendershott 1986), we have constructed an

inflation premium with a special adjustment for the early l980s, SINFPER8O.

This premium allows for the gradual adjustment of interest income to a three

percentage point increase in real interest rates in 1981. Based on an

examination of the difference between RINTPER and the Livingston expected

inflation data for the 1978—85 period, the SINFPER8O calculation assumes that

the real interest rate incorporated in interest income was one percentage point

higher in 1981, two points higher in 1982 and three points higher during 1983-

85. This is equivalent to adding one, two, and three percentage points to the

value of RINTPER5O for 1981, 1982 and 1983-85, respectively.
                                        —17--




       The after—tax inflation premium component netted from corporate saving is

 calculated directly as


       SINFCOR = (l-TxcOR) (RINTcOR -
                                      RINTCOR5O)ACOR,              (3)



 where TXCOR is the maximum corporate tax rate and the other variables are

 defined analogously to those used in the personal inflation premium adjustment

 except that they refer to net interest paid by nonfinancial corporations on

their stock of net debt.'4 SINFCOR8O is SINFCQR calculated with the same

adjustment to RINTCOR5O made to RINTPER5O in the calculation of SINFPER8O.

      Figure 2 contains graphs of SINFPER, SINFCOR, SINFPER8O and SINFcOR8O,

again in 1982 dollars. The upward surge in the series, owing to both rising

inflation (interest rates) and growing real net stocks of financial assets

 (households) and liabilities (corporations), is clear. The series rise from

under a billion to peaks of $127 billion ($95 billion with the real rate

adjustment) for persons and $38 billion ($33 billion) for corporations. In

general, the business premium is 25 to 35 percent of the household premium. An

exception is the 1969—75 period, where the business premium averaged nearly 45

percent of the household premium. Prior to the late l970s when deregulation of

many deposit rates and the growth of money market funds made household interest

income responsive to interest rate changes, the business premium rose relative

to the household premium when interest rates increased and fell when interest

rates decreased. The relatively high business premium in the 1969—75 period

reflected much higher interest rates relative to the l960s.


                     II. Official and Adjusted Saving Rates

     Our adjusted personal saving series incorporates the five adjustments to

SNIA described above. The first four adjustments are added to SNIA, while the

inflation component is subtracted. Adjusted personal saving is thus:
                                       —18—



      SADJPER = SNIAPER + SCDUR + SGPEN + SSSEC8O + STAX - SINFPER8O.   (4)



To obtain an adjusted personal saving rate, we divide the adjusted series by

adjusted disposable income (and multiply by 100). The adjustments to

disposable income are those indicated in the income and net—interest—paid

columns of Table 2 and the tax timing adjustment. The adjusted income series

is calculated as:


      YDADJ = YDNIA + STAX + SGPEN ÷ SSSEC8O - YINF8O,                      (5)



where YDNIA is NIPA personal disposable income, and YINF8O is the inflation

premium adjustment for disposable income. The latter is computed from a

relationship similar to equation (2), but with the interest income (adjusted

for the rise in real rates in the l980s) and net asset stock series redefined

appropriately. The interest income series is increased by including imputed

interest paid on personal demand deposits by financial institutions and by not

excluding interest paid to business; the net asset stock is increased by the

demand deposits and home mortgage and other debt of households. In terms of

Table 3, we add the $63.9 billion of imputed interest paid to households by

banks, credit agencies and investment companies and both the $150.0 billion of

mortgage interest and the $82.6 billion of other interest paid to business by

households to our 1985 total of $225.4 billion, arriving at an adjusted total

of $521.9 billion.

      Our adjusted corporate saving series includes only the inflation premium

adjustment:


      SADJCOR = SNIACOR + SINFCOR8O,                              (6)
                                          -19-




 where SNIACOR already incorporates the NIPA capital consumption and inventory

 valuation adjustments. Owing to the inflation premium adjustment, the ratio of

 adjusted corporate saving to adjusted official disposable income is 12 percent

 greater, on average, than the ratio of official corporate saving to official

 disposable income. However, the standard deviation of the adjusted ratio is 20

 percent less. Our adjusted private saving series is the sum of the adjusted

 personal and corporate rates:


       SADJPRI = SADJPER + SADJCOR.
                                                                      (7)



       Figures 3 and 4 present the adjusted and official
                                                         personal and private
 saving rates, respectively. The most obvious difference in the adjusted and

official series is their average values. Given our additions to official

saving, the adjusted personal series is 6½ percentage points greater than the

official, on average, while the adjusted private rate is 7 percentage points

greater. Moreover, the differences between the adjusted and official series

are far larger since 1970 than in the l950s and early l960s. The trend

increase in the differences is the result of trends in our adjustments.

The retirement contributions (government
                                            employees pension and social security)
correction has a strong upward trend,
                                        adding 2 percentage points to saving
rates in the early l950s but 7 percentage points in the 1980s. The inflation

premium correction also has an upward trend, rising from zero to over 4

percentage points (for personal saving) in the early 1980s, before tailing off.

No trends exist in the durables and tax
                                          timing adjustments.

     The retirement correction and the difference between it and the

inflation premium corrections for personal and private saving, respectively,

are plotted in Figure 5. As can be seen, the difference (the net adjustment to
                                       —20—




 saving) raises the official personal and private saving rates from 2 percentage

 points in 1951 to over 4 (to 5 for private saving) in the middle 1970s, after

 which the sum is roughly constant (with a temporary dip in the early l980s).

       The adjusted personal saving rate is more volatile than the official

 rate; its standard deviation is nearly 70 percent greater. Moreover, the

adjusted rate contains some broad movements that are not evident in the

official rate. In particular, the adjusted saving rate declines from above 14

percent in 1950—51 to about 11 percent in 1958—61 and then rises back to 15

percent in 1966. During the same time span, the official rate moves

erratically within a one and three-quarters percentage point band. The two

series also move differently since 1978. The adjusted series declines from 15

percent to below 12½ percent in 1980-82 and then rises slightly in 1984-85. In

contrast, the official rate is nearly constant at about 7 percent throughout

the 1978—82 period and then drops to 5½ percent in 1983-85. That is, the

adjusted series is three—quarters of a percentage point higher in 1983—85 than

in 1980—82, rather than 1½ percentage points lower.

      Figure 6 presents the national and government (federal, state and local)

saving rates, both adjusted and unadjusted, as percentages of net national

product. The area between the two pairs of national and government saving rate

lines represents private saving. Less than half of our adjustment to private

saving represents a net addition to national saving. For the 1950—85 period,

the private saving rate (as a percentage of net national product) is increased

by 5.6 percentage points; the national saving rate is increased by only 2.5

percentage points (due to the consumer durables adjustment). The
                                                                   remaining
increase to private saving comes from a 3.1 percentage point reduction in the

government saving rate (2.7 federal and 0.4 state and local). The federal

government saving adjustment is composed of the tax timing adjustment, the

social security adjustment, about one-quarter of the government employees
                                       —21—



 pension adjustment (SGPEN), and a portion of the net inflation premium

 adjustment (SINFPER8O-SINFCOR8O). The federal government share of the net

 inflation premium adjustment oscillates from 80 percent in the 1950s down to

 almost 50 percent by the early 1970s and then back to 80 percent by 1985. The

 state and local saving adjustment' is composed of the remainder of the SGPEN and

 net inflation premium adjustments.

      Table 4 contains average national, private and federal government saving

rates, both official and adjusted, for the 1982—85 period and the three

preceding decades: 1952—61, 1962-71, and 1972—81, each of which concluded with

a recession.15 All three official saving rates
                                                  are reasonably constant for the
three decades, although the federal and national saving rates were both down by

about a percentage point in the l970s. In contrast, sharp two percentage point

declines occurred in both the private and federal saving rates in the 1982-85

period, giving a whopping 4½ point decline in the national saving rate. The

adjusted saving rate series tell the same story regarding the declines from

1972-81 to 1982-85, but the context of these declines is far different. For

one thing, the decline in federal saving is not
                                                  a one—time abberation but the
continuation of a trend. In fact, the decrease from 1972—81 to 1982—85 is less

than the decrease from 1962-71 to 1972—81.
                                              On the other hand, the decline in
the private saving rate reverses an upward trend so the 1982-85 rate is nearly

a point above the 1952—61 rate, rather than at an all-time low.
                                      —22—



          Table 4: Official and Adjusted National, Private and Federal
            Government Saving Rates (percent of net national product)


                 National               Private             Federal Government
           Official    Adjusted   Official     Adjusted    Official    Adjusted
1952—61      7.50        9.55       8.16        12.47       —0.46        —2.35

1962—71      8.48       11.14       9.05        14.72       —0.66        -3.34

1972—81      7.64       10.08       8.64        15.03       —2.06        —5.60

1982—85      3.11        5.38       6.88        13.30       —4.29        —7.55
                                          —23—




                     III. Personal Saving Equation Estimates

        Estimates of equations explaining real per capita personal saving are

  reported in this section. The primary
                                           purpose of the equations is to provide a
  test, albeit crude, of our proposed personal
                                                 saving adjustments. If, for
  example, an adjustment should have a coefficient of minus unity in an equation

 explaining NIPA saving and the estimated coefficient
                                                         is positive, this would
 constitute strong grounds for rejecting our adjustment. The equations are

 based on a model of planned wealth
                                       accumulation that includes measures of

 wealth, income, capital gains, the GNP gap (all in per capita constant 1982

 dollars), the real after-tax interest rate and
                                                  the age composition of the
 population as explanatory variables (see Hendershott and Peek, 1985a, for a

 detailed description of the model). This section begins with a discussion of

 the variables and estimation
                                procedure, reports the results, and then analyzes
 their implications for the relationship between personal and corporate
                                                                        saving.

                   A. The Variables and Estimation Procedure

      Our disposable labor income measure is equal to the NIPA measures of

wages and salaries, other labor income, and a proportion of proprietor's

income, less labor's share of actual personal income tax liabilities and

employee contributions for social insurance, plus the sum of government

employees retirement benefits and SGPEN (equal to contributions plus accrued

interest on cumulated contributions)
                                       and both SSSEC8O and OASI benefit payments
(assumed to equal accrued interest on the stock of cumulated OASI

contributions). The latter additions are needed to make the income measure

consistent with our adjusted saving
                                      measure. Transfer payments are set equal
to NIPA transfer payments less both
                                      government employees retirement benefits
and OASI benefits (which we have
                                   reallocated to disposable labor income).
                                       —24--




       Both adjusted disposable labor income and adjusted transfer payments are

 divided into their expected and unexpected components through regression

 analysis (see Hendershott and Peek, 1985a, for specific details). The

 predicted value from an equation with the variable in question being regressed

 on a set of predetermined variables is taken as the expected component; the

 residual series from the regression is taken as the proxy for the unexpected

 component. We use annual observations for the 1951—85 period. The explanatory

variables for real per capita labor income/transfer payments are four lagged

values of the dependent variable and one lagged value of each of the following:

real government expenditures, the difference (gap) between potential and actual

real GNP, the real value of the Ml definition of the money supply, the one-year

after-tax nominal treasury bill yield (RAT), an index of marginal personal

income tax rates, and the one-year ahead Livingston expected inflation rate

from the December survey (IT). The potential GNP measure is the middle

expansion trend GNP series calculated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. All

variables except for interest, tax and inflation rates are per capita.

      The real net capital gains data were calculated from the Board of

Governors (1986) as in Hendershott and Peek (l985b). We combined household

assets and liabilities (including noncorporate business holdings) into three

categories:   (1) tangible capital (residential structures, consumer durable

goods, land, and the plant and equipment and inventories of nonprofit

institutions and noncorporate business), (2) corporate equities, held both

directly and indirectly through household life insurance and pension fund

reserves, and (3) all other financial assets less liabilities. The real

capital gains measures were divided into their expected and unexpected

components using a regression procedure similar to that used for the labor

income and transfer variables. The capital gains regressions have the ratio of

net capital gains to the beginning-of—period stock of assets as the dependent
                                         —25—



 variable. The explanatory variables include four lagged values of the

 dependent variable, the expected inflation rate, and lagged values of the first

 differences of all the explanatory variables in the labor income/transfer

 equations. For the equities equation we also include both our adjusted

 corporate saving variable lagged one period divided by the beginning-of-perj

 stock of corporate equities and the top corporate income tax rate.

       Table 5 presents estimates of personal saving equations with and without

 our tax timing, government pension, social security, and inflation premium

 adjustments. The consumer durables adjustment
                                                  cannot be employed as a
 regressor because it is an endogenous decision variable)6
                                                                According to the
 Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis, individuals choose their level of

 consumption (durable plus nondurable) subject to their budget constraint. Not

only do they choose the level of their
                                         consumption, but they also choose its
composition; they can substitute more or less durable services for nondurables

and scrvices within their total
                                  consumption. In contrast, consumer choice over
government employees pension or social security contributions and the inflation

premium in interest income is severely limited, and thus these adjustments can

be employed as regressors. The hypothesized minus one coefficient on the

consumer durables adjustment is imposed in our estimation by adding this

adjustment to NIPA saving and using this sum as the dependent variable.

      Regressors considered, in addition to our saving adjustments and the

income and capital gains variables previously described, include: the

beginning_of_period stock of real household wealth (with financial assets and

liabilities converted from par to market values) from Board of Governors (1986);

the share of the population over 64 from the Council of Economic Advisers,

1987; the GNP gap; and the
                             one-year after-tax expected real interest rate from
the previous December, calculated as RAT -   i. Both   the population share and
                                            —26—




real interest rate variables (less their mean values) have been multiplied by

expected adjusted disposable labor income. All        of   the dollar variables are per

capita constant 1982 dollar magnitudes.

             The rather high correlations between pairs of explanatory variables make

it very difficult to pinpoint the individual effects of the variables on

personal saving. For example, the pairwise correlations between wealth,

expected labor income, expected transfers, share of population over 64,

SINFPER8O, SGPEN and SSSEC8O are each above 0.9. Furthermore, the pairwise

correlations of each of these variables with expected capital gains on net

financial assets ranges between —0.76 and -0.92. First—differencing the data

substantially reduces the collinearity between pairs of explanatory variables.

Consequently, each equation in Table 5 has been estimated using first—

differenced data. To simplify the exposition and to preserve degrees of

freedom, we have combined the expected and unexpected components of disposable

labor income, which tended to have very similar estimated coefficients.

Similarly, because the estimated coefficients on expected transfer payments,

expected and unexpected capital gains on net financial assets, and unexpected

capital gains on tangible assets tended to be statistically insignificant (and

in many cases, quite erratic) across the various saving equation

specifications, they have been omitted from the equations presented in the

table. Finally, the one-year after—tax real Treasury bill rate was omitted

because it never had a coefficient of either quantitative or statistical
 •   •   •         17
significance.
                                           —27—



                                  B. The Estimates

        Columns (1) and (2) in Table 5 are estimated with data from the full

  1952—85 sample period. The first column
                                              explains personal saving (including
  net durables, SNIAPER + SCDUR) without our proposed adjustments.
                                                                      Only the
  coefficients on wealth, disposable labor income, population share, and expected

  gains on tangible assets are Statistically significant at the 95 percent

  confidence level with the predicted
                                        sign, although the unexpected transfer
 payments and GNP gap variables contribute to the
                                                     explanatory power of the
 equation. In column 2, our saving adjustments (without the l980s

 modifications) are included as additional
                                              explanatory variables. Each of the
 estimated coefficients on the four
                                       adjustment variables, except that on SSSEC,
 is more than two standard
                             errors from zero with the expected sign; that on
 SSSEC is more than one and a half
                                     standard errors. Moreover, none of the four
 estimated coefficients are more than
                                         two standard errors away from their
 predicted values. However, the point estimates of the coefficients on both

 SGPEN and SINFPER are nearly double
                                        their predicted values.

       Because the equation underlying column 2 makes no special modification

 for either the l980s decline in the
                                       expected rate of return on social
                                                                      security
relative to market interest rates or the l980s rise in real interest
                                                                     rates, the
estimates are suspect. The problem with
                                            the 1980s observations can be solved
either by eliminating the troublesome 1981—85 observations from the
                                                                    estimation
period (column 3) or by retaining the
                                         entire sample period but using the
modified measures of the social
                                  security (SSSEc80) and inflation premium

(SINFPER8O) adjustments (Column 4). For
                                            the 1952—80 subperjod, each of the
estimated coefficients on the saving adjustments is within a standard
                                                                      error of
its predicted value with the
                             exception of that on STAX which is just
                                                                     slightly
more than a single standard error away. All but the inflation premium

coefficient differ significantly from
                                        zero. Alternatively, when SSSEC8O and
                                                 —28—



                                                Table 5

      Personal Saving (Including Net Investment in Consumer Durables Regressions,
                            Annual Observations for 1952—85
      (First Differences of Real Per Capita Data, Standard Errors in Parentheses)


    Explanatory Variables      (1)      (2)a        (3)b      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)

 Tax Timing                     —     —1.128     —1.289     —1.044     —1.051     —1.00     —1.00
 Adjustment                            (.230       (.258)    (.233)     (.233)

 Government Pension            —      —1.837     -1.663     —1.501     —1.779     —1.00     —1.00
 Adjustment                            (.707)      (.729)    (.657)     (.614)

 Social Security               —       —.922     —1.443     —1.358     —1.476     —1.00     —1.00
 Adjustment                            (.547)      (.603)    (.497)     (.487)

Inflation Premium              —       1.871       .826       .980       .956      1.00      1.00
Adjustment                             (.619)     (.841)     (.361)     (.360)

Wealth                      —.0309    —.0439 —.0307         —.0360     -.0399     —.0415 —.0395
                            (.0152)    (.0123) (.0133)       (.0111)    (.0106)    (.0094) (.0091)
Labor Income                 .497       .648       .608       .584       .567       .523      .509
                            (.087)     (.084)     (.085)     (.066)     (.065)     (.052)    (.051)

Unexpected                  —.783       .198       .682       .299      .264        .122      .150
Transfers                   (.505)     (.391)     (.419)     (.396)     (.395)     (.325)    (.313)

Percent Popula—             —3.60     —5.21       —3.63     —3.01      —1.50      —1.50     —1.50
tion over Age 64            (1.68)     (1.49)     (1.79)     (1.26)

GNP gap                      .0693     .0564   .0455         .0892      .0876      .0785   .1006
                            (.0488)   (.0342) (.0424)        (.0357)   (.0356)    (.0315) (.0327)
Expected Gains              —.0657    —.0124 —.0302         —.0382     —.0377     —.0358 —.0467
on Tangible Assets          (.0257)   (.0228) (.0310)       (.0190)    (.0190)    (.0167) (.0171)
Expected Gains on           —.0058    — .0245     — .0226   — .0252    — .0297    — .0277   — .0317
Corp. Equities              (.0137)   (.0111) (.0110)       (.0104)    (.0097)    (.0084) (.0084)
Unexpected Gains             .0013    —.0121 —.0178         —.0158     —.0166     —.0164 —.0145
on Corp. Equities           (.0131)   (.0094) (.0097)       (.0095)    (.0094)    (.0085) (.0082)
Minutes to Midnight           —         —           —         -          —          -        . 00140
                                                                                            (.00076)
R2                                     .854       .863       .856       .848       .817      .837
SEE                      63.87        43. 72     41.73      43.46      43.46      41.56     40.06
DW                        2.31         2.15       2.04       1.78       1.79       1.96      2.14
a
  The social—security and inflation—premium adjustments for the column do not
include the 1980s corrections.
b
    These estimates are for the 1952-80 period.
                                          —29—



 SINFPER8O are used as regressors and the equation is estimated over the entire

 1952—85 sample period, each of the four coefficients differs significantly from

 zero and each of the four is well within a single standard error of its

 predicted value. All of the estimated coefficients except for those on

 unexpected transfer payments and unexpected gains on corporate equities are now

 statistically significant with the expected sign. The introduction of the

 saving adjustments reduces the standard error of the equation by over 30

percent compared to column 1. Whether we omit the 1981-85 observations or

modify the social security and inflation premium adjustments, we obtain very

similar results. The sharpest differences between the two equations are the

doubling of the GNP gap coefficient and the sharp decline in both the

unexpected transfer payments coefficient and the standard error of the

inflation premium adjustment coefficient as we move from column 3 to column 4.

      The only problem with the estimates in column 4, in our view, is the

magnitude of the population share coefficient. This coefficient implies too

large a negative impact of the aging of the population.     In fact, a coefficient
of -1.5 is as large, in absolute value, as seems plausible (Hendershott and

Peek, 1985a, p. 89). Constraining the coefficient to this value (column 5)

makes little difference. The equation standard error is virtually unchanged,

and none of the individual coefficients
                                           changes by as much as half a standard

deviation. The pension adjustment coefficient is now slightly more than a

standard error from its expected value)8

     Column 6 contains estimates with the coefficients on all the saving

adjustments constrained to their theoretical values. These
                                                              estimates imply
significant positive labor income (coefficient of 0.52) and GNP gap (0.78)

responses, and significant negative wealth (—0.042), expected gains on tangible
                                      —30—




 assets (-0.036), and expected (-0.028) and unexpected (—0.016) corporate equity

 gains relationships. The unexpected transfer payments coefficient, in

 contrast, is less than half a standard error from zero.

      The final equation in Table 5 includes Slemrod's (1986) minutes to

midnight nuclear—fear variable. Increased fear of nuclear holocaust would

 likely reduce the propensity to save. When this variable (scaled by expected

disposable labor income) is added to our basic equation, the estimated

coefficient is significantly greater than zero (t—statistic =   1.84) 19 Of the
other estimated coefficients, only those on the GNP gap and expected gains on

tangible assets change (barely) by as much as half a standard error.2°

      How do the various explanatory variables interact to explain the broad

swings in the adjusted personal saving rate discussed earlier, namely the rise

from an average 12% rate in the 1954—64 period to l5½% in the 1966—78 period

and then the decline to 12½% in the l980s? The two upper series plotted in

Figure 7 are the adjusted personal saving rate and the wealth/income ratio.

The negative correlation between the series is obvious. The lower series is an

average of the rate of growth in our real adjusted disposable income series for

the current and preceding two years. This average correlates positively with

the saving rate and negatively with the wealth ratio, although the correlations

break down somewhat in the 1969-78 decade. The correlations with the saving

and wealth ratios indicate the two channels through which real income growth

affects saving: more rapid growth raises the saving rate directly, because the

marginal propensity to save exceeds the average, and indirectly, because the

saving rate is negatively related to the wealth-income ratio which falls when

income grows more rapidly than wealth. The last relevant part of the

explanation concerns movements in the stock market. Stock market gains

averaged (as a share of income) 9.2%, —2.9% and 6.0% in the 1954—66, 1968—78

and 1980-85 periods. These gains alter the wealth-income ratio (the negative
                                        —31—



 gains in the middle period explain the break down in the negative relationship

 between income growth and the wealth ratio) and also have a small direct impact

 on the saving rate.

                       C. The Corporate Veil and Denison's Law

       A question often asked Is: do households directly alter their saving in

 response to changes in corporate saving (Feldstein 1973)? The answer usually

 given is yes, to a significant extent (Howrey and Hymans 1978 and von

 Furstenberg 1981). That is, the coefficient on corporate saving when it is

 added to a personal saving equation generally lies between —0.45 and -0.7 and

 is statistically different from zero. If we regress official NIPA saving on

the variables in column 1 plus official NIPA corporate saving, we get a similar

result (coefficient of -0.44 with standard error of 0.23). However, this

estimate comes from an equation in which both personal and corporate saving are

mismeasured. More importantly, the measurement errors are negatively

correlated; personal saving is too high during inflationary periods and

corporate saving is too low. When the series are corrected, i.e., personal

saving is lowered by the household inflation premium adjustment (and augmented

by the other adjustments) and corporate saving is raised by the corporate

inflation premium adjustment, the coefficient on corporate saving is positive

(0.21 with a standard error of 0.13).

      Even earlier, Denison (1958) focused attention on the relative stability

of the gross private saving rate. He argued that, for many purposes, analysis

of the total private saving rate is more appropriate than considering the

personal and corporate saving components separately. He stated:    "Indeed, it

was the clear tendency, readily observable even in the dollar figures, for

personal saving and corporate saving to move in offsetting fashion that first

led me to deal directly with total saving (p. 264)."   Later work by David and

Scadding (1974) and others confirmed this relationship. When official
                                                                         gross
                                       —32—



 saving rates are plotted for the 1952—85 period, the negative correlation

 between them is, indeed, "readily observable"; moreover, the simple correlation

 coefficient is -0.31. However, such a relationship is not observable between

 the adjusted saving rates, and their simple correlation coefficient is 0.25.

 Thus, the often noted negative correlation between the personal and corporate

 saving rates, either gross or net, appears to be due to the negatively

 correlated inflation premia inappropriately contained in the official saving

 measures.

       The absence of a negative relation between household and business saving,

correctly measured, does not mean that households do not respond rationally to

corporate real wealth accumulation. If corporations were to generate an

additional dollar of retained earnings through wise investments, the market

value of corporate equity would rise. If the higher retained earnings were not

expected to continue, then the equity value would increase by $1 and

households, by our estimates, would consume 1.5 cents (the coefficient on

unexpected corporate equity gains) in the current year and 4.0 cents (the

wealth coefficient) in subsequent years. If retained earnings were expected to

be higher in perpetuity, then the market value of corporate equity would rise

by a multiple, say $25, and households would consume 36 cents of the initial $1

(0.015 times $25) and $1.00 (0.040 times $25) in each of the subsequent years.



                          IV. Summary and Conclusion

      Personal and private saving rates have hit post—1950 lows in the 1980s

according to official saving statistics. The average personal saving rate for

1983-85 was 5.6 percent, less than any year in the 1950—82 period and 20

percent below the average rate for that period. The average private saving

rate for 1982-85 was 8.6 percent, less than any year in the 1950-81 period and

23 percent below the average rate for that period.
                                         —33—



        But the official statistics contain a number of conceptual measurement

  errors. The major ones are:     (1) treating net investment in consumer durables

 as consumption, (2) effectively treating net investment in government

 retirement plans, especially social security, as taxes, and (3) counting as

 interest income that part of interest received which is both due to inflation

 and available to compensate for inflation's erosion of fixed—valued asset

 stocks. The first two errors cause the
                                           official personal and private saving
 rates to understate the true rates; the last causes an overstatement of both

 rates, although less for private saving because the private sector is a smaller

 net creditor than is the personal sector.

       The consumer durables correction is highly cyclical and generally raises

 saving rates by between 1½ and 4½ percentage points over the 1950-85 period.

 The retirement contributions
                                correction, in contrast, has a strong upward

 trend, adding 2 percentage points to saving rates in the early l950s but 7

percentage points in the l980s. The inflation
                                                  premium correction also has an
upward trend, rising from zero to 4¼ percentage points (for personal saving) in

the early 1980s, before tailing off. The difference between these trend

adjustments raises the official personal and
                                                private saving rates by increasing
amounts between 1951 and the middle 1970s.

      Because of this trend in our adjustments,
                                                  our adjusted saving rates in
the middle l980s are generally higher than
                                             the rates during the 1950—65 period
and only slightly below the averages for the entire 1950-85 period. For

adjusted personal saving, the rate for each year so far in the l980s exceeds

every year in the 1958—63 period, and the adjusted
                                                     rate for 1984—85 exceeds the
rate in every year in the 1954—64 span. Moreover, the 1984—85 rate is only a

half percentage point below the 1950-83 average, in contrast to the 1½
                                      —34—



percentage points the official rate is below its 1950—83 average. The adjusted

personal saving rate was low in 1954-64, high in 1966—78 and then slightly

below average in 1980—85.

      Basically, the same description holds for the adjusted private saving

rate which so far in the 1980s is'slightly below the 1950—85 average, but above

its value during most of the l950s and early 1960s. More specifically, the

1984—85 rate exceeds the rate in every year between 1952 and 1963, except 1955.

Further, the adjusted private saving rate in 1984-85 is only a quarter

percentage point below the 1950-83 average, in contrast to the two percentage

point difference in the official private saving rate in these periods. The

adjusted private saving rate was low in 1952-63, high in 1964—79 and only

slightly below average so far in the 1980s.

      In contrast to personal saving, corporate saving has been less volatile

than the official statistics indicate. The official rate has been especially

low during high inflation periods (1974—75, 1980—82). When the inflation—

premium correction is added (some of corporate interest expense is simply

compensation for declines in the real value of their debt), these low values

are smoothed out. The inflation-premium corrections, for both corporate and

personal saving, have another interesting effect: they remove the negative

correlation between personal and corporate saving. For the 1950—85 period, the

official personal and corporate saving rates, where disposable personal income

is the denominator, exhibit a correlation of —0.23; the adjusted saving rates,

where adjusted disposable income is the denominator, have a correlation

coefficient of 0.22. That is, earlier evidence on households "seeing through

the corporate veil" reflected measurement errors in the two series (the

negatively correlated inflation-premia). Households respond rationally to

corporate retentions that raise stock prices and thus wealth; they do not

irrationally respond to retentions that are not viewed as increasing wealth.
                                        —35—



      To summarize, private saving has been relatively robust in recent years,

according to our adjusted saving series. While the rate is below peak rates in

the 1970s, it is close to the average rate for the 1950—82 period. On the

other hand, the decrease in federal
                                      government saving in the 1982-85 period,
rather than being a one—time
                               aberration, is simply the continuation of a trend
starting in the l960s.
                                       —36—



                                   Footnotes

1. See, for example, the studies by Auerbach, Kane, and Jianakoplos in

Hendershott (1985).


2. As straight-forward as this definition is, conceptual and practical

difficulties exist in the determination of what constitutes an increase in real

resources, not the least of which is measuring changes in unfunded pension

wealth (private and social security), a task requiring heroic assumptions about

future legislation, tax treatment and discount rates. See, for example, the

studies by Auerbach and Hendershott and Peek (Chap. 3) in Hendershott (1985b).


3. See Hendershott and Peek (l985a).


4. Rather than being retained, capital was withdrawn from these enterprises at

an annual rate of $64 billion over the 1982-85 period.


5. For a fascinating analysis of the illogic of government accounting methods,

including those for social security, see Kotlikoff (1986).


6. We also considered an accelerated-depreciation adjustment for business

saving. When capital purchases are written of f faster than capital

productivity erodes, taxes on current profits are postponed. In effect,

businesses are borrowing interest free to reduce current taxes, and thus saving

is overstated. The overstatement of saving is the implicit amount firms are

borrowing in order to be able to pay the extra taxes that will come due when

economic depreciation on today's investment eventually exceeds tax

depreciation. However, the extra taxes only come due to the extent that the

business shrinks or depreciation allowances are made less generous in the

future. For an ongoing concern that does not expect a shortening of tax lives,

the implicit amount borrowed is zero; the deferral is a permanent gift.
                                          —37—



  7. To be complete, we should also impute income from the use of durables to

  consumption. However, the same imputation would be made to personal income,

  leaving saving unaffected.


 8. Blades and Sturm (1982) claim to have
                                            made this adjustment, but we do not
 know how accrued interest (either the rate of return on social security or the

 stock of accumulated contributions to which it is applied) could be calculated.


 9. See Park (1986) and articles cited therein for a more detailed discussion of

 the tax liabilities series.


 10. The inflation adjustment was first
                                          addressed by Poole (1972). His measure
 of the inflation premium in disposable income was Constructed as:

       YPREM =     YINT,

 where iT, RCB, and YINT represent the anticipated inflation
                                                               rate, the corporate
 bond rate, and net interest income.


 11. In terms of Table 1, this stock
                                       equals the integrated household holdings
 (column 3) of other deposits and credit market
                                                  assets plus life insurance and
pension fund holdings of the same assets (which are implicit in household

insurance and pension reserves) minus other debt, all at market values.


12. The TXINT series is constructed from
                                           data contained in annual issues of the
U.S. Internal Revenue Service's Statistics of Income, Individual Income Tax

Returns. Following Wright (1969), the tax rate is calculated as a weighted

average of the marginal personal income tax rate for each adjusted gross income

class. The weight for each class is equal to its share of the total interest

received by all income classes.
                                      —38—



 13. This is not meant to suggest that we think the real interest rate was

constant; ample empirical evidence exists that the real rate has varied

cyclically (Hendershott and Huang 1985, for example). However, during the

1950—80 period this variation has been on the order of only two percentage

points. Moreover, the variation in the rate built into interest income is

substantially less given the lags with which this income reflects rate

movements. In contrast, interest income incorporates a major (six to eight

percentage point) trend increase in expected inflation between 1950 and 1980.


14. In terms of Table 1, this stock equals nonfinancial corporate (column 4)

other debt less other deposits and credit market instruments, all at market

values. The after—tax premium can be calculated directly because nontaxable

interest income of corporations is negligible.


15. Because this study is primarily concerned with private saving, the

adjustment to federal government saving is incomplete, e.g., government net

investment in tangible capital should be included as net investment in consumer

durables is included in household saving. We have made only these adjustments

to government saving that are required by our adjustments to private saving.


16. We thank Edward McKelvey for emphasizing the general problem of bias in the

estimated coefficients on the adjustment variables. Technically, bias will

exist if a variable is correlated with the error term. As noted in the text,

this is likely to be true for the consumer durables adjustment but not for the

other adjustments.


17. While the real after—tax interest rate has a negligible direct impact on

personal saving, this rate has a major indirect impact through capital gains on

tangible wealth (Hendershott and Peek, 1985a).
                                           —39-



 18. The Federal Reserve series
                                    exhibits surprising volatility (especially
 troubling is a $4½ billion decline in the state
                                                     and local component in 1979
 followed by a $10 billion increase in
                                           1980). Holloway (1987) presents an
 alternative series excluding
                                  military federal employees. When we use his
 series for state and local employees and the Federal Reserve's federal

 employee's series (about one-quarter of the total), the estimated coefficient

and its standard error both rise
                                      by nearly 50 percent. The pension coefficient
is still more than two standard
                                     deviations from zero and less than two standard
deviations from minus unity.


19. The coefficient and its level of significance are much higher when
                                                                       minutes
to midnight is included in an
                                  equation explaining official NIPA personal saving
without the saving adjustments. When combined with the regressors included in

column 1, the coefficient is 0.0049 with a t—statistic of four.


20. Because corporate equities
                                   account for such a large proportion of the
movement in total household wealth,
                                        we reestimated our final equation with
wealth separated into two
                         components: corporate equities and noncorporate—
equity wealth. The noncorporate equity
                                       component has the larger impact
C— .0477 versus — .0333),
                            but the coefficients are not Statistically different

(their standard errors are about 0.012).
                                      —40—



                                    References

Auerbach, Alan J. 1982. "Issues in the Measurement and Encouragement of

      Business Saving." In Saving and Government Policy, Conference Series No.

      25, Boston Mass.: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 79-99.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Lawrence 3. Kotlikoff. 1986. "An Evaluation of

      Empirical Tests of Social Security and Savings." In Social Policy

      Evaluation: An Economic Perspective, edited by E. Helpman et.al., pp.

      161-81. New York: Academic Press.

Blades, Derek W. and Peter H. Sturm. 1982. "The Concept and Measurement of

      Savings: The United States and Other Industrialized Countries." In

      Saving and Government Policy, Conference Series No. 25, Boston, Mass.:

      Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 1-30.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1986. Balance Sheets for

      the U.S. Economy 1946-85. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

      Office.

Clarida, R.H. and Benjamin M. Friedman. 1983. "The Behavior of U.S. Short-

      term Interest Rates Since October 1979." Journal of Finance 39 (July),

      671—82.

Council of Economic Advisors. 1987. Economic Report of the President.

      Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

David, Paul A. and John L. Scadding. 1974. "Private Savings:

      Ultrarationality, Aggregation, and "Denison's Law." Journal of Political

     Economy 82 (March/April): 225-249.

Denison, Edward. 1958. "A Note on Private Saving." Review of Economics and

     Statistics 15 (August) :   261—267.

Eisner, Robert, and Paul J. Pieper. 1984. "A New View of the Federal Debt and

     Budget Deficits." American Economic Review 74 (March): 11-29.
                                                   —41—



 Evans, Owen. 1983. "Social Security and Household Saving in the United

         States." IMF     Staff   Papers 30 (September): 601—618.

 Feldstein, Martin. 1973. "Tax Incentives, Corporate Saving, and Capital

         Accumulation in the United States." Journal of Public Economics 2

         (February): 159-171.

 Hendershott, Patric H. 1985. Editor, The Level and Composition of Household

         Saving, Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, Mass.

 Hendershott, Patric H. 1986. "Debt and Equity Returns Revisited." In

         Financing Corporate Capital Formation, edited by Benjamin Friedman, pp.

         35-50. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Roger Huang. 1985. "Debt and Equity Yields:

        1926—80." In Corporate Capital Structure in the United States, edited

        by Benjamin Friedman, pp. 17-63. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Joe Peek. l985a. "Household Saving:           an

        Econometric Investigation." In Hendershott, ed. 1985, pp. 63—100.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Joe Peek, 1985b. "Real Household Capital Gains and

        Wealth Accumulation." In Hendershott, ed., 1985, pp. 41—61.

Holloway, Thomas M. 1987. "Present NIPA Saving Statistics: Their

        Characteristics and Limitations." This volume.

Howrey, E. Phillips and Saul H. Hymans. 1978. "The Measurement and

        Determination of Loanable—Funds Saving." Brookings Papers on Economic

       Activity (3) :       655—85.

Jump, Gregory V. 1980. "Interest Rates, Inflation Expectations, and           Spurious
       Elements in Measured Real Income and Saving." American Economic Review

       70 (December) :       990—1004.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J.          1986. "Deficit Delusion." The Public Interest 84

        (Summer) :    53—65.
                                      —42—



McSteen, Martha A. 1985. "Fifty Years of Social Security." Social Security

      Bulletin 48 (August): 36—44.

Munne].l, Alicia. 1977. The Future of Social Security, The Brookings

      Institution, Washington D.C.

Park, Thae S. 1986. "Federal Personal Income Taxes: Revised and Updated

      Estimates of Liabilities and Payments, 1949-84," Survey of Current

      Business (May): 40—41.

Peek, Joe. 1982. "Personal Saving and the Measurement of Income Tax

      Liabilities." Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (February): 143—47.

Poole, William. 1972. "The Role of Interest Rates and Inflation in the

      Consumption Function." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (no. 1)

      211—20.

Slemrod, Joel. 1986. "Saving and the Fear of Nuclear War." Journal of

     Conflict Resolution 30 (no 3): 403-19.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1981. The National Income and Product

     Accounts of the United States, 1929—76. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

     Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1986. Social Security Bulletin
     - An
            Annual Statistical Supplement, Washington D.C.: U.S. Government

     Printing Office.

U.S. Internal Revenue Service. Statistics of Income, Individual Income Tax

     Returns. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

von Furstenberg, George M. 1981. "Saving." In How Taxes Affect Economic

     Behavior, edited by Henry Aaron and Joseph Pechman, pp. 327-490.

     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Wright, Cohn. 1969. "Saving and the Rate of Interest." In The Taxation of

     Income from Capital, edited by Arnold C. Harberger and Martin 3. Bailey

     pp. 275-300. Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Billions of 1982 Dollars
300
                                                               Without 1980's Corrections
250
150
100
 50
 1950           1955       1960            1965         1970         1975          1980
                            Figure   1:   Adjustments to Personal Saving
0
1950   1955            1960          1965         1970          1975         1980     1985
       Figure   2:   Personal and Corporate After—tax Inflation Premium Adjustments
     Percent
     20
     15
tn
     10
     1950      1955            1960          1965         1970         1975       1980   1985
                      Figure   3:   Official and Adjusted Personal Saving Rates
     Pe,
     25
     20
¼0
     15
     1
     1950
         OL   .
              1955
                  I   i i     i
                                  1960
                                      I        i    i   .   i
                                                            1965
                                                                I   .   i   i   .
                                                                                1970
                                                                                    I   i   i
                                                                                            1975
                                                                                                I   i   &   i
                                                                                                            1980
                                                                                                                I    j
                                                                                                                    1985
                            Figures       4:       Official and Adjusted Private Saving Rates
                               Total Retirement
7                              (SGPEN & SSSEC8O)
6          Retirement   less
           Private Inflation Premium
5
4
                                    Retirement less
                                    Personal Inflation Premium
2
    1955                  1965             1970         197      1980   1985
                      Figure   5:   Trend Adjustments
        Rates Saving Government and National Official and
                                                            Adjusted   6:   Figure
1985   1980        1975          1970                        1960             1955
18                                                                                                6
       Adjusted Personal
15
       (left scale)
                                   N                                                              5.5
12                                                                                                5
                                                Wealth / Income   Ratio
                                                            (right scale)
9                                                 'S.
                                     •__•__•%   ,#   \                                            45
6                                                                                                 4
                              Real Disposable    Income-                                          3.5
                              Growth Rate
                              (left scale)
0
                                      1965                                      19              1985
     Figure   7:   Adjusted Personal Saving Rate, Wealth/Income Ratio, and Real tncome Growth
