NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH POLICY, AGGLOMERATION, AND (THE LACK OF) COMPETITION
Wyatt J. Brooks
Joseph P. Kaboski
Yao Amber Li
Working Paper 22947
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22947

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We are thankful for comments received Timo Boppart, Gaurav Khanna, David Atkin, Oleg
Itshkhoki, and participants in presentations at: BREAD, Cornell University; Dartmouth College;
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; HKUST IEMS/World Bank Conference on Urbanization,
Structural Change, and Employment; the London School of Economics/University College of
London; NEUDC; Princeton University; SED; SITE; the Taipei International Conference on
Growth, Trade and Development; the University of Cambridge; the World Bank; and Yale
University. We are thankful to the International Growth Centre and the HKUST IEMS for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Wyatt J. Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yao Amber Li. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Policy, Agglomeration, and (the Lack of) Competition
Wyatt J. Brooks, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yao Amber Li
NBER Working Paper No. 22947
December 2016
JEL No. L11,O1,O25,R11
ABSTRACT
Industrial clusters are promoted by policy and generally viewed as good for growth and
development, but both clusters and policies may also enable non-competitive behavior. This
paper studies the presence of non-competitive pricing in geographic industrial clusters. We
develop, validate, and apply a novel test for collusive behavior. We derive the test from the
solution to a partial cartel of perfectly colluding firms in an industry. Outside of a cartel, a firm's
markup depends on its market share, but in the cartel, markups across firms converge and depend
instead on the total market share of the cartel. Empirically, we validate the test using plants with
common owners, and then test for collusion using data from Chinese manufacturing firms
(1999-2009). We find strong evidence for non-competitive pricing within a subset of industrial
clusters, and we find the level of non-competitive pricing is about four times higher in Chinese
special economic zones than outside those zones.
Wyatt J. Brooks
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
wyattjbrooks@gmail.com
Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu

Yao Amber Li
Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1 University Road, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong SAR
yaoli@ust.hk

Both rich and poor countries generally regard industrial clusters as good for
productivity, growth, and development. The conventional economic wisdom dates
back to Marshall (1890)’s causes of agglomeration. Marshall’s first two causes,
resource and demand concentration, cause agglomeration to occur naturally without any need for policy intervention, but or local externalities. His third cause,
positive external spillovers on nearby firms, could lead to too little agglomeration, and this is used to justify cluster-fostering industrial policies. Many studies
find support for Marshall’s hypotheses.1 Influential work, including Marshall, has
also viewed industrial clusters as productivity-enhancing through pro-competitive
pressures they may foster (e.g., Porter (1990)). Therefore, perhaps we should not
be surprised that both advanced and developing economies adopt policies that
promote clusters.2
Industrial clusters may indeed be cost reducing and productivity enhancing,
but there is an even older concern – dating back to at least Adam Smith – that
gathering competitors in the same locale could instead lead to non-competitive behavior.3 It may seem paradoxical that multiple producers in the same area would
lead to noncompetitive behavior rather than increased competition, but close
proximity facilitates easy communication and observation, which are theoretically
(e.g., Green and Porter (1984), in the case of tacit collusion) and empirically (see
Marshall and Marx (2012) and Genesove and Mullin (1998), for example, which
document the behavior of actual cartels) associated with collusive behavior. They
may also foster the close relationships needed to support cooperative agreements.
Indeed, the most famous industrial clusters in the United States have all been

1 See, for example, Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti (2010), Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010), and
Guiso and Schivardi (2007), for recent evidence. In contrast, Cabral, Wang and Xu (2015) finds little
evidence of agglomeration economies in Detroit’s Motor City, however.
2 There are currently an estimated 1400 global initiatives fostering industrial clusters.
3 Smith (1776)’s famous quote: “People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment
and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to
raise prices. It is impossible indeed to prevent such meetings, by any law which either could be executed,
or would be consistent with liberty and justice. But though the law cannot hinder people of the same
trade from sometimes assembling together, it ought to do nothing to facilitate such assemblies; much less
to render them necessary. (Book I, Chapter X).”

2

accused of explicitly collusive behavior.4 Moreover, programs designed to enable
firm cooperation in other areas can also have the unintended side effect of encouraging collusion. Nevertheless, this possibility has been overlooked in development
policy.
This paper examines the hypothesis that non-competitive behavior is associated with geographic concentration and cluster policies. Specifically, we define
non-competitive behavior as behavior in either firm sales, hiring, or input purchasing that internalizes pecuniary externalities on other firms. We make three
major contributions toward this end. First, we derive a novel, intuitive test for
identifying non-independent behavior for firms competing in the same industry.
Firms that are pricing independently consider their own market share but not
the market shares of other firms when setting markups. In contrast, firms in a
cartel internalize the impact of their pricing on the other cartel firms, so their
markups depend on the aggregate market share of the cartel. Second, using panel
data on Chinese manufacturing firms, we validate that our test can identify noncompetitive behavior in sales by applying our test to firms that are affiliates of the
same parent company. The test verifies that these firms are colluding, which we
would expect from firms with the same owner. Third, we show evidence of noncompetitive behavior at the level of organized industrial clusters in the Chinese
economy. Although we find limited levels of non-competitive behavior in the economy overall, it is four times higher in China’s “special economic zones” (SEZs)
than outside of them. Furthermore, we find that the levels of non-competitive behavior are also high in a set of industry-geography pairs that pre-identified using
the theory.
Our test is derived from a standard nested constant-elasticity-of-substitution
(CES) demand system with a finite number of competing firms and with a
higher elasticity of substitution within an industry than across industries. As
4 See Bresnahan (1987) for evidence of Detroit’s Big 3 automakers in the 1950s, and Christie, Harris
and Schultz (1994) for Wall Street in the 1990s. The major Hollywood production studios were convicted
of anti-competitive agreements in the theaters that they owned in the Paramount anti-trust case of the
1940s. Ongoing litigation alleges non-compete agreements for workers among Silicon Valley firms.

3

is well known in this setup and empirically confirmed (e.g., Atkeson and Burstein
(2008),Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2015)), the gross markup that a firm charges
is increasing in its own market share. We show that a subset of firms acting as
a perfect cartel, and therefore maximizing joint profits, leads to convergence in
markups across cartel members, as each member’s markup is set based on the
total market share of the cartel firms rather than its own firm-specific market
share.
Our test follows directly from the firm’s first-order condition in the model.
We regress the reciprocal of the firm’s markup on the firm’s own market share
and the total market share of its potential set of fellow cartel members.5 If
firms are acting independently, only the coefficient on own market share should
be significant, while under perfect collusion, only the coefficient on the cartel’s
market share should be significant. The test is similar in spirit to the standard
risk-sharing regression of Townsend (1994), focusing on a cartel of local (colluding)
firms rather than a syndicate of local (risk-sharing) households.6 It has similar
strengths, in that it allows for the two extreme cases of independent decisionmaking and perfect joint maximization. However, it also allows intermediate
cases. As in Townsend, we can be somewhat agnostic about the actual details
of how non-competitive behavior occurs. In principle, collusion could be either
explicit or tacit, for example, and firm behavior could be Cournot or Bertrand.
The test is also robust along other avenues. Importantly, our theoretical results,
and so the validity of the test, depend only on the constant elasticity demand
system. They are therefore robust to arbitrary assumptions on the (differentiable)
cost functions and geographical locations of the individual firms. Moreover, we
5 Throughout the paper we consider several different possibilities for sets of firms that are colluding,
such as firms with a common owner, firms in the same geographic region, and firms in the same special
economic zone.
6 An important difference between our context and that of Townsend (1994) is the potential confounding effect of measurement error. Ravallion and Chaudhuri (1997) argue that idiosyncratic measurement
error potentially biases the measure of risk-sharing upward when measurement error in the dependent
variable is unrelated to that in the independent variable. In our context, measurement error in revenue
affects both our measure of market shares and of markups. As discussed in Section II.B, that implies that
idiosyncratic measurement error actually biases our measure of collusion downward. Hence, idiosyncratic
measurement error cannot explain our results.

4

use simulations to show that our test performs well for plausible levels of firm
uncertainty, including correlated demand or cost shocks, and when we relax our
strong assumptions on the demand system. Indeed, simulations calibrated to our
empirical exercise show only small biases when departures from our assumptions
are in the empirically plausible range.
Empirically, we use the test to assess the possibility of collusion in Chinese
industrial clusters and SEZs. SEZs are generally considered to have played a key
role in its growth miracle, and we have a high quality panel of firms with a great
deal of spatial and industrial variation. The panel structure of the Annual Survey
of Chinese Industrial Enterprises (CIE) allows us to estimate markups using the
cost-minimization methods of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and implement
our test using within-firm variation.
Our test both identifies non-competitive pricing in simple validation exercises
and rejects it in simple placebo tests. Specifically, we test for joint profit maximization among groups of affiliates with the same parent company and in the
same industry. Similarly, we test for joint profit maximization among state-owned
firms in the same industry. Consistent with the theory, in our validation tests
we estimate a highly significant relationship between markups and cartel market
share, but an insignificant relationship with own market share. This is exactly
what the theory predicts for firms that maximize their joint profits. In our placebo
tests, we find no response in markups to industrial cluster market shares and no
influence of SEZs on markup behavior among these sets of firms.
In the broader sample of Chinese firms, competitive behavior appears much
more prevalent than collusive behavior, but behavior becomes somewhat more
collusive as we move to smaller geographic definitions of a cluster. Moreover, we
find stronger evidence in subsets of clusters: SEZs and clusters pre-screened as
having low initial cross-sectional variation in markups. SEZs have policies targeting firms in specific industries and locations, and give them benefits such as
5

special tax treatment or favorable regulation.

7

They also attempt to foster co-

operation through industry associations, trade fairs, and coordinated marketing,
but such venues can be used to reduce competition.8 We find that the intensity
of collusion is four times higher for clusters in SEZs than for those not in SEZs.
Our results therefore have normative importance for evaluating the desirability
of cluster policies in China and elsewhere. Moreover, we apply our pre-screening
criteria, focusing on clusters in the lowest three deciles of cross-sectional markup
variation, and find that only the cluster market share is a significant predictor of the panel variation in markups. That is, this subsample appears to be
dominated by effectively collusive behavior. These clusters are characterized by
disproportionately higher concentration industries, have lower export intensities,
and contain a greater proportion of private domestic enterprises (as opposed to
foreign or state-owned ventures).
Our paper contributes and complements the literatures on both industrial clusters and collusion. We are not the first paper to examine collusion in cooperative
industry associations, industrial clusters or agglomerations. The 19th century
railroad associations in the U.S., originally formed to cooperate on technical
(e.g., track width) and safety standards to link the various rails, soon turned
to an explicit cartel designed to manage competition (see, e.g., Chandler (1977)).
Colluding clusters in the 20th century have also been studied. Bresnahan (1987)
studied collusion of the Big 3 automakers in Detroit, and Christie, Harris and
Schultz (1994) examine NASDAQ collusion on Wall Street. More recently, Gan
and Hernandez (2013) shows that hotels near one another effectively collude.
Methodologically, the recent industrial organization literature on collusion has
tended toward detailed case studies of particular industries, making less stringent
7 We use SEZ in the broad sense of the term. See Alder, Shao and Zilibotti (2013) for a summary of
SEZs, their history, and their policies.
8 Our own interviews with firm owners and administrators of industrial clusters in China uncovered
explicit cooperation on pricing. For example, the leader of an industry association acknowledged, “We
do not allow internal competition on pricing. If a firm tried price cutting, we would kick them out.” One
role of this industry association was to accept and manage large orders that were “too large or difficult
for one firm to fill.” The industry association leader allocated orders among its member firms while also
maintaining quality.

6

assumptions on demand or basing them on deep institutional knowledge of the
industry.9 We complement these papers by developing a test that can be applied
to a wide range of industries. We apply the test to the entire economy of a
developing country that has actively promoted industrial clusters. Thus, our test
can be used to guide broad industrial policy ex ante, rather than focusing on a
case study that could be useful for prosecuting a specific cartel ex post .

The local growth impact of Chinese SEZs has been studied in Alder, Shao and
Zilibotti (2013), Wang (2013), and Cheng (2014), and they have been found to
have sizable positive effects using panel level data at the local administrative units.
Our firm-level evidence of non-competitive behavior suggests that this growth
may have important, unintended consequences.10 Measured value added may be
higher among firms in SEZs in part because collusion allowed them to achieve
higher markups, which is an important caveat when interpreting the previous
results. Finally, we contribute to an emerging literature examining the role of
firm competition – markups in particular – on macro development, including
Asturias, Garcia-Santana and Ramos (2015), Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2015),
Galle (2016), and Peters (2015).

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the model
and derives the key theoretical results. Section II lays out are empirical test and
reviews our empirical application. Section III discusses our data and methods for
identifying markups. Section IV discusses the empirical results, while Section V
concludes.

9 Einav and Levin (2010) give an excellent review of the rationale for moving away from cross-industry
identification. Our test also relies on within-industry (indeed, within-firm) identification.
10 While collusion is likely an unintended consequence of agglomeration it is not obvious that the
effect is negative. In a second best world, collusion itself may be welfare improving over high levels
of competition. See, for example, Galle (2016) or Itskhoki and Moll (2015) for the case where financial
frictions are present. In this paper we do not need to take any stand on whether the welfare consequences
of collusion are negative or positive.

7

I.

Model

We develop a simple static model of a finite number of differentiated firms that
yields relationships between firm markups and market shares under competition
and cartel behavior, and we show the robustness of these results to various assumptions. We assume a nested CES demand system of industries and varieties
within the industry, which we assume is independent of location. Whereas the
structure of demand is critical, we make minimal assumptions on the production
side, allowing for a wide variety of determinants of firms costs, such as location
choice, arbitrary productivity spillovers, and productivity growth for firms.11

A.

Firm Demand

A finite number of firms operate in an industry i. The demand function of firm
n in industry i is:

(1)

yni = Di

pni
Pi

−σ 

Pi
P

−γ
,

where pni is the firm’s price, and Pi and P are the price indexes for industry i
and the economy overall, respectively. Thus, σ > 1 is the own price elasticity of
any variety within industry i, while γ > 1 is the elasticity of industry demand to
changes in the relative price index of the industry.12 Typically, σ > γ, so that
products are more substitutable within industries than industries are with one
another. The parameters Di captures the overall demand at the industry level.
For exposition, we define units so that demand is symmetric across firms in the
same industry, but this is without loss of generality. As each firm in the industry
11 Our assumption that demand is independent of location implicitly assumes negligible trade costs in
output, which is important in allowing for agglomeration based on externalities rather than local demand.
Empirically, we will focus on manufactured goods.
12 We analyze highly disaggregated industries, so the assumption γ > 1 is natural.

8

faces symmetric demand, the industry price index within industry i is:
1/(1−σ)


(2)

X

Pi = 


p1−σ
mi

,

m∈Ωi

where Ωi is the set of all firms operating in industry i.
As we show in the online appendix, this demand system can be derived as the
solution to a household’s problem that has nested CES utility.
One can invert the demand function to get the following inverse demand:

(3)

pni = P

yni
Yi

−1/σ 

Yi
Di

−1/γ
,

where:

(4)

Yi = 


X

σ
σ−1

1−1/σ 

.

ymi

m∈Ωi

To establish notation that will be used throughout this paper, we define market
shares as:
1−1/σ

(5)

sni

y
pni yni
= Xni 1−1/σ ,
= X
pmi ymi
ymi
m∈Ωi

m∈Ωi

where the second equality follows from substituting in (1) for prices and simplifying.
This demand system implies that the cross-price elasticity is given by a simple
expression:
(6)

∀m 6= n,

∂ log(yin )
= (σ − γ) sim .
∂ log(pim )

which allows for simple aggregation in the results that follow. Our structure
9

of demand, which implies a this cross-price elasticity restriction and a constant
elasticity of demand, allows us to be very general in our specification of firm
costs. The cost to firm n of producing yni units of output is C(yni ; Xni ), where
Xni represents a general vector of characteristics such as capital, technology, firm
productivity, location, externalities operating through the production levels of
other firms, and any other characteristics that are taken as given by the producer
when making production choices. For example, a special case of our model would
be one in which an initial stage involves a firm placement game in which each
firms’ productivity is determined by the placement of each other firm through
external spillovers, local input prices, or other channels. Then the results from
that first stage determine Xni that firms take as given when production choices
are made, which is a special case of our framework.13
We now separately consider two extreme cases: firms operating totally independently and firms acting as a perfect cartel. We then consider intermediate
cases.

B.

Firms Operating Independently

First, we consider the case of all firms operate independently of one another.
The static profit maximization problem of a firm n in industry i is:
πni = max pni yni − C(yni ; Xni ).

(7)

yni

Using (3), the firm’s optimal pricing condition equates marginal revenue with
marginal cost:

(8)

pni

!


1−1/σ
yni
1
1
σ−1
+
−
= C 0 (yni ; Xni ).
1−1/σ
σ
σ γ P
y
m∈Ωi

mi

13 However, note that the fact that firms maximize static profits below implicitly limits the way the
vector Xni can relate to past production decisions, such as dynamic learning-by-doing, sticky market
shares, or dynamic contracts.

10

Using the definition of market shares, sni , given above, rearranging (8), and
defining the firm’s gross markup, µn , as the ratio of price to marginal cost yields
the well-known result:14
σ−1
1
=
+
µni
σ

(9)



1
1
−
σ γ


sni .

When a firm is operating independently, and given values of the elasticity parameters, this equation implies that the only information that is needed to predict
a firm’s markup is that firm’s market share. In particular, while factor prices,
productivity, and local externalities captured by Xni would certainly affect quantities, prices, costs, and profits, markups are only affected by Xni through their
impact on market shares. For σ > γ, the empirically relevant case, additional
sales that accompany lower markups come more from substitution within the industry than from growing the relative size of the industry itself. Firms with larger
market shares have more to lose by lowering their prices, so they charge higher
markups.

C.

Cartel

We contrast the case of independent firms with the opposite extreme: a subset
of firms within an industry forms a cartel to maximize the sum of their profits.
Within an industry i, consider a set S ⊆ Ωi of firms that solve the following joint
maximization problem:
(10)

X
m∈S

14 See,

πmi =

max

{ymi }m∈S

X

pmi ymi − C(ymi ; Xmi ).

m∈S

for example, Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2015) or Atkeson and Burstein (2008).
11

Using our definition of market shares again, we can express the first order condition as:
(11)

∀n ∈ S,


X 1
σ−1
1
smi .
C (yni ; Xni ) = pni
+ pni
−
σ
σ γ
0

m∈S

Then rearranging (11) gives the relationship between markups and market shares:
(12)

1
σ−1
=
+
µni
σ



1
1
−
σ γ

X

smi .

m∈S

The markup of a firm within the set S depends only on the total market share
of all firms within the group. While the independent firm considered only its
own market share, the cartel internalizes the costs to its own members of any one
firm selling more goods, and these cost depends on the total market shares of the
member firms. In this extreme case of a perfect cartel, the firm’s own market
share influences its markup only to the extent that it affects the cartel’s share.
A number of corollary results follow from equations (9) and (12). First, clearly
σ > γ > 1 implies that an independent firm’s markup is increasing in its own
market share. Second, for a firm in a cartel, the firm’s markup is increasing in
the total market share of the cartel. That is, the firm’s own market share plays
no role except to the extent that it affects the cartel market share. Third, cartel
members all charge the same markup, since their markup is based on the sum
of their market shares. In our empirical work later we interpret this to mean
that there is less variation in markups when firms collude than they would have
if they operated independently. Fourth, if any member of a cartel were instead
operating independently, that firm’s markup would be lower and its market share
would be higher. Finally, the market shares of any set of colluding firms exhibit
more variation than if the same set of firms was operating independently.
We summarize the above characterization in the following proposition.
PROPOSITION 1: Given σ > γ > 1:
12

1) When operating independently, firm markups are increasing in the firm’s
own market share.
2) When maximizing joint profits, firm markups are increasing in total cartel
market share, with the firm’s own market share playing no additional role.
3) Cartel firm markups are more similar under perfect cartel than independent
decisions.
4) Firm markups are higher under perfect cartel decisions than independent
decisions.
5) Firm market shares are less similar under perfect cartel decisions than independent decisions.
Each of these claims will be addressed in our empirical work that follows. We will
use the first two claims to derive our test in Section II, while the third and fourth
claims will be used to pre-identify potential collusive clusters. Finally, we will use
the fifth claim as additional testable implication. We have intentionally written
Proposition 1 in general language. In the subsection below, we will show that,
while the precise formulas vary, these more general claims are robust to several
alternative specifications.
D.

Alternative Models

We present related results below for the cases of firm-specific price elasticities,
Bertrand competition rather than Cournot, an imperfect cartel, and monopsonistic collusion.
Firm-specific price elasticities

To allow for markups to vary among competitive firms with the same market
share, we allow for a firm-specific elasticity of demand. In particular, suppose
13

that inverse demand takes the form:
(13)

1/γ

pin = Di

−1/σ+δin

P yin

1/γ−1/σ

Yi

.

Here δin captures the firm-specific component of demand, and we think of these
P
as deviations from the average elasticity σ:
n∈Ωi δin = 0. Proceeding as before
to derive markup equations, the first order conditions for an independent firm
imply:
(14)

σ−1
1
= δni +
+
µni
σ



1
1
−
γ σ


sni ,

and for a cartel, the analogous equation is:
(15)

1
σ−1
= δni +
+
µni
σ



1
1
−
γ σ

 X
.
smi
m∈S

Firm markups are again increasing in either the firm or cartel’s market share
and the magnitude of this relationship is governed by the difference between the
within- and across-industry elasticities. In addition, however, the presence of δni
in both equations shows the level of markups may be firm-specific, even when
market share is arbitrarily small or firms are members of the same cartel. This
could explain why firms in the same cartel have differing markups.

Bertrand competition

Now we consider the case where firms take competitors’ prices as given instead
of quantities when making production choices. From the demand function (1),
we can write the problem of a firm operating independently as:
max pni yni − C(yni ; Xni )

{pni ,yni }

14


subject to:

yni = Di

pni
Pi

−σ 

Pi
P

−γ
.

Taking first-order conditions with respect to both choice variables and dividing
them yields the following equations, which are analogous to (9) and (12), respectively:
(16)

µin
= σ − (σ − γ)sin
µin − 1

and
(17)

X
µin
= σ − (σ − γ)
sim .
µin − 1
m∈S

Equation (16) corresponds to the case where firms operate independently, and
equation (17) to the case where firms are in a perfect cartel. Again, given elasticity
parameters we see that firms’ market shares (in the case of independent firms) or
cartels’ market shares (in the case of perfect cartels) are sufficient to solve for the
firms’ markups. As before, higher markups coincide with higher market shares,
and the magnitude of this increasing relationship depends on the gap between
the two elasticity parameters.

Imperfect Cartel

Purely independent pricing and pure cartel represent two extreme cases. Here
we consider an imperfect cartel, in which firms place a positive weight κ ∈ (0, 1)
on other firms’ profits relative to its own, so that each firm maximizes:
πin + κ

X
m∈S/{n}
15

πim .

It is easy to show that the markup now depends on both the firm and cartel
market shares. For the Cournot case, we have:
(18)

σ−1
1
=
+ (1 − κ)
µni
σ



1
1
−
σ γ




sni + κ

1
1
−
σ γ

X

smi .

m∈S

Monopsony behavior

Instead of colluding to increase output prices, firms may instead collude to
reduce input costs. As a simple case to evaluate this possibility, suppose each
firm n in location j uses a single factor to produce its output by a production
function ynj = F (lnj ; Xnj ). To fix ideas, we refer to this as labor. The aggregate
supply of labor Lj depends on the market wage wj , which is common across firms
in a given location. For simplicity, we assume the function for the market wage
takes the following form:
(19)

wj (Lj ) = Aj Lφj .

Firms take the labor demand decisions of other firms (or those outside their own
cartel) as given. To isolate the effect of monopsony power, suppose that firms
take the price of their output as given. Then the problem of an independent firm
n in location j is:
max pnj ynj − wj (Lj )lnj

ynj ,lnj

subject to:

ynj ≤ F (lnj ; Xnj )
Lj =

X

lmj .

m

Since there are a finite number of firms purchasing labor, firm optimality implies
a markup because firms restrict their purchases of labor to keep wages low. A
firm n in location j has labor market share:
(20)

sL
nj =
16

lnj
.
Lj

Optimality for the independent firm implies that the markup is given by:
µnj = 1 + φsL
nj

(21)

and the analog for the cartel imply a result similar to (12):
(22)

X

µnj = 1 + φ

sL
mj

m∈S

Three things are important to note. First, the expressions above define marginal
cost as the cost of producing an additional unit at market prices. Therefore the
markup is:
(23)

µnj =

pnj
wj (Lj )/F 0 (lnj ; Xnj )

Second, the shares in the expressions depend critically on the view of labor
markets and the definition of relevant labor supply, Lj . If labor is mobile across
industries but not across locations, it would be the total local labor force. If
labor is specialized by industry but mobile across locations, it would be the total
industry labor force. If immobile along both dimensions, it would be the total
local industry-specific labor, while if mobile in both dimensions, it would be the
economy-wide total labor force. Finally, note that it would be trivial to replace
labor with any other input in the analysis.

II.

Empirical Approach

In this section, we present our empirical test for non-competitive pricing; assess
the robustness of the test on Monte Carlo simulations; and discuss our application
to China, including the data and methods of acquiring markups.
17

A.

Test for Non-Competitive Pricing

The model of the previous section yielded the result that the markups of competitive firms depend on the within-industry elasticity of demand and their own
market share, while the markups of perfectly colluding firms depend on the total market share of the firms in the cartel. This motivates the following single
empirical regression equation for inverse markups:
(24)

X
1
= θt + αni + β1 snit + β2
smit + εnit
µnit
m∈S

for firm n, a member of (potential) cartel S, in industry i at time t.
In the case of purely independent pricing, the hypothesis is β2 = 0 and β1 < 0.
The case of a pure cartel, we have the inverted hypothesis of β2 < 0 and β1 = 0.
The relationships in equations (9) and (12) hold deterministically. The error term
εnit could stem from (classical) measurement error in the estimation of markups,
which we discuss in Section III.B, or from uncertainty or other model specification
error as discussed in Section II.B.
Moreover, for the case of intermediate collusion, κ in (18) can be easily estimated from equation (24) as:

(25)

κ̂ =

βˆ2
βˆ1 + βˆ2

Furthermore, equation (18) implies that we can use the regression in equation
(24) to estimate the elasticity parameters. These equations imply that:
1
1
− = βˆ1 + βˆ2
σ̂ γ̂

(26)



X
X
X
σ̂ − 1
1
 1 − βˆ1 sni − βˆ2
=
smi 
σ̂
N
µni
i

n∈Ωi

m∈Sni

where N is the number of firms. It is then immediate to solve these equations
18

simultaneously to generate estimates of the elasticity parameters.
An alternative interpretation of κ̂ as a measure of the intensity of collusion can
be derived from considering the case of a subset of S̃ ⊂ S firms who perfectly
collude, while the others compete independently. This also leads to intermediate
estimates in both coefficients, with β1 larger and β2 smaller for S̃ than for S.
Under somewhat stronger assumptions that the distribution of market shares is
the same for colluding and non-colluding firms, we can show that κ equals the
fraction of firms perfectly colluding.15
Equation (24) has strong parallels with the risk-sharing test developed by
Townsend (1994). In that family of risk-sharing regressions, household consumption is regressed on household income and total (village) consumption in the
risk-sharing syndicate. Townsend solves the problem of a syndicate of households jointly maximizing utility and perfectly risk-sharing, and contrasts that
with households in financial autarky; We solve the problem of a syndicate of
firms jointly maximizing profits in perfect collusion and contrast with those independently maximizing profits. Townsend posited that households in proximity
are likely to be able to more easily cooperate, defining villages as the appropriate risk-sharing network. We posit the same is true for firms and examine local
cooperation of firms. Our test also shares another key strength of risk-sharing
tests: we do not need to be explicit about the details of collusion because we only
look at its effects on pricing.16 Finally, as discussed in Section I.D, firms could
compete as in Cournot or Bertrand, and the essential elements of the test hold in
each.
We also note the presence of time and firm dummies in our test. The time
dummies, θt , capture time-specific variation, which is important since markups
have increased over time, as we show in the next section. In principle, firmspecific fixed effects are not explicitly required in the case of symmetric demand
15 Details
16 For

of this claim are provided in the appendix.
example, we do not need to distinguish between implicit or explicit price collusion.
19

elasticities.17 Nevertheless, we add αni to capture fixed firm-specific variation in
the markup, stemming perhaps from firm-specific variation in demand elasticities,
as discussed in Section I.D. Together, these time and firm controls assure that the
identification in the regression stems from within-cluster and within-firm variation
over time in markups and market shares.
B.

Simulation Results

We derived our test from the model in Section I, which assumed that (i) all
relevant information is known to the firm before it makes its production or pricing
decisions, (ii) demand is nested-CES, and (iii) there is no measurement error. In
reality firms face unanticipated shocks to production costs and demand, and they
take this uncertainty into account when making decisions. Indeed we require
such unanticipated shocks in order to identify our production functions used in
our empirical implementation. Moreover, demand may not be CES, and there
may be measurement error with specific levels of correlation. Here we examine
the robustness of our tests to relaxing these assumptions by running our test on
simulated data from an augmented model.
We augment demand and technologies for firm n in industry i located in region
k in year t according to the following equations:


(27)

ynikt = εnikt Dnikt

pnikt + p̄
Pi

−σ 

Pi
P

−γ
,

η
ynikt = ρnikt znikt lnikt

The parameter η allows for curvature in the cost function, while the parameter
p̄ allows for decreasing (p̄ < 0) and increasing (p̄ > 0) demand elasticities. Here
Dnikt and znikt are the known component of (firm-specific) demand and produc17 Here the parallel with Townsend breaks, since risk-sharing regression require household fixed effects,
or differencing, in order to account for household-specific Pareto weights. In contrast, cartels maximize
profits rather than Pareto-weighted utility, and as long as profits can be freely transferred – an assumption
needed for a perfect cartel – all profits are weighted equally.

20

tivity, respectively, while εnikt and ρnikt are the unanticipated shocks to demand
and productivity, respectively. Note that demand and productivity shocks are
not equivalent in this model, since productivity shocks affect marginal cost, while
demand shocks do not.
We then augment the firm’s problem to allow for partial collusion captured by
κ and take into account firm uncertainty:





Z Z
(28)

(1 − κ)πnikt (l, ε, ρ) + κ

max
lnikt

ε

ρ

X

πmikt (l, ε, ρ) dF (ε)dG(ρ)

m∈Sikt

where the unsubscripted ε, ρ, l are vectors of demand shocks, cost shocks, and
labor input choices. We assume that each firm belows to a cluster Sikt that
jointly solve (28). In later sections we consider different cases for the sets of
firms that may be colluding, but in this section we refer to them generally as
clusters. Notice that F and G are probability distributions over vectors. We
will consider covariation of these shocks across firms at the firm, cluster, regionindustry, industry, and year levels.
We simulate this model for various parameter values, run our test regression
on the simulated data, and evaluate the bias in κ as measured by equation (25).
We overview the results here, and full details are given in the online appendix.
Our first exercise is to measure the bias to our estimates from unanticipated
shocks. When shocks are at the level of the individual firm or are correlated at
the level of the cluster, we find that they can bias our results, but these work
in opposite directions. Unanticipated shocks at the individual level push our
estimate of κ toward zero, while those at the cluster level push κ toward one. This
is because individual shocks cause comovement in markups and individual shares
independent of the cluster shares, which causes the coefficient on the individual
share to increase in magnitude. The opposite is true for the cluster shock, which
causes the coefficient on cluster share to increase in magnitude relative to that
21

on the individual share. These effects can bias our βˆ1 and βˆ2 estimates. These
estimates can lead to bias in κ̂ for two reasons. First, biases in βˆ1 and βˆ2 feed
directly into κ̂. Second, since κ̂ is a nonlinear function of βˆ1 and βˆ2 , then variance
in the estimates of those coefficients leads to bias in κ̂.
In all of these results, we stress that this bias only results from unanticipated
shocks, and any shocks to cost or demand that are anticipated will not bias
our results no matter how those shocks are correlated across firms as discussed
in Section I. In particular, if changes in the price of inputs are spatially or
industrially correlated it only biases our results to the extent to which they are
unanticipated.
In our second exercise, we study how large these unanticipated shocks would
have to be to generate economically significant bias in our results. We parameterize the simulation to match the regression output from our baseline exercise,
which is discussed in Section IV.B. We select the variance of individual shocks,
the variance of cluster shocks as well as values of σ, κ and γ in order to match
the point estimates and standard errors on the coefficients on own and cluster
shares, the average markup, the estimated value of κ and the adjusted R2 (when
averaged across all simulations) to their counterparts in the Chinese analysis. We
find that magnitudes of these shocks are not large enough to substantially bias
our estimates of κ. In our parameterized simulation, the true value of κ is 0.32
while the estimated value is 0.26. In general, the quantitative importance of these
depend on the magnitude of shocks relative to predictable variation in the data.
Hence, large bias in estimates of κ would require a substantially lower adjusted
R2 than we observe in the data.
In our third exercise, we simulate a non-CES demand system. Applying the
form of non-CES demand given in equation (27), we find that, as the CESdeviating parameter, p̄, moves away from zero, our estimated coefficient on firms’
own shares can be biased. In the case of p̄ > 0 (implying a decreasing elasticity,
as in linear demand, for example), the estimate would be upward biased, since a
22

firm’s markups would increase with its output (and firm’s market share) simply
from the decreasing elasticity. The converse is true for p̄ < 0. Nevertheless, the
coefficient estimate on the cluster shares are unbiased. This is important because,
if we wished to test for the presence of collusion, our model implies that we should
test if the coefficient on the cluster share is positive. Thus, the fact that our coefficient on cluster share is unbiased with non-CES demand implies that our test
for the presence of collusion is unaffected by non-CES demand. However, the fact
that the coefficient on firms’ own shares is biased implies that our estimate of the
magnitude of collusion, κ̂, is biased when demand is non-CES, and the direction
of bias depends on the direction of the deviation from CES demand.
Our final exercise is to consider measurement error in revenues and costs in
the model to see how that affects our estimate of κ.18 One might suspect that
idiosyncratic measurement error would lead to overestimation of collusion in a
way that it can lead to overestimates of risk-sharing.19 However, we find that
idiosyncratic measurement error actually leads to a downward bias in our estimate
of κ.
This bias may seem surprising, but it has a simple explanation. Measurement
error in regressors typically biases their coefficient estimates toward zero, so measurement error in a firm’s own market shares alone should shrink that regressor’s
coefficient and push the estimate of κ toward one. However, this intuition relies
on market share measurement error being independent of markups, but measurement error in revenue affects both measured market shares and measured
markups. If the measured value of revenue is higher than its true value, both
measured markups and measured market shares are by construction higher than
their true values, and therefore idiosyncratic measurement error causes them to
positively comove. We thereforeoverestimate the strength of the relationship between the two, increasing our estimate of βˆ1 and causing a downward bias in κ̂.
18 Measurement error is distinguished from the case of model misspecification described above in that
unanticipated shocks are taken into account when firms make choices, while measurement error has no
effect on firm choices.
19 See, for example, Ravallion and Chaudhuri (1997)’s critique of Townsend (1994).

23

Hence, if measurement error is idiosyncratic, we would tend to underestimate the
extent of collusion.

20

Our conclusion from these simulations is that the most serious threat to the
interpretation of our results as evidence of collusion is any shock correlated at
the level of the cluster. We address this concern in multiple ways, as discussed
in detail in the following sections. We examine variation across different sets of
firms, where we have stronger or weaker a priori reasons to suspect collusion.
First, we examine affiliated of the same parent company as a validation. Second,
using similar reasoning, we evaluate firms that are state-owned enterprises within
an industry, and we also run a placebo test for local collusion in the sample
of state-owned firms. Third, we utilize the result in Proposition 1 that collusion
makes markups more similar (Result 3) to motivate separately examining clusters
with low coefficients of variation in markups over the cross-section of firms in
the cluster. To limit potential endogeneity, we identify these clusters using the
cross-sectional variation of firms in the initial year of our data (1999). Within
the model, these clusters could have low markup variation because (i) they are
colluding or (ii) they have lower variation in market shares (because of similarity
in firm-specific demand or technology, for example). We assume the former in our
ex ante identification strategy, but then we evaluate the latter ex post. Finally,
as a robustness check, we add region-time specific fixed effects to control for any
region-time specific cost shocks, such as unanticipated shocks to factor prices.
III.

Application to Chinese Data

For our empirical test, we examine manufacturing firms in China. Manufacturing firms have the advantage of being highly tradable, as is consistent with
the assumption in our model that demand does not depend on location or local
markets. Our measurement methods are standard and closely follow the existing
20 By the same argument, however, measurement error that is perfectly correlated at the level of the
cluster biases the estimate of κ upward, and the overall bias for a mix of idiosyncratic and cluster-specific
measurement error depends on the relative strength of each.

24

literature.
A.

Why China?

China has several advantages. First, it has the world’s largest population and
second largest economy. The size of the Chinese country and economy give us
wide industrial and geographic heterogeneity. Second, China is a well-known
development miracle, and its success is often attributed, at least in part, to its
policies fostering special economic zones and industrial clusters.21 Third, both
agglomeration and markups have increased over time as shown in Figure 1, which
plots the average level of industrial agglomeration (as defined below) and average
markups.
Finally, we have a high quality panel of firms for China: the Annual Survey
of Chinese Industrial Enterprises (CIE), which was conducted by the National
Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC). The database covers all state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and non-state-owned enterprises with annual sales of at least
5 million RMB (about $750,000 in 2008).22 It contains the most comprehensive
information on firms in China. These data have been previously used in many influential development studies (e.g., Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Song, Storesletten
and Zilibotti (2011)).
B.

Measurement

Between 1999 and 2009, the approximate number of firms covered in the NBSC
database varied from 162,000 to 411,000. The number of firms increased over
time, mainly because manufacturing firms in China have been growing rapidly,
and over the sample period, more firms reached the threshold for inclusion in
the survey. Since there is a great variation in the number of firms contained
21 For example, a World Bank volume (Zeng, 2011) cites industrial clusters as an “undoubtedly important engine [in China’s] meteoric economic rise.”
22 We drop firms with less than ten employees, and firms with incomplete data or unusual patterns/discrepancies (e.g., negative input usage). The omission of smaller firms precludes us from speaking
to their behavior, but the impact on our proposed test would only operate through our estimates of market
share and should therefore be minimal.

25

in the database, we used an unbalanced panel to conduct our empirical analysis.
This NBSC database contains 29 2-digit manufacturing industries and 425 4-digit
industries.23
The data also contain detailed data on revenue, fixed assets, labor, and, importantly, firm location at the province, city, and county location. Of the three
designations, provinces are largest, and counties are smallest. We construct real
capital stocks by deflating fixed assets using investment deflators from China’s
National Bureau of Statistics and a 1998 base year. Finally, the “parent id code”,
which we use to identify affiliated firms, is only available for the year 2004, but we
assume that ownership is time invariant. We construct market shares using sales
data and following the definition in Equation (5). We also use firms’ registered
designation to distinguish state-owned enterprises (SOEs) from domestic private
enterprises (DPEs), multinational firms (MNFs), and joint ventures (JVs).
We do not have direct measures of prices and marginal cost, so we cannot directly measure markups. Instead, we must estimate firm markups using structural
assumptions and structural methods, the method of De Loecker and Warzynski
(2012), referred to as DW hereafter, in particular. DW extend Hall (1987) to show
that one can use the first-order condition for any input that is flexibly chosen to
derive the firm-specific markup as the ratio of the factor’s output elasticities to
its firm-specific factor payment shares:
(29)

µi,t =

v
θi,t
x .
αi,t

This structural approach has the advantage of yielding a plant-specific, rather
than a product-specific, markup. The result follows from cost-minimization and
holds for any flexibly chosen input where factor price equals the value of marginal
product. Importantly, we use materials as the relevant flexibly chosen factor. The
x is therefore easily measured.
denominator αi,t
23 We

use the adjusted 4-digit industrial classification from Brandt, Van Biesebroeck and Zhang (2012).
26

The more difficult aspect is calculating the firm-specific output elasticity with
v , which requires estimating firm-specific production funcrespect to materials, θi,t

tions. The issue is that inputs are generally chosen endogenously to productivity
(or profitability). We address this by applying Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer
(2006)’s methodology, presuming a 3rd-order translog gross output production
function in capital, labor, and materials that is:

(30) qnit = βk,i knit + βl,i lnit + βm,i mnit +
2
2
βk2,i knit
+ βl2,i lnit
+ βm2,i m2nit + βkl,i knit lnit + βkm,i knit mnit +
3
βlm,i lnit mnit + βk3,i knit
+ ... + ωnit + nit .

Note that the coefficients vary across industry i, but only the level of productivity
is firm-specific. This firm-specific productivity has two stochastic components.
nit is a shock that was unobserved/anticipated by the firm (and could reflect
measurement error, as mentioned above) and is therefore exogenous to the firm’s
input choices. However, ωnit is a component of TFP that is observed/anticipated,
and so it is potentially correlated with ki,t , lnit , and mnit because the inputs
are chosen endogenously based on knowledge of the former. They assume that
ωnit is Markovian and linear in ωni(t−1) . Identification comes from orthogonality
moment conditions that stem from the timing of decisions, namely lagged labor
and materials and current capital (and their lags) are all decided before observing
the innovation to the TFP shock, and a two-step procedure is used to first estimate
nit and then the production function.
Production functions are estimated at the industry-level (although the estimation allows for firm-specific factor-neutral levels of productivity). The precision of
the production function estimates – and hence the measurement error in markups
– therefore depends on the number of firms in an industry. For this reason, we
follow DW and weight the data in our regressions using the total number of firms
in the industry.
27

Finally, we use information on the geographic industries and clusters that we
study. Namely, we merge our geographic and industry data together with detailed data from the China SEZs Approval Catalog (2006) on whether or not a
firm’s address falls within the geographic boundaries of targeted SEZ policies,
and, if so, when the SEZ started. We use the broad understanding of SEZs, including both the traditional SEZs but also the more local zones such as High-tech
Industry Development Zones (HIDZ), Economic and Technological Development
Zones (ETDZ), Bonded Zones (BZ), Export Processing Zones (EPZ), and Border Economic Cooperation Zones (BECZ). Since no SEZs were added after 2006,
these data are complete. Since our data start in 1999, the broad, well-known
SEZs that were established earlier offer us no time variation. We also measure
agglomeration at the industry level using using the Ellison and Glaeser (1997)
measure, where 0 indicates no geographic agglomeration (beyond that expected
by industrial concentration), 1 is complete agglomeration, and negative would
indicate “excess diffusion” relative to a random balls-and-bins approach.24
Table 1 presents the relevant summary statistics for our sample of firms.
IV.

Results

We start by presenting the results validating our test using affiliated firms. We
then present the results for the overall sample (which are mixed), the results for
those pre-identified clusters with low variation in markups across firms (which
strongly indicate collusion), and some important characteristics of these collusive
24 Specifically,

start by defining a measure of geographic concentration, G:
X
G≡
(si − xi )2
i

, where si is the share of industry employment in area i and xi is the share of total manufacturing
employment in area i. This therefore captures disproportionate concentration in industry i relative to
PN
2
total manufacturing. Using the Herfindahl index H =
j=1 zj , where zj is plant j’s share in total
industry employment, we have the following formula for the agglomeration index g:

P
G − 1 − i x2i H
.
g≡
P 2
1 − i xi (1 − H)
28

clusters. Throughout our regression analysis, we report robust standard errors,
clustered at the firm level.
A.

Validation and Placebo Exercises

We start by running our test on the sample of affiliated firms. That is, we define
our potential cartels in equation (24) as groups of affiliated firms in the same
industry who all have the same parent, and we construct the relevant market
shares of these cartels. We know from existing empirical work (e.g., Edmond,
Midrigan and Xu (2015)) that markups tend to be positively correlated with
market share. Our hypothesis is β1 = 0 and β2 < 0, however, so that own
market share will not impact markups after controlling for total market share.
We estimate (24) for various definition of industries: 2-digit, 3-digit, and 4-digit
industries. Note that the definition of industry affects not only the market share
of the firm and cartel, but the set of affiliates in the cartel. The broader industry
classification incorporates potential vertical collusion, but it also makes market
shares themselves likely less informative.
Table 2 present the estimates, βˆ1 and βˆ2 . (We omit the firm and time fixed
effects from the tables.) The first column shows the estimates, where we assume
perfectly independent behavior and constrain the coefficient on collusion share to
be zero. In the next three columns, we assume perfect collusion at the cluster
level (constraining the coefficient on firm share to be zero), and define clusters
at the 2-digit, 3-digit, and 4-digit levels, respectively. The last three columns are
analogous in their cluster definitions, but we do not constrain either coefficient.
We report robust standard errors, clustered at the firm level. The sample of
observations is a very small subset (less than two percent) of our full sample
both because we only include affiliates, and because we only have parent/affiliate
information for firms present in the 2004 subsample.
Focusing on the last three columns, we see that our hypothesis is confirmed
for the finer industry classifications, especially the 4-digit industry classification.
29

In particular, the coefficient on own share is small and statistically insignificant,
while the the cartel share is negative and marginally significant at a ten percent
level. Returning the results that constrain βˆ1 to zero (i.e., column (iv)), and applying (26), yields estimates of σ = 4.5 and γ = 2.9. (The corresponding values
implied by column 7 are very similar at 4.5 and 3.1. The implied demand elasticities in all of our results are consistent with those found using other methods,
e.g., elasticities based on international trade patterns in Simonovska and Waugh
(2014), which is encouraging given the potential biases discussed in Section ??.)
For the 3-digit industry classification, the impact of cartel market share is larger
and even more significant, but the coefficient on own share actually exceeds the
coefficient on cartel share (though statistically insignificant). The broad 2-digit
industry classification gives insignificant results, however, likely reflecting the fact
that our test is based on horizontal competition where industrial markets are narrowly defined.
Our second validation exercise is analogous. Instead of examining private affiliates owned by the same parent, however, we examine state-owned enterprises
(SOEs), which are all owned by the government. The variation in the data naturally reflect the privatization process occurring in China over the period (declining
market share of SOEs), and the corresponding decrease in markups, but we hypothesize that competition amongst SOEs is weaker than competition between
SOEs and private firms.
Indeed, the results in Table 3 verify this hypothesis. Columns 2-4 examine
collusion at different industry aggregations, and, once again, our test is consistent
with perfect collusion at the disaggregate industry level. In column 4, we find the
coefficient on own share to be insignificant at the 4-digit level, while the coefficient
on cluster’s share is negative and significant. While our test uncovers negative
and statistically significant coefficients on cluster’s share at the broader industry
levels too, own share is also significant and the implied κ values are tiny. Again,
our model is one of horizontal competition, so it is natural that the results are
30

most consistent when using the most disaggregate industries. For this reason, we
focus on the 4-digit industry classification, our narrowest, for the remainder of
our analyses.
Columns 5-7 consider variants where SOEs only collude with other SOEs (in
their 4-digit industry) that are in geographic proximity, i.e., at more local levels
of province, city, or county, respectively. We view this in some sense as a placebo
test, and indeed the evidence for collusion disappears at these more local levels.
We take this as evidence that the presence of any correlated local shocks are not
enough to erroneously lead to an assumption of only local collusion in the case of
SOEs.
We also run placebo tests that replicate our tests for industrial cluster-based
collusion, but use these subsets of firms. We use the identical measure of industrial
cluster market share that we use below, but consider only the markup response for
these sets of firms. The results are quite strong: we find no significant responses
of markups to the total market share of industrial clusters in either the SOE or
affiliated firm samples, and no effect of being in an SEZ. See the online appendix
for full results. These negative results are an important counter-example to the
idea that something about the construction of our test (e.g., biases due to spurious
local correlations) or our data automatically lead to false positives in detecting
collusion at cluster levels.
In sum, both validation tests are consistent with firms colluding within ownership structures at the disaggregate industry level, and our test is able to reject
cluster-based collusion in placebo tests.
B.

Non-Competitive Behavior in Industrial Clusters

We now turn to industrial clusters more generally by defining our potential
cartels as sets of firms in the same industry and geographic location. Table 4
presents the results. The first column shows the estimates, where we assume
perfectly independent behavior and constrain the coefficient on collusion share to
31

be zero. In the next three columns, we assume perfect collusion at the cluster
level (constraining the coefficient on firm share to be zero), and define clusters at
the province, city, and county level respectively. The next three columns allow
for both shares to influence inverse markups, while the final three interact firm
market share and cluster market share with an indicator variable for whether the
firm is in a SEZ. Again, we report robust standard errors clustered at the firm
level.
Focusing on columns 1 through 7, we note several strong results. First, all of
the estimates are highly significant indicating that both firm share and market
share are strongly related to markups. Because all estimates are statistically different from zero, we can rule out either perfectly independent behavior or perfect
collusion at the cluster level. Second, all the coefficients on market shares are
negative, as we would predict if output within an industry are more substitutable
than output between industries. Third, the magnitudes are substantially larger
for own firm share. Fourth, as we define clusters at a more local level, the coefficient on cluster share increases in magnitude, while the the coefficient on own
share decreases. This suggests that collusion is indeed more prevalent among
firms that are in proximity to one another.
The β2 < 0 estimates indicate some level of cluster-level collusion in the overall
sample.25 Again, applying equation (26), we can interpret the magnitude of the
implied elasticities and the extent of collusion. At the county level, we estimate
κ̂ = 0.26, while we estimate just κ̂ = 0.07 at the province level. This indicates a
relatively low level of non-competitive behavior overall, especially when examining
firms only located within the same province. The implied elasticity estimates are
σ = 4.8 and γ = 3.1. These implied elasticities are quite similar to those implied
in the smaller sample of affiliated firms, even though the level of collusion is
greater.
25 We verify that this is not driven by the affiliated firms in two ways: (i) dropping the affiliated firms
from the sample, and (ii) assigning the parent group share within the cluster to firm share. Neither
changes affect our results substantially.

32

Finally, we examine the role of SEZs examined in columns 8-10 of Table 4.
The coefficients on the interaction of the SEZ dummy with firm market share are
positive and significant but smaller in absolute value than the coefficient on firm
market share itself. Adding the two coefficients, own market share is therefore a
less important a predictor of (inverse markups) in SEZs. Similarly, the coefficients
on cluster market share are negative, so that overall cluster market share is a more
important predictor in SEZs. Indeed, using the county-level estimates in the last
column, we estimate a collusion index κ̂ = 0.45 for firms within SEZs, four times
higher than that of firms not in SEZs, where κ̂ = 0.11. Again, the results for
SEZs are strongest, the more local the definition of clusters. Recall, that SEZs are
essentially pro-business zones, combining tax breaks, infrastructure investment,
and government cooperation in order to attract investment. A common goal with
industry-specific zones or clusters is to foster technical coordination in order to
internalize productive externalities. The evidence suggests that such zones may
also facilitate marketing coordination and internalizing pecuniary externalities.
We have estimated similar regressions where we differentiate across industries
using the Rauch (1999) classification. Rauch classifies industries depending on
whether they sell homogeneous goods (e.g., goods sold on exchanges), referenced
priced goods, and differentiated goods. Without agriculture and raw materials,
our sample of homogeneous goods is limited, but we can distinguish between
industries that produce differentiated goods, and those that produce homogenous/reference priced goods. Our estimates of κ are 0.14 for the former and
0.30 for the latter, indicating somewhat stronger collusion for more homogeneous
goods, consistent with existing arguments and evidence that collusion is less beneficial and common in industries with differentiated products Dick (1996). Equally
interesting, the coefficients themselves are much larger for these goods, consistent
with a larger ρ, which would be expected, since goods should be highly substitutable within these industries.26 Again, we view this latter consistency as further
26 See

the online appendix for details.
33

evidence that our results are driven by the pricing-market share mechanism we
highlight rather than some other statistical phenomenon.
We have also examined robustness of the (county-level, unrestricted) results
in Table 4 to various alternative specifications. Although the theory motivates
weighting our regressions, neither the significance nor magnitudes of our results are dependent on the weighting in our regressions. We can also use the
Bertrand specification rather than Cournot, by replacing the dependent variable
with µnit /(µnit − 1). This Bertrand formulation require us to Windsorize the
data, however, because for very low markups the dependent variable explodes.
These observations take on huge weight, and very low markups are inconsistent
with the model for reasonable values of γ. If we drop all observations below
1.06, a lower bound on markups for a conservative estimate of γ = 10 (much
larger than implied by the Cournot estimates, for example), we get very similar
results, with implied elasticities σ = 5.5 and γ = 3.1 and the fraction colluding
κ = 0.40. Finally, we can use log markup, rather than inverse markup, as our
dependent variable. The log function may make these regressions more robust
to very large outlier markups. Naturally, the predicted signs are reversed, but
they are both statistically significant, indicating partial collusion, and the implied
semi-elasticities with respect to own and cluster share are 9.7 and 3.6 percent,
respectively. The details of these robustness studies are in our online appendix.
We next turn to clusters which appear a priori likely to be potentially collusive
because they have low cross-sectional variation in markups. We do this by sorting
clusters into deciles according to their coefficient of variation of the markup. Table
5 presents the coefficient of variation of these deciles, along with other cluster
decile characteristics, when clusters are defined at the county level. Note that the
average markup increases with coefficient of variation of markups over the top
seven deciles, but that this pattern inverts for the lowest three deciles, where the
average markup is actually higher as the coefficient of variation decreases. Higher
markups and lower coefficients of variation may be more likely to be collusive,
34

given claims 3 and 4 in Proposition 1. We therefore focus on firms in the these
bottom three clusters, and the lowest thirty percent is not inconsistent with the
estimate that 26 percent of firms collude.27
The other key characteristics of these lowest deciles of clusters are also of interest. First, although they have lower variation in markups, this does not appear
to be connected to lower variation in market shares, as the coefficients of variations in market shares are similar, showing no clear patterns across the deciles.
They have fewer firms per cluster, and are in industries with higher geographic
concentration (measured by the Ellison-Glaeser agglomeration index) and higher
industry concentration (as measured by the Hirschman-Herfindahl index). The
firms themselves are somewhat smaller in terms of fewer employees per firm.
Fewer firms in these clusters export, and overall exports are a lower fraction of
sales. Finally, although there are not sharp differences in the ownership distribution, they are disproportionately domestic private enterprises and somewhat less
likely to be multi-national enterprises or joint ventures.

28

Table 6 presents the results for this restricted sample of the lower three deciles.
The columns follow a parallel structure as in Table 4, but there are three columns
even for the regressions that only include firm market share because the set of
firms here varies depending on whether we define our clusters at the province,
city, or county level. In the results that assume perfectly independent behavior
we again find negative and significant estimates at the province and county level.29
In the results, that assume perfectly collusive behavior, we again find negative
significant estimates on cluster market share, and the results are again stronger,
the more locally the cluster is defined. The most interesting results in the table,
however, are those where we do constrain either coefficient. In this restricted
sample, we again find evidence of partially collusive behavior at the province
27 These low markup variation deciles contain fewer firms on average, however, and so they constitute
only 16 percent of firms.
28 Moreover, the single most disproportionately overrepresented industry in these clusters is petroleum
refining, a classic cartel in U.S. history.
29 The city estimates have fewer observations, since there are fewer firms in the low markup variation
deciles of city clusters.

35

level.
What is striking, however, is that the collusive behavior appears complete at
local levels within these restricted samples: only the βˆ2 estimates are negative and
significant. The positive β̂1 at the city and county level are admittedly at odds
with the theory, but the coefficient are not statistically significant. Moreover,
the magnitude of the β̂1 (0.037) is less than half that of β̂2 (0.077) at the county
level. The county-level estimate in column (vi) implies a within-industry elasticity
σ that compares well with that in the full sample (5.0 vs. 4.8), but the betweenindustry elasticity is somewhat higher than in the full sample (3.9 vs. 3.1).
Once again, we find significant impacts of SEZs when interacted with market
share. For counties, the region’s share is nearly twice as large for firms in SEZs.
C.

Robustness

We now examine the robustness of our results to various alternatives. In particular, we attempt to address the issue that the correlation between markups
and cluster share may simply be driven by spatially correlated shocks to costs or
demand across firms, as our Monte Carlo simulations indicated could be problematic. We address this concern in two ways.
First, we add region-time specific fixed effects as controls into our regressions.
Our Monte Carlo simulations showed that these effectively control for any general
shocks or trends to production or costs at the region level, e.g., rising costs of land
or (non-industry-specific) labor from agglomeration economies. Controlling for
these, our regressions will only be identified by cross-industry variation in market
shares within a geographic location. Table 7 shows these results for the sample of
clusters with low initial variation in markups. The patterns are quite similar to
those in Table 6, although the magnitudes of the coefficients on cluster share are
somewhat smaller (e.g., -0.054 vs. -0.077) in column 9. The results are significant
at a five percent level. We find very similar results for the overall sample, but
since our SEZs show very little variation with counties, we cannot separately run
36

our SEZ test using these fixed effects. Nonetheless, we view the robustness of
our results as evidence that spatially correlated shocks (or trends) do not drive
our inference, although in principle, industry-specific spatially correlated shocks
could still play a role.
Second, we attempt an instrumental variable approach, since shares themselves
are endogenous. Identifying general instruments may be difficult, but in the
context of the model and our Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2006) estimation,
exogenous productivity shocks affect costs and therefore exogenously drive both
market share and markups. We motivate our instrument using an approximation,
the case of known productivity zin and monopolistic competition. This set up
yields the following relationship between shares and the distribution of productivity:
1−1/σ

z
pin yin
≈ Xin 1−1/σ
sin = X
pim yim
zim

(31)

m∈Ωi

m∈Ωi

We construct instruments for own market share (I1 ) and cluster market share
(I2 ) using variants of the above formula that exclude the firm’s own productivity
and the productivities of all firms in the firm’s cluster (Sn ), respectively:
(32)

I1 =

1
X

1−1/σ
zim

,

I2 =

m∈Ωi /n

1
X

1−1/σ

zim

m∈Ωi /Sn

This two-stage estimation yields very similar results (see Table A.3). For example, the coefficient on cluster share in the analog to column (ix) is -0.050 and
is significant at the five percent level. Again, the patterns we develop are broadly
robust.
In sum, we have shown that: the test detects collusion among firms owned by
the same parents in the affiliated and SOE samples; the markups of local SOEs
in a placebo test do not respond to their cluster market share; the estimates are
37

consistent with the model’s mechanism based on the Rauch classification; our
collusion patterns are stronger in SEZs; the collusion patterns are very strong in
clusters that the model pre-identifies as likely colluders; these collusion patterns
are robust to inclusion of time-region specific fixed effects and instrumenting for
market share.
V.

Conclusion

We have developed a simple, intuitive and robust test for identifying noncompetitive behavior for subsets of firms competing in the same industry. Using
this test we have found evidence of collusion in Chinese industrial clusters. These
results are strongest within narrowly-defined clusters in terms of narrow industries and narrow geographic units. A small but non-negligible share of firms
and clusters appear to exhibit from non-competitive behavior. This behavior is
disproportionately strong – four times greater – in special economic zones.
The results open several avenues for future research. In this paper we have
focused exclusively on China. However, the fact that it satisfied our validation
exercises means it could easily applied more generally to other countries and contexts where firm panel data are available. Furthermore, the potential normative
importance of our results are compelling with respect to evaluating industrial
policies that promote clustering, such as local tax breaks, subsidized credit, or
targeted infrastructure investments. They motivate more rigorous evaluation of
various normative considerations, including weighing the extent to which cartels hurt (or perhaps even help) consumers, productivity gains from external
economies of scale vs. monopoly pricing losses from cartels, and local vs. global
welfare implications and incentives. Precisely these issues are the subjects of our
continuing research.
REFERENCES

Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer. 2006. “Structural
38

identification of production functions.” University Library of Munich, Germany
MPRA Paper 38349.
Alder, Simon, Lin Shao, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2013. “The Effect of Economic Reform and Industrial Policy in a Panel of Chinese Cities.” Working
Paper.
Asturias, Jose, Manuel Garcia-Santana, and Roberto Ramos. 2015.
“Competition and the Welfare Gains from Transportation Infrastructure: Evidence from the Golden Quadrilateral in India.” Working Paper.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel Burstein. 2008. “Pricing-to-Market, Trade
Costs, and International Relative Prices.” American Economic Review,
98: 1998–2031.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. 2012. “Creative Accounting or Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in
Chinese Manufacturing.” Journal of Development Economics, 97(2): 339–351.
Bresnahan, Timothy. 1987. “Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Industry: The 1955 Price War.” Journal of Industrial Economics,
35(4): 457–482.
Cabral, Luis, Zhu Wang, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2015. “Competitors, Complementors, Parents and Places: Explaining Regional Agglomeration in the U.S.
Auto Industry.” Working Paper.
Chandler, Alfred. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in
American Business. Harvard University Press.
Cheng, Yiwen. 2014. “Place-Based Policies in a Development Context - Evidence from China.” Working Paper.
39

Christie, William, Jeffrey Harris, and Paul Schultz. 1994. “Why did NASDAQ Market Makers Stop Avoiding Odd-Eighth Quotes?” Journal of Finance,
49(5): 1841–1860.
De Loecker, Jan, and Frederic Warzynski. 2012. “Markups and Firm-Level
Export Status.” American Economic Review, 102(6): 2437–71.
Dick, Andrew. 1996. “When are Cartels Stable Contracts?” Journal of Law
and Economics, 39(1): 241–283.
Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Xu. 2015. “Competition,
Markups and the Gains from International Trade.” American Economic Review.
Einav, Liran, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. “Empirical Industrial Organization:
A Progress Report.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2): 145–162.
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L Glaeser. 1997. “Geographic Concentration in
U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political
Economy, 105(5): 889–927.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. “What Causes
Industrial Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review, 100(3): 1195–1213.
Galle, Simon. 2016. “Competition, Financial Constraints and Misallocation:
Plant-Level Evidence from Indian Manufacturing.” Working Paper.
Gan, Li, and Manuel Hernandez. 2013. “Making Friends with Your Neighbors? Agglomeration and Tacit Collusion in the Lodging Industry.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 95(3): 1002–1017.
Genesove, David, and Wallace Mullin. 1998. “Testing Static Oligopoly Models: Conduct and Cost in the Sugar Industry, 1890-1914.” RAND Journal of
Economics, 29(2): 355–377.
40

Green, Edward, and Robert Porter. 1984. “Noncooperative Collusion under
Imperfect Price Information.” Econometrica, 52(1): 87–100.
Greenstone, Michael, Rick Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. “Identifying Productivity Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large
Plant Openings.” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3): 536–598.
Guiso, Luigi, and Fabiano Schivardi. 2007. “Spillovers in Industrial Districtrs.” Economic Journal, 117(516): 68–93.
Hall, Robert. 1987. “Productivity and the Business Cycle.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 27: 421–444.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–
1448.
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Benjamin Moll. 2015. “Optimal Development Policies
with Financial Frictions.” Working Paper.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: MacMillan.
Marshall, Robert, and Leslie Marx. 2012. The Economics of Collusion. MIT
Press.
Peters, Michael. 2015. “Heterogeneous Mark-Ups, Growth and Endogenous
Misallocation.” Working Paper.
Porter, Michael. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Free Press, New
York.
Rauch, James E. 1999. “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade.”
Journal International of Economics, 48(1): 7–35.
Ravallion, Martin, and Shubham Chaudhuri. 1997. “Risk and Insurance in
Village India: Comment.” Econometrica, 65(1): 171–184.
41

Simonovska, Ina, and Michael Waugh. 2014. “Elasticity of Trade: Estimates
and Evidence.” Journal of International Economics, 92(1): 34–50.
Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. W. Strahan and T. Cadell, London.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2011. “Growing
Like China.” American Economic Review, 101(1): 202–241.
Townsend, Robert. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in Village India.” Econometrica,
62(3): 539–591.
Wang, Jin. 2013. “The economic impact of Special Economic Zones: Evidence
from Chinese municipalities.” Journal of Development Economics, 101: 133–
147.
Zeng, Douglas. 2011. “How Do Special Economic Zones and Industrial Clusters Drive China’s Rapid Development?” In Building Engines for Growth and
Competitiveness in China. , ed. Douglas Zeng. Washington, D.C.

42

1999

2001

2003
2005
year
County

2007

2009

1

0

1.05

.01

1.1

.02

Gross Markup
1.15
1.2

1.25

E-G Agglomeration
.03
.04
.05
.06

1.3

.07

.08

1.35

Figure 1: Increasing Agglomeration and Markups over Time in China

1999

2001

2003
2005
Year

2007

City

Markup Level (weighted)

Province

Markup Level (unweighted)

2009

Table 1: Key Summary Statistics of Data
Variable
Mean Median S.D. Min

Max

Markup

1.29

1.26

0.21

4.76

Firm Share
Cluster Share (Province)
Cluster Share (City)
Cluster Share (County)
Capital per Firm
Materials per Firm
Real Output per Firm
Workers per Firm

0.00
0.14
0.04
0.02
320
720
1000
290

0.00
0.10
0.02
0.00
50
170
240
120

0.01
0
0.14
0
0.06
0
0.04
0
3720 0.01
5940 0.05
7970 0.08
1010 10

No. of Firms

0.61

1
1
1
1
1,035,380
860,550
1,434,840
166,860

408,848

Notes: Market shares are computed using 4-digit industries. Capital,
output and materials are in thousand RMB (in real value).

Table 2: Baseline Results Using Affiliated Firms
1
Dependent Variable: µnit
(1)
4-digit
Firm’s share

(2)
2-digit

(3)
3-digit

(4)
4-digit

(5)
2-digit

(6)
3-digit

(7)
4-digit

-0.223
(0.666)

0.283
(0.268)

0.073
(0.086)

-0.077
(0.049)

-0.190
(0.182)

-0.258∗∗∗
(0.100)

-0.119∗
(0.072)

-0.036
(0.057)
-0.206 -0.196∗∗
(0.171) (0.090)

Cluster’s share

Year FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

26779

26779

26779

26779

26779

26779

26779

.518

.518

.519

.518

.518

.519

Observations
Adjusted R

2

.518
∗∗∗

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, ∗∗ :
∗
5%, : 10%. Various industry aggregation levels are employed, including 4-digit industry (in
specifications 1, 4 and 7), 3-digit industry (in specifications 3 and 6), and 2-digit industry (in
specifications 2 and 5). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations
for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al.
2014). All regressions include a constant term.

Table 3: Baseline Results Using SOEs as Cluster
1
Dependent Variable: µnit
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
all SOEs in the industry
4-digit 2-digit
3-digit
4-digit
Firm’s Share

-0.047
(0.056)

Cluster’s Share

(5)
province
4-digit

(6)
city
4-digit

(7)
county
4-digit

-1.801∗∗
(0.810)

-0.331∗
(0.201)

-0.028
(0.056)

0.012
(0.064)

0.004
(0.072)

-0.018
(0.120)

-0.047∗∗
(0.019)

-0.020∗∗
(0.010)

-0.026∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.062∗∗
(0.031)

-0.053
(0.049)

-0.030
(0.112)

Year FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

111520

111520

111520

111520

111520

111520

111520

.572

.572

.572

.572

.572

.572

.572

Observations
Adjusted R

2

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ :
5%, ∗ : 10%. Various industry aggregation levels are employed, including 4-digit industry (in
specifications 1 and 4-7), 3-digit industry in specifications, and 2-digit industry in specifications 2.
All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC
sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions
include a constant term.

0.541

0.541

1470892

YES

YES

0.541

1470892

YES

YES

∗∗∗

0.541

1470892

YES

YES

∗∗

∗

0.541

1470892

YES

YES

0.541

1470892

YES

YES

0.538

1205337

YES

YES

0.538

1205337

YES

YES

0.538

1205337

YES

YES

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.026∗∗
(0.011)

0.090∗∗
(0.042)

-0.017∗∗
(0.008)

-0.142∗∗∗
(0.028)

(10)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined at various aggregation
levels, including province (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), city (in specifications 3, 6, and 9), and county (in specifications 4, 7, and 10). All specifications
are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker
et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

Adjusted R

0.541

1470892

1470892

2

Observations

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

Year FEs

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

SEZ Dummy

-0.142∗∗∗
(0.028)

(9)
City

-0.022∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.029∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.157∗∗∗
(0.027)

(8)
Province

-0.012∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.024∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.081∗∗∗
(0.022)

(7)
County

SEZ*Region’s Share

Region’s Share

-0.009∗∗∗
(0.002)

-0.086∗∗∗
(0.021)

(6)
City

0.086∗∗
(0.041)

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.104∗∗∗
(0.021)

(5)
Province

0.073∗
(0.040)

-0.031∗∗∗
(0.004)

(4)
County

SEZ*Firm’s Share

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.002)

(3)
City

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.112∗∗∗
(0.021)

(2)
Province

1
µnit

-0.003
(0.003)

Firm’s Share

(1)

Dependent Variable:

Table 4: Baseline Results Using Overall Sample

Avg.
Coefficient
of Variation
of Markup

0.01
0.03
0.04

0.06
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.14
0.17
0.26

Cluster
Decile of
Coefficient
of Variation
of Markup

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1.219
1.225
1.232
1.234
1.252
1.280
1.345

1.224
1.223
1.223
4.4
4.4
4.9
4.4
5.5
5.0
4.5

4.3
4.3
4.5
3.72
4.35
4.70
4.99
5.03
4.57
3.27

1.69
2.22
2.92

Local Competition Indicator
Avg. Coefficient
Avg.
of Variation of Avg. Firms
Mean Markup
Market Share
Per Cluster

0.0100
0.0098
0.0099
0.0100
0.0096
0.0095
0.0095

0.0102
0.0100
0.0099

0.017
0.017
0.017
0.016
0.018
0.018
0.022

0.023
0.020
0.018

0.19
0.22
0.24
0.23
0.28
0.29
0.20

0.16
0.14
0.16

79
79
75
70
62
57
54

79
81
81

17
18
21
25
33
37
34

14
14
14

4
4
4
4
5
6
12

7
5
4

Industry Concentration
Firm
Firm Ownership
Characteristics
Exporting
Distribution
Avg. EG
Hirschman- Avg. Mean
Avg.
Avg.
Avg.
Agglomeration Herfindahl
Export
Percent Percent Percent
Index
Index
Share
DPE
FIE
SOE

Table 5: Cluster Characteristics by Cluster Decile of Coefficient of Variation of Markup

0.713

0.841

192068

YES

YES

-0.040
(0.035)

(3)
County

0.57

271403

YES

YES

-0.014∗∗
(0.006)

(4)
Province

0.713

159353

YES

YES

-0.024
(0.016)

(5)
City

∗∗∗

0.841

192068

YES

YES

-0.059∗∗∗
(0.022)

(6)
County

1
µnit

∗∗

0.57

271403

YES

YES

-0.012∗∗
(0.006)

-0.060
(0.044)

∗

(7)
Province

0.713

159353

YES

YES

-0.028∗
(0.014)

0.027
(0.064)

(8)
City

0.841

192068

YES

YES

-0.077∗∗∗
(0.025)

0.037
(0.043)

(9)
County

: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
at various aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 1, 4, and 7), city (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and county (in
specifications 3, 6 and 9). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector
production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

0.57

271403

Observations

Adjusted R

159353

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

YES

YES

-0.002
(0.064)

-0.072∗
(0.044)

Year FEs

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(2)
City

(1)
Province

Dependent Variable:

Table 6: Baseline Results Using Low CV Deciles

271403
.574

Observations
Adjusted R2

192068
.861

YES
271403
.574

159353
.724

YES

YES

-0.030∗∗
(0.014)

(5)
City

192068
.861

YES

YES

-0.037∗
(0.021)

(6)
County

271403
.574

YES

YES

-0.011∗∗
(0.005)

(7)
Province
-0.066∗
(0.037)

159353
.724

YES

YES

-0.034∗∗
(0.013)

(8)
City
0.025
(0.049)

192068
.861

YES

YES

-0.054∗∗
(0.024)

(9)
County
0.034
(0.039)

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%. Regions are defined
at various aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 1, 4, and 7), city (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and county (in
specifications 3, 6 and 9). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector
production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

159353
.724

YES

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

Region-Year FEs

(4)
Province

-0.012∗∗
(0.005)

(3)
County
-0.020
(0.031)

Region’s Share

Firm’s Share

(2)
(1)
Province
City
-0.076∗∗ -0.009
(0.037) (0.048)

Table 7: Low CV Deciles with Region-Year Fixed Effects

.518

.518

26779

YES

YES

.518

26779

YES

YES

.518

26779

YES

YES

∗∗∗

∗∗

.518

26779

YES

YES

∗

.518

26779

YES

YES

0.018
(0.051)

0.023
(0.023)

-0.087
(0.069)

(8)
Province

.514

22331

YES

YES

.514

22331

YES

YES

0.003
(0.006)

0.018
(0.041)

0.063
(0.114)

0.008
(0.035)

-0.073
(0.074)

(9)
City

.514

22331

YES

YES

0.003
(0.006)

0.017
(0.041)

0.063
(0.114)

0.026
(0.054)

-0.091
(0.085)

(10)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined at various
aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), city (in specifications 3, 6, and 9), and county (in specifications 4,
7, and 10). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function
estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

.518

26779

Observations

Adjusted R

26779

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

YES

Year FEs

YES

0.005
(0.033)

-0.054
(0.076)

(7)
County

0.003
(0.006)

0.016
(0.021)

-0.041
(0.066)

(6)
City

SEZ Dummy

-0.006
(0.037)

-0.051
(0.060)

(5)
Province

0.014
(0.041)

-0.004
(0.029)

(4)
County

SEZ*Region’s share

0.012
(0.020)

(3)
City

0.060
(0.114)

-0.036
(0.057)

(2)
Province

1
µnit

SEZ*Firm’s share

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)

Dependent Variable:

Table A.1: Appendix Table–Placebo Test Using Affiliate Sample

.572

.572

111520

YES

YES

.572

111520

YES

YES

.572

111520

YES

YES

∗∗∗

∗∗

.572

111520

YES

YES

∗

.572

111520

YES

YES

0.011
(0.058)

-0.007
(0.018)

-0.086
(0.061)

(8)
Province

.564

72657

YES

YES

.564

72657

YES

YES

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.049
(0.139)

0.010
(0.032)

-0.102
(0.067)

(9)
City

.564

72657

YES

YES

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.049
(0.138)

0.045
(0.067)

-0.138
(0.089)

(10)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined at various
aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), city (in specifications 3, 6, and 9), and county (in specifications 4,
7, and 10). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function
estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

.572

111520

Observations

Adjusted R

111520

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

YES

Year FEs

YES

0.017
(0.028)

-0.066
(0.080)

(7)
County

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.018
(0.016)

-0.071
(0.064)

(6)
City

SEZ Dummy

-0.027
(0.042)

-0.039
(0.061)

(5)
Province

-0.003
(0.048)

0.000
(0.026)

(4)
County

SEZ*Region’s share

-0.021
(0.015)

(3)
City

0.050
(0.138)

-0.055
(0.059)

(2)
Province

1
µnit

SEZ*Firm’s share

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)

Dependent Variable:

Table A.2: Appendix Table–Placebo Test Using SOE Sample

Table A.3: Appendix Table–Rauch Product Classification Results
Dependent Variable:

1
µnit

(1)
homo/ref

(2)
diff.

(3)
overall

(4)
homo/ref

(5)
diff.

(6)
overall

Firm’s Share

-0.170∗∗
(0.084)

-0.050∗∗
(0.024)

-0.150∗∗∗
(0.058)

-0.075
(0.224)

-0.031
(0.026)

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.044)

Region’s Share

-0.071∗∗∗
(0.013)

-0.013
(0.009)

-0.064∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.293∗∗∗
(0.100)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.066∗∗∗
(0.010)

Differentiated X firm share

0.087
(0.062)

0.147∗∗∗
(0.049)

Differentiated X region share

0.054∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)

Differentiated Dummy

-0.003∗∗
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Year FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

283277
.568

1037618
.532

1398020
.537

78326
.434

715552
.538

1398020
.537

Observations
Adjusted R2

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%.
Specifications 1-3 refer to product classification using “most frequent” principle; specifications 4-6 refer to
product classification using “pure” principle. All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of
observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al.
2014). All regressions include a constant term.

0.841

191987

YES

0.57

266924

YES

YES

-0.001
(0.019)

(4)
Province

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.013)

(5)
City

0.841

191987

YES

YES

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.020)

(6)
County

0.57

266924

YES

YES

0.013
(0.026)

0.172
(0.213)

(7)
Province

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.087
(0.187)

(8)
City

(Sum of other firms’ productivity; Sum of outside-cluster firms’ productivity)
0.0000

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.196∗∗∗
(0.050)

-0.284∗
(0.158)

YES

(3)
County

(2)
City

1
µnit

0.841

191987

YES

YES

-0.050∗∗
(0.022)

-0.085
(0.069)

(9)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%. Regions are defined at various aggregation
levels, including province (in specifications 1, 4, and 7), city (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and county (in specifications 3, 6 and 9). All specifications
are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker
et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

First-Stage Instruments:
Weak Instrument ( Prob > F )

0.57

266924

Observations

Adjusted R

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

0.107
(0.158)

Year FEs

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)
Province

Dependent Variable:

Table A.4: Appendix Table–Instrumental Variable Estimation Results Using Low CV Deciles

Table A.5: Appendix Table–Robustness
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.081∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.142∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.049∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.029∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.031∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.073∗∗∗
(0.013)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.005)

Panel A: Dependent Variable = 1/µnit
Firm’s Share

-0.112∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.004)

Region’s Share

-0.023∗∗∗
(0.004)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

0.090∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.076∗∗∗
(0.021)

SEZ*Region’s Share

-0.026∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.032∗∗∗
(0.007)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1470892
0.541

1470892
0.541

1470892
0.541

1205337
0.538

1470892
0.539

1470892
0.539

1470892
0.539

1205337
0.536

329.188
(390.900)

605.930
(530.172)

22.092
(172.321)

11.689
(217.461)

Panel B: Dependent Variable = µnit /(µnit − 1) (full sample)
Firm’s Share

169.961
(256.601)

Region’s Share

45.849
(95.777)

143.820
(280.289)

295.045
(364.181)

24.251
(104.618)

16.686
(123.835)

352.320
(346.765)
89.076
(152.865)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

-300.513
(562.327)

-547.209
(842.053)

SEZ*Region’s Share

24.188
(164.433)

29.639
(305.981)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1470892
-0.021

1470892
-0.021

1470892
-0.021

1205337
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1205337
-0.098

-0.958∗∗∗
(0.318)

-2.077∗∗∗
(0.406)

-0.726∗∗∗
(0.137)

-0.473∗∗∗
(0.163)

Panel C: Dependent Variable = µnit /(µnit − 1) (drop µnit < 1.06)
Firm’s Share

-2.482∗∗∗
(0.322)
-1.185∗∗∗
(0.120)

Region’s Share

-1.429∗∗∗
(0.352)

-3.048∗∗∗
(0.462)

-0.971∗∗∗
(0.131)

-0.842∗∗∗
(0.156)

-1.724∗∗∗
(0.284)
-0.913∗∗∗
(0.122)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

2.937∗∗∗
(0.716)

2.693∗∗∗
(0.649)

SEZ*Region’s Share

-0.445∗∗
(0.204)

-0.677∗∗∗
(0.226)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1335576
0.438

1335576
0.438

1335576
0.438

1093555
0.439

1335576
0.432

0.097∗∗∗
(0.016)

0.171∗∗∗
(0.020)

0.057∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.016∗∗
(0.007)

1335576
0.432

1335576
0.433

1093555
0.434

0.035∗∗
(0.014)

0.087∗∗∗
(0.017)

0.021∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.007)

Panel D: Dependent Variable = log(mu)nit
Firm’s Share

0.136∗∗∗
(0.014)
0.051∗∗∗
(0.005)

Region’s Share

0.028∗∗∗
(0.005)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

-0.097∗∗∗
(0.031)

-0.089∗∗∗
(0.027)

SEZ*Region’s Share

0.042∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.047∗∗∗
(0.010)

Observations
Adjusted R2
All Panels
Year FEs
Firm FEs

1470892
0.53

1470892
0.53

1470892
0.53

1205337
0.529

1470892
0.529

1470892
0.529

1470892
0.529

1205337
0.528

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%. Regions are defined at county level.
Specifications 1-4 are weighted regressions; specifications 5-8 are unweighted regressions. All regressions include a constant term.

Online Appendix
A1.

Derivation of the Demand Function

Suppose the household solves the following problem:
(A1)

max

X

{Yi }

1/γ
Di Yi

γ−1
γ

!

γ
γ−1

i

subject to:
X

P i Yi ≤ P

i

We take the budget of the household P to be exogenous. Cost minimization on
the part of the representative household implies the demand function:
 −γ
Pi
(A2)
Yi = Di
P
The final product in each industry is assembled by competitive firms in each
industry that solves:
X
pni yni
(A3)
Pi Yi = min
{yni }

n∈Ωi

subject to:
Yi =

X

σ−1
σ

!

σ
σ−1

yni

i

Cost minimization on the part of these competitive firms implies:


pni −σ
(A4)
yni = Yi
Pi
Combining equations (A2) and (A4) implies:

(A5)

yni = Di
A2.

Pi
P

−γ 

pni
Pi

−σ

Proof of Proposition 1

Suppose marginal costs of all firms are bounded and non-decreasing. Proposition 1 has the following five parts:
1) If operating independently, firm markups are increasing in a firm’s own
market share,
1

2) If operating as a cartel, cartel markups are increasing in total cartel market
share with each firm’s own market share playing no additional role,
3) Firm markups are higher under cartel decisions than when operating independently,
4) Firm markups are more similar when operating as a cartel than when operating independently,
5) Firm market shares are more similar when operating independently than
when operating as a cartel
PROOF:
Suppose any firm n in industry i weights the profits of the set of firms S ⊂ Ωi
with constant κ ∈ [0, 1]. Then their objective is:
X
(A6)
max p(yni )yni − C(yni ; Xni ) + κ
[p(ymi )ymi − C(ymi ; Xmi )]
yni

m∈S

Then for µni defined as price divided by marginal cost and share defined as the
firm’s revenue divided by the sum of firm revenues in the industry, the firm’s first
order condition can be rewritten as:
(A7)

X smi ∂ log(pmi )
1
∂ log(pni )
+κ
= 1 + (1 − κ)
µni
∂ log(yni )
sni ∂ log(yni )
m∈S

If inverse demand is given by:
 σ γ−1 −1


(A8)

pni =

−1/σ
Di yni

γ σ−1

1−1/σ
ymi 

X

m∈Ωi

Then the cross-price elasticities are:


∂ log(pmi )
=
∂ log(yni )

(A9)

1
1
−
σ γ


sni

The own-price elasticity is:
(A10)

∂ log(pni )
1
=− +
∂ log(yni )
σ



1
1
−
σ γ


sni

Together these imply that:
(A11)

1
1
=1− +
µni
σ



1
1
−
σ γ

!


(1 − κ)sni + κ

X
m∈S

2

smi

Firms operating independently is the case where κ = 0, so then:


1
1
1
1
(A12)
=1− +
sni
−
µni
σ
σ γ
This implies result 1, when σ > γ. Likewise, if firms are operating as a perfect
cartel, then κ = 1:


1
1
1
1 X
=1− +
(A13)
−
smi
µni
σ
σ γ
m∈S

This immediately implies the second result. Moreover, equations (A12) and (A13)
together imply the fourth result, as cartels have no variation in markups (even if
they have variation in market shares) while independent firms have markups that
vary with their shares.

To compare firms in a cartel to those operating independently, we construct an
artificial single firm that is equivalent to the cartel. That is, suppose κ = 1 so
that the cartel solves:
X
(pmi ymi − C(ymi ; Xmi ))
(A14)
max
{ymi }

m∈S

where pmi is given by (A8). Now define a cartel aggregate of production:
!
(A15)

Y =

X

σ
σ−1

1−1/σ

ymi

m∈S

Let C̃(Y ) be the cost function of the cartel defined as:
X
(A16)
C̃(Y ) = min
C(ymi ; Xmi )
{ymi }

m∈S

!
subject to:

Y =

X

σ
σ−1

1−1/σ

ymi

m∈S

Then the following problem is equivalent to (A14):
! σ γ−1 −1
γ σ−1

(A17)

max Di Y 1−1/σ
Y

Y 1−1/σ +

X
n∈S
/
3

1−1/σ
yni

− C̃(Y )

First notice that the Envelope Theorem applied to the problem in (A16):
(A18)

C̃ 0 (Y ) = λ =

∀m ∈ S,

C 0 (ymi ; Xmi )
−1/σ

ymi Y 1/σ

Then we can relate the size of the cartel to the cost of the cartel’s production.
LEMMA 1: Consider a cartel made up of in T ⊂ S. Then for every level of
production Y , the marginal cost in the cartel composed of T is strictly higher than
in the cartel composed of S.
T is how much firm m produces when part of the
To prove this lemma, suppose ymi
S
cartel composed of T and ymi is how much the same firm produces when part of
the cartel composed of S. Then for any given Y it must be the case that:
S
T
ymi
< ymi
=⇒

S ;X )
C 0 (ymi
mi
S −1/σ Y 1/σ
ymi

<

T ;X )
C 0 (ymi
mi
T −1/σ Y 1/σ
ymi

0
0
=⇒ C˜S (Y ) < C˜T (Y )

where the second implication follows from the fact that all firms have nondecreasing marginal costs. The first inequality follows from bounded marginal
costs and Inada conditions in the aggregation of individual firm production to
cartel-level production. Therefore, if more firms are added to a cartel, marginal
costs for the cartel are reduced for every level of output.
Given this lemma, notice that as a cartel grows, the markup that the cartel
charges strictly increases. This follows immediately from that fact that, given the
lemma, marginal costs decline so cartel production increases, and as another firm
from within the same industry is brought into the cartel, that firm’s production is
no longer counted in the denominator when computing the cartel’s market share.
Therefore, the cartel’s market share strictly increases as more firms are added.
Hence, by (A13), the markup charged by the cartel increases.
A special case of this result is part 3 of Proposition 1. If a firm is operating
outside of an existing cartel then is brought into it, the new cartel would have
strictly higher markups than either the original cartel or the formerly independent
firm.
To demonstrate the last result, consider any two firms n and m within the same
cartel. Manipulating (A18) gives:
(A19)

C 0 (ymi ; Xmi )
=
C 0 (yni ; Xni )



ymi
yni

− 1



σ

=

smi
sni



1
1−σ

Then consider two other firms v and w that are operating independently. Then
the relationship between marginal cost and market share is:
(A20)

C 0 (yvi ; Xvi )
=
C 0 (ywi ; Xwi )



svi
swi



1
1−σ

4

1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)svi
1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)swi

Suppose these two pairs of firms have the same relative marginal costs. Then:
C 0 (ymi ; Xmi )
C 0 (yvi ; Xvi )
=
=⇒
C 0 (yni ; Xni )
C 0 (ywi ; Xwi )

(A21)


smi
sni



1
1−σ


=

svi
swi



1
1−σ

1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)svi
1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)swi

Without loss, if firms v and m have relatively high costs, then:
C 0 (ymi ; Xmi )
C 0 (yvi ; Xvi )
=
> 1 =⇒
C 0 (yni ; Xni )
C 0 (ywi ; Xwi )

(A22)

1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)svi
sni
swi
> 1 =⇒
>
1 − 1/σ + (1/σ − 1/γ)swi
smi
svi
Therefore, independently operating firms have wider variation in market shares
conditional on marginal cost than do firms operating as a cartel. This completes
the proof.
A3.

Simulation of Model with Shocks to Demand and Costs

We now consider a version of the model where some uncertainty in costs or
demand is realized after production choices are made. Firm i in industry j located
in region k in year t solves the following problem:


Z Z
X
(1 − κ)πijkt (l, ε, ρ) + κ
πmjkt (l, ε, ρ) dF (ε)dG(ρ)
max
lijkt

Sε

Sρ

m∈ωjkt

where:
 σ γ−1 −1


πijkt (l, ε, ρ) =

1/η
Dj (εijkt lijkt )1−1/σ

γ σ−1

X

m∈Ωjt

1/η
(εmjkt lmjkt )1−1/σ 

− ρijkt

lijkt
zijkt

Here ε is the vector of demand shocks, ρ is the vector of cost shocks, and l is the
vector of production choices. The set of firms operating in industry j at time t is
Ωjt , and its subset of firms operating within region k is ωjkt . For any given firm,
zijkt is the component of their costs that is known before production decisions
are made. Without heterogeneity in this, there would be no heterogeneity in lijkt .
The parameter η allows for curvature in the cost function.
Notice that F and G are probability distributions over vectors, and we will
consider covariance at the cluster, industry and year levels.
5

The first order condition implies:
Z

1−1/η

ηρijkt lijkt
zijkt

Sρ



dG(ρ) =
1/η

σ − 1  1
1

=
pijkt (l, ε) 
+
−
σ γ
 σ
Sε
Z

1−1/σ + (1 − κ)
 κ(εijkt lijkt )

X

X

1/η

(εnjkt lnjkt )1−1/σ

n∈ωjkt

1/η

(εmjkt lmjkt )1−1/σ

m∈Ωjt

where:
 σ γ−1 −1


pijkt (l, ε) =

1−1/σ −1/ησ
Dj εijkt lijkt

γ σ−1

X


(εmjkt lmjkt )

1/η(1−1/σ) 

m∈Ωjt

Firms face a variety of shocks at different levels:
εijkt = ν1 ε1t + ν2 ε2jt + ν3 ε3ijkt + ν4 ε4jkt + ν5 ε5kt
ρijkt = µ1 ρ1t + µ2 ρ2jt + µ3 ρ3ijkt + µ4 ρ4jkt + µ5 ρ5kt
Therefore, we can separately analyze shocks at different levels.
Computational Implementation

The simulated dataset has T years, J industries and K regions. Every industryregion-year has I firms within it. The vectors ε and ρ are therefore of length
I × J × K × T . First, both ε and ρ are simulated M times. Then a vector L
is drawn. Then L is input as the vector of production choices of firms. Using
the first order condition, we then solve for the vector Z of anticipated costs that
rationalizes the vector L. Together, Z, L, and the realization of shocks implies
markups (using the method of De Loecker and Warzynski) and market shares for
each firm. Then, for each realization, the regression described in the paper is run
on the simulated data. This is done M times.
For these results we choose σ = 5, γ = 3, and κ = 0.3. We set T = 11, J = 5,
K = 8, I = 10 and M = 1000. We assume that the log of each shock is a standard
normal random variable.
Effects of Shocks: Comparative Statics

First we look at the effects of all twelve types of shocks individually. The table
below presents the results of setting µ1 = ... = µ5 = ν1 = ... = ν5 = 0, then
individually setting each to 1.
6




 dF (ε)


In each iteration of the simulation we run the following regression:
1
= α + β1 sijkt + β2 cjkt + δijkt
markupijkt
where:

(εijkt yijkt )1−1/σ
sijkt = X
(εmjkt ymjkt )1−1/σ
m∈Ωjt

cjkt =

X

sljkt

l∈ωjkt

Here we present the simulated moments of κ̂ defined by:

Table A1—Simulation Results: Ex Post Shocks

Cost Shocks:
Year
Industry-Year
Firm-Year
Cluster-Year
Region-Year
Demand Shocks:
Year
Industry-Year
Firm-Year
Cluster-Year
Region-Year
Cost Shocks:
Year
Industry-Year
Firm-Year
Cluster-Year
Region-Year
Demand Shocks:
Year
Industry-Year
Firm-Year
Cluster-Year
Region-Year

No Fixed Effects
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.3000
0.0075
-0.0006
0.3000
0.0015
0.0030
0.0120
0.0562
0.0093
0.9759
0.0059
0.0805
0.2227
0.0332
0.0175
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.3000
0.0065
-0.0006
0.2999
0.0086
-0.0006
0.0652
6.7790
-0.0001
1.1084
24.2151
0.0016
0.0179
23.5850
0.0021
Firm FEs
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.3003
0.0124
-0.1004
0.3000
0.0020
-0.0147
0.0035
0.0499
0.0125
0.9986
0.0053
0.0984
0.2253
0.0306
-0.0113
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.2995
0.0124
-0.1004
0.2998
0.0126
-0.0187
-0.2294
15.1836
0.0002
0.7296
8.6585
-0.0002
-1.3071
53.0598
0.0092
7

Region-Year and Firm FEs
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.2995
0.0171
0.9999
0.3000
0.0024
0.1719
0.0044
0.0577
0.0130
0.9982
0.0059
0.2628
0.3178
0.0253
0.6229
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.3000
0.0145
0.9999
0.2998
0.0149
0.1650
0.0199
5.3935
-0.0003
0.8891
5.2687
0.1846
0.3018
0.0215
1.0000
Region-Year FEs
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.3004
0.0098
1.000
0.3000
0.0016
0.1694
0.0074
0.0605
0.0094
0.9752
0.0066
0.2483
0.3101
0.0222
0.5584
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Adj. R2
0.2999
0.0085
1.0000
0.2998
0.0111
0.1711
-0.1389
6.0075
-0.0002
1.1787
2.6894
0.1893
0.3004
0.0110
0.9999

κ̂ ≡

β2
β1 + β2

The results from these experiments are given in Table A.A3. We provide four
sets of results based on the set of fixed effects considered, and for each case we
provide the average and standard deviation of κ across the 1000 simulations. We
also provide the adjusted R2 averaged across the 1000 simulations.
These results demonstrate two important things to help understand how our
estimates of κ could be biased. Firm-year shocks bias estimates of κ downward,
and cluster-year and region-year shocks bias estimates upward. The region-year
shocks can be mitigated with region-year fixed effects: the bias is almost eliminated for cost shocks and is less severe for demand shocks. In the other cases,
the adjusted R2 of the model can fall considerably, but we see little evidence of
bias in estimates of κ.
Calibrated Example

The previous subsection demonstrates that the most serious bias arises when
ex post shocks are at the firm-year and cluster-year level. We now repeat the
numerical exercise from the previous section but now we parameterize the model
to replicate the results of our baseline results in column 7 of Table 4. As in that
regression, we include firm and year fixed effects and cluster standard errors at
the firm level. We first consider ex post shocks to demand at the firm-year level,
the cluster-year level, and the year level. We also have idiosyncratic firm-year ex
ante shocks. Each shock is assumed to be log-normal.
We calibrate seven parameters: the variance of all three ex post demand shocks,
the variance of the ex ante demand shock, γ, σ, and κ. We match seven moments:
the coefficient estimate on the firm’s own share and on the cluster’s share, the
point estimate of κ from equation (17), the standard errors on the firm’s own
share and on the cluster share, the average markup, and the regression’s adjusted
R2 .
The calibrated value of κ is 0.3246, while the value in the model, as in the data,
is 0.2636. This demonstrates that, in this case, we underestimate the degree
of collusion with our procedure relative to its true value. This is because the
calibrated standard deviation of the firm-year shock is 0.0168 while that of the
cluster-year shock is 0.0015. As demonstrated in the previous subsection, the
firm-year shocks tend to bias estimated values of κ downward, while cluster-year
shocks bias them upward. Since the firm-year shocks are larger, our estimates in
the calibrated model are biased downward. Our estimate of σ is 4.5660 and γ is
3.2746. The standard deviation of the year-level shock is 0.0244 and the standard
deviation of the idiosyncratic ex ante shock is 0.4313.
8

Figure A1. Varying Non-Homotheticity: Estimated κ

Departure from CES Demand

Next we consider the case where the demand system is instead given by:

 

pijkt + p̄ −σ Pjt −γ
(A23)
qijkt =
Pjt
Pt
Proceeding with the same simulation technique as above, we consider the case
where there are no ex post shocks and vary the magnitude of p̄.
The results are summarized below in Figures A1 and A2. As the value of p̄
varies, as shown on the horizontal axis in both figures, on average our measure
of κ will be affected monotonically as shown in Figure A1. As before, the true
value of κ in this simulation is equal to 0.3. Figure A2 shows that this bias is
entirely due to bias in the coefficient on firms’ own shares. In fact, the coefficient
on cluster shares is unbiased by p̄.
This supports our conclusion that a non-CES demand system of this type affects
our estimate of the magnitude of collusion. However, if we interpret the t-test
of whether or not the coefficient on the cluster share is positive to be a test of
collusion, that test is unaffected by non-CES demand systems of this form.
Measurement Error

Finally, we consider the case where revenues are measured with error. We
proceed as before, but now instead of unanticipated shocks, we study the effect
9

Figure A2. Varying Non-Homotheticity: Coefficient Estimates

of increases in the variances of the measurement error.
Following the parameterization in the first simulation exercise, A.A3 shows the
effects of measurement error. In the “Idiosyncratic” columns, we assume that
measurement error has no correlation across firms. In the “Cluster” columns, we
consider the extreme case of correlation within clusters where measurement errors
are equal in all firms of the same cluster.
Table A2—Effects of Measurement Error

Var. of Error
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Var. of Error
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

Measurement Error, Idiosyncratic
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Avg. βˆ1 Avg.βˆ2
0.2763
0.0520
-0.0899 -0.0337
0.2135
0.0781
-0.1280 -0.0333
0.1563
0.0812
-0.1926 -0.0335
0.1170
0.0746
-0.2736 -0.0341
0.0840
0.0672
-0.3846 -0.0328
Measurement Error, Cluster
Avg. κ̂ St. Dev. κ̂ Avg. βˆ1 Avg.βˆ2
0.3602
0.0855
-0.0777 -0.0457
0.4954
0.1102
-0.0775 -0.0826
0.6322
0.1116
-0.0771 -0.1469
0.7253
0.0869
-0.0769 -0.2236
0.8033
0.0599
-0.0761 -0.3391
10

.518

.518

26779

YES

YES

.518

26779

YES

YES

.518

26779

YES

YES

∗∗∗

∗∗

.518

26779

YES

YES

∗

.518

26779

YES

YES

0.018
(0.051)

0.023
(0.023)

-0.087
(0.069)

(8)
Province

.514

22331

YES

YES

.514

22331

YES

YES

0.003
(0.006)

0.018
(0.041)

0.063
(0.114)

0.008
(0.035)

-0.073
(0.074)

(9)
City

.514

22331

YES

YES

0.003
(0.006)

0.017
(0.041)

0.063
(0.114)

0.026
(0.054)

-0.091
(0.085)

(10)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined at various
aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), city (in specifications 3, 6, and 9), and county (in specifications 4,
7, and 10). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function
estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

.518

26779

Observations

Adjusted R

26779

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

YES

Year FEs

YES

0.005
(0.033)

-0.054
(0.076)

(7)
County

0.003
(0.006)

0.016
(0.021)

-0.041
(0.066)

(6)
City

SEZ Dummy

-0.006
(0.037)

-0.051
(0.060)

(5)
Province

0.014
(0.041)

-0.004
(0.029)

(4)
County

SEZ*Region’s share

0.012
(0.020)

(3)
City

0.060
(0.114)

-0.036
(0.057)

(2)
Province

1
µnit

SEZ*Firm’s share

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)

Dependent Variable:

Table A.1: Appendix Table–Placebo Test Using Affiliate Sample

.572

.572

111520

YES

YES

.572

111520

YES

YES

.572

111520

YES

YES

∗∗∗

∗∗

.572

111520

YES

YES

∗

.572

111520

YES

YES

0.011
(0.058)

-0.007
(0.018)

-0.086
(0.061)

(8)
Province

.564

72657

YES

YES

.564

72657

YES

YES

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.049
(0.139)

0.010
(0.032)

-0.102
(0.067)

(9)
City

.564

72657

YES

YES

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.048)

0.049
(0.138)

0.045
(0.067)

-0.138
(0.089)

(10)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance:
: 1%, : 5%, : 10%. Regions are defined at various
aggregation levels, including province (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), city (in specifications 3, 6, and 9), and county (in specifications 4,
7, and 10). All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function
estimation reported (following De Loecker et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

.572

111520

Observations

Adjusted R

111520

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

YES

Year FEs

YES

0.017
(0.028)

-0.066
(0.080)

(7)
County

-0.000
(0.005)

-0.018
(0.016)

-0.071
(0.064)

(6)
City

SEZ Dummy

-0.027
(0.042)

-0.039
(0.061)

(5)
Province

-0.003
(0.048)

0.000
(0.026)

(4)
County

SEZ*Region’s share

-0.021
(0.015)

(3)
City

0.050
(0.138)

-0.055
(0.059)

(2)
Province

1
µnit

SEZ*Firm’s share

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)

Dependent Variable:

Table A.2: Appendix Table–Placebo Test Using SOE Sample

Table A.3: Appendix Table–Rauch Product Classification Results
Dependent Variable:

1
µnit

(1)
homo/ref

(2)
diff.

(3)
overall

(4)
homo/ref

(5)
diff.

(6)
overall

Firm’s Share

-0.170∗∗
(0.084)

-0.050∗∗
(0.024)

-0.150∗∗∗
(0.058)

-0.075
(0.224)

-0.031
(0.026)

-0.185∗∗∗
(0.044)

Region’s Share

-0.071∗∗∗
(0.013)

-0.013
(0.009)

-0.064∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.293∗∗∗
(0.100)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.066∗∗∗
(0.010)

Differentiated X firm share

0.087
(0.062)

0.147∗∗∗
(0.049)

Differentiated X region share

0.054∗∗∗
(0.014)

0.065∗∗∗
(0.014)

Differentiated Dummy

-0.003∗∗
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Year FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Firm FEs

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

283277
.568

1037618
.532

1398020
.537

78326
.434

715552
.538

1398020
.537

Observations
Adjusted R2

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%.
Specifications 1-3 refer to product classification using “most frequent” principle; specifications 4-6 refer to
product classification using “pure” principle. All specifications are regressions weighted by the number of
observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker et al.
2014). All regressions include a constant term.

0.841

191987

YES

0.57

266924

YES

YES

-0.001
(0.019)

(4)
Province

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.045∗∗∗
(0.013)

(5)
City

0.841

191987

YES

YES

-0.057∗∗∗
(0.020)

(6)
County

0.57

266924

YES

YES

0.013
(0.026)

0.172
(0.213)

(7)
Province

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.041∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.087
(0.187)

(8)
City

(Sum of other firms’ productivity; Sum of outside-cluster firms’ productivity)
0.0000

0.713

159245

YES

YES

-0.196∗∗∗
(0.050)

-0.284∗
(0.158)

YES

(3)
County

(2)
City

1
µnit

0.841

191987

YES

YES

-0.050∗∗
(0.022)

-0.085
(0.069)

(9)
County

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at firm level in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%. Regions are defined at various aggregation
levels, including province (in specifications 1, 4, and 7), city (in specifications 2, 5, and 8), and county (in specifications 3, 6 and 9). All specifications
are regressions weighted by the number of observations for each two-digit CIC sector production function estimation reported (following De Loecker
et al. 2014). All regressions include a constant term.

First-Stage Instruments:
Weak Instrument ( Prob > F )

0.57

266924

Observations

Adjusted R

YES

Firm FEs

2

YES

0.107
(0.158)

Year FEs

Region’s share

Firm’s share

(1)
Province

Dependent Variable:

Table A.4: Appendix Table–Instrumental Variable Estimation Results Using Low CV Deciles

Table A.5: Appendix Table–Robustness
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.081∗∗∗
(0.012)

-0.142∗∗∗
(0.015)

-0.049∗∗∗
(0.009)

-0.029∗∗∗
(0.004)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.031∗∗∗
(0.010)

-0.073∗∗∗
(0.013)

-0.017∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.002
(0.005)

Panel A: Dependent Variable = 1/µnit
Firm’s Share

-0.112∗∗∗
(0.011)
-0.041∗∗∗
(0.004)

Region’s Share

-0.023∗∗∗
(0.004)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

0.090∗∗∗
(0.023)

0.076∗∗∗
(0.021)

SEZ*Region’s Share

-0.026∗∗∗
(0.007)

-0.032∗∗∗
(0.007)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1470892
0.541

1470892
0.541

1470892
0.541

1205337
0.538

1470892
0.539

1470892
0.539

1470892
0.539

1205337
0.536

329.188
(390.900)

605.930
(530.172)

22.092
(172.321)

11.689
(217.461)

Panel B: Dependent Variable = µnit /(µnit − 1) (full sample)
Firm’s Share

169.961
(256.601)

Region’s Share

45.849
(95.777)

143.820
(280.289)

295.045
(364.181)

24.251
(104.618)

16.686
(123.835)

352.320
(346.765)
89.076
(152.865)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

-300.513
(562.327)

-547.209
(842.053)

SEZ*Region’s Share

24.188
(164.433)

29.639
(305.981)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1470892
-0.021

1470892
-0.021

1470892
-0.021

1205337
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1470892
-0.068

1205337
-0.098

-0.958∗∗∗
(0.318)

-2.077∗∗∗
(0.406)

-0.726∗∗∗
(0.137)

-0.473∗∗∗
(0.163)

Panel C: Dependent Variable = µnit /(µnit − 1) (drop µnit < 1.06)
Firm’s Share

-2.482∗∗∗
(0.322)
-1.185∗∗∗
(0.120)

Region’s Share

-1.429∗∗∗
(0.352)

-3.048∗∗∗
(0.462)

-0.971∗∗∗
(0.131)

-0.842∗∗∗
(0.156)

-1.724∗∗∗
(0.284)
-0.913∗∗∗
(0.122)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

2.937∗∗∗
(0.716)

2.693∗∗∗
(0.649)

SEZ*Region’s Share

-0.445∗∗
(0.204)

-0.677∗∗∗
(0.226)

Observations
Adjusted R2

1335576
0.438

1335576
0.438

1335576
0.438

1093555
0.439

1335576
0.432

0.097∗∗∗
(0.016)

0.171∗∗∗
(0.020)

0.057∗∗∗
(0.012)

0.036∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.016∗∗
(0.007)

1335576
0.432

1335576
0.433

1093555
0.434

0.035∗∗
(0.014)

0.087∗∗∗
(0.017)

0.021∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.007)

Panel D: Dependent Variable = log(mu)nit
Firm’s Share

0.136∗∗∗
(0.014)
0.051∗∗∗
(0.005)

Region’s Share

0.028∗∗∗
(0.005)

SEZ*Firm’s Share

-0.097∗∗∗
(0.031)

-0.089∗∗∗
(0.027)

SEZ*Region’s Share

0.042∗∗∗
(0.009)

0.047∗∗∗
(0.010)

Observations
Adjusted R2
All Panels
Year FEs
Firm FEs

1470892
0.53

1470892
0.53

1470892
0.53

1205337
0.529

1470892
0.529

1470892
0.529

1470892
0.529

1205337
0.528

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

YES
YES

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance: ∗∗∗ : 1%, ∗∗ : 5%, ∗ : 10%. Regions are defined at county level.
Specifications 1-4 are weighted regressions; specifications 5-8 are unweighted regressions. All regressions include a constant term.

