                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DOMINANT CURRENCY PARADIGM

                                            Gita Gopinath
                                             Emine Boz
                                            Camila Casas
                                           Federico J. Díez
                                      Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                       Mikkel Plagborg-Møller

                                        Working Paper 22943
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22943


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2016


This paper combines two papers: Casas et al. (2016) and Boz et al. (2017). We thank Isaiah Andrews,
Richard Baldwin, Gary Chamberlain, Michael Devereux, Charles Engel, Christopher Erceg, Doireann
Fitzgerald, Jordi Galí, Michal Kolesár, Philip Lane, Francis Kramarz, Brent Neiman, Maury Obstfeld,
Jonathan Ostry, Ken Rogoff, Arlene Wong, and seminar participants at several venues for useful comments.
We thank Omar Barbiero, Vu Chau, Tiago Flórido, Jianlin Wang for excellent research assistance
and Enrique Montes and his team at the Banco de la República for their help with the data. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, its
Executive Board, or management, nor those of the Banco de la República or its Board of Directors,
nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Gopinath acknowledges that this material
is based on work supported by the NSF under Grant Number #1061954 and #1628874. Any opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. All remaining errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gita Gopinath, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Díez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas,
and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Dominant Currency Paradigm
Gita Gopinath, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Díez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and
Mikkel Plagborg-Møller
NBER Working Paper No. 22943
December 2016, Revised March 2019
JEL No. E0,F0

                                              ABSTRACT

Most trade is invoiced in very few currencies. Yet, standard models assume prices are set in either
the producer’s or destination’s currency. We present instead a ‘dominant currency paradigm’ with
three key features: pricing in a dominant currency, pricing complementarities, and imported input
use in production. We test this paradigm using both a newly constructed data set of bilateral price
and volume indices for more than 2,500 country pairs that covers 91% of world trade, and very granular
firm-product-country data for Colombian exports and imports. In strong support of the paradigm we
find that: (1) Non-commodities terms of trade are essentially uncorrelated with exchange rates. (2)
The dollar exchange rate quantitatively dominates the bilateral exchange rate in price pass-through
and trade elasticity regressions, and this effect is increasing in the share of imports invoiced in dollars.
(3) U.S. import volumes are significantly less sensitive to bilateral exchange rates, compared to other
countries’ imports. (4) A 1% U.S. dollar appreciation against all other currencies predicts a 0.6% decline
within a year in the volume of total trade between countries in the rest of the world, controlling for
the global business cycle.


Gita Gopinath                                        Federico J. Díez
Department of Economics                              Research Department
Harvard University                                   Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
1875 Cambridge Street                                600 Atlantic Ave.
Littauer 206                                         Boston, MA 02210
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  fdiez@imf.org
and NBER
gopinath@harvard.edu                                 Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                                     Department of Economics
Emine Boz                                            University of California, Berkeley
International Monetary Fund                          530 Evans Hall #3880
700 19th Street, N.W.                                Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Washington, DC 20431                                 and CEPR
eboz@imf.org                                         and also NBER
                                                     pog@econ.berkeley.edu
Camila Casas
CEEII                                                Mikkel Plagborg-Møller
Banco de la República                                Princeton University
Cra. 4 # 7 - 14                                      Department of Economics
Cali, Colombia                                       Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
mcasaslo@banrep.gov.co                               Princeton, NJ 08544
                                                     mikkelpm@princeton.edu
1        Introduction

Nominal exchange rates have always been at the center of fierce economic and political debates on

spillovers, currency wars, and competitiveness. It is easy to understand why: in the presence of price

rigidities, nominal exchange rate fluctuations are associated with fluctuations in relative prices and

therefore have consequences for real variables such as the trade balance, consumption, and output.

        The relationship between nominal exchange rate fluctuations and other nominal and real vari-

ables depends critically on the currency in which prices are rigid. The first generation of New Keyne-

sian (NK) models, the leading paradigm in international macroeconomics, assumes prices are sticky

in the currency of the producing country. Under this ‘producer currency pricing’ paradigm (PCP), the

law of one price holds and a nominal depreciation raises the price of imports relative to exports (the

terms-of-trade) thus improving competitiveness. This paradigm was developed in the seminal con-

tributions of Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962), Svensson and van Wijnbergen (1989), and Obstfeld

and Rogoff (1995).

        There is, however, pervasive evidence that the law of one price fails to hold. Out of this ob-

servation grew a second pricing paradigm. In the original works of Betts and Devereux (2000) and

Devereux and Engel (2003), prices are instead assumed to be sticky in the currency of the destination

market. Under this ‘local currency pricing’ paradigm (LCP), a nominal depreciation lowers the price

of imports relative to exports, a decline in the terms-of-trade, thus worsening competitiveness. Both

paradigms have been extensively studied in the literature and are surveyed in Corsetti et al. (2010).

        Recent empirical work on the currency of invoicing of international prices questions the validity

of both approaches. Firstly, there is very little evidence that the best description of pricing in inter-

national markets follows either PCP or LCP. Instead, the vast majority of trade is invoiced in a small

number of ‘dominant currencies,’ with the U.S. dollar playing an outsized role. This is documented in

Goldberg and Tille (2008) and in Gopinath (2015). Secondly, exporters price in markets characterized

by strategic complementarities in pricing that give rise to variations in desired mark-ups.1 Thirdly,
    1
        Burstein and Gopinath (2014) survey the evidence on variable mark-ups.


                                                              1
most exporting firms employ imported inputs in production, reducing the value added content of

exports.2 The workhorse NK models in the literature à la Galı́ and Monacelli (2005) instead assume

constant demand elasticity and/or abstract from intermediate inputs.

       Based on these observations, this paper proposes an alternative: the ‘dominant currency paradigm’

(DCP). Under DCP, firms set export prices in a dominant currency (most often the dollar) and change

them infrequently. They face strategic complementarities in pricing, and there is roundabout pro-

duction using domestic and foreign inputs. We then test this paradigm using a newly constructed

data set of bilateral price and volume indices for more than 2,500 country pairs that covers 91% of

world trade, and a firm level database of the universe of Colombian exports and imports.

       According to DCP, the following should hold true: First, at both short and medium horizons the

terms-of-trade should be insensitive to exchange rate fluctuations. Second, for non-U.S. countries

exchange rate pass-through into import prices (in home currency) should be high and driven by the

dollar exchange rate as opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. For the U.S., on the contrary, pass-

through into import prices should be low. Third, for non-U.S. countries, import quantities should be

driven by the dollar exchange rate as opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. In addition, U.S. import

quantities should be less responsive to dollar exchange rate movements as compared to non-U.S.

countries. Fourth, when the dollar appreciates uniformly against all other currencies, it should lead

to a decline in trade between countries in the rest of the world (i.e. excluding the U.S.).

       The stability of the terms-of-trade under DCP follows from the pricing of imports and exports in

a common currency and the low sensitivity of these prices to ER fluctuations. This contrasts with

the predictions of the PCP and LCP paradigms. Under PCP (LCP) the terms-of-trade depreciates (ap-

preciates) almost one-to-one with the exchange rate as the price of imports rise (is stable) alongside

stable (rising) export prices, in home currency. It also differs from predictions of models with flexible
   2
    The fact that most exporters are also importers is well documented. See Bernard et al. (2009), Kugler and Verhoogen
(2009), Manova and Zhang (2009) among others. This is also reflected in the fact that value added exports are significantly
lower than gross exports, particularly for manufacturing, as documented in Johnson (2014) and Johnson and Noguera (2012).
Amiti et al. (2014) present empirical evidence of the influence of strategic complementarities in pricing and of imported
inputs on pricing decisions of Belgian firms.



                                                            2
prices and strategic complementarities in pricing such as Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Itskhoki

and Mukhin (2017). Unlike these models, the terms-of-trade stability under DCP is associated with

volatile movements of the relative price of imported to domestic goods for non-dominant (currency)

countries. Furthermore, this volatility is driven by fluctuations in the value of the country’s currency

relative to the dominant currency, regardless of the country of origin of the imported goods. Conse-

quently, demand for imports depends on the value of a country’s currency relative to the dominant

currency. When a country’s currency depreciates relative to the dominant currency, all else equal, it

reduces its demand for imports from all countries.

   In the case of exports, in contrast to PCP, which associates exchange rate depreciations with

increases in quantities exported (controlling for demand), DCP predicts a negligible impact on goods

exported to the dominant-currency destination. For exporting firms whose dominant currency prices

are unchanged there is no increase in exports. For those firms changing prices the rise in marginal

cost following the rise in the price of imported inputs and the complementarities in pricing dampen

their incentive to reduce prices, leaving exports mostly unchanged. The impact on exports to non-

dominant currency destinations depends on the fluctuations of the exchange rate of the destination

country currency with the dominant currency. If the exchange rate is stable then DCP predicts a

weak impact on exports to non-dollar destinations. On the other hand, if the destination country

currency weakens (strengthens) relative to the dominant currency it can lead to a decline (increase)

in exports.

   Fluctuations in the value of dominant currencies can also have implications for cyclical fluctu-

ations in global trade (the sum of exports and imports). Under DCP, a strengthening of dominant

currencies relative to non-dominant ones is associated with a decline in imports across the periphery

without a significant increase in exports to dominant currency markets, thus negatively impacting

global trade. In contrast, in the case of PCP, the rise in competitiveness for the periphery generates

an increase in exports. Moreover, the increase in exports dampens the decline in imports as produc-

tion relies on imported intermediate inputs. In the case of LCP, both the import and export response


                                                   3
is muted so the impact on global trade is weak.

       We further demonstrate numerically that the different paradigms lead to contrasting implications

for the transmission of monetary policy shocks within and across countries. With a Taylor rule, the

inflation-output trade-off in response to a monetary policy (MP) shock for a non-dominant currency

worsens under DCP relative to PCP. That is, a monetary policy rate cut raises inflation by much

more than it increases output, as compared to PCP. Further, under DCP, contractionary MP shocks

in the dominant country have strong spillovers to MP in the rest-of-the world and reduce rest-of-

world and global trade, while MP shocks in non-dominant currency countries generate only weak

spillovers and have little impact on world trade.

       Our empirical findings strongly support the predictions of DCP. Using the global database of

bilateral trade price and volume indices we show the following. First, a regression of the bilateral

non-commodities terms of trade on changes in the bilateral exchange rate yields a contemporaneous

coefficient on the exchange rate of 0.037, with a 95% confidence interval [0.02, 0.05], consistent with

DCP. For comparison, the coefficient should be close to 1 under PCP and to −1 under LCP.

       For our second finding, we estimate exchange rate pass-through and trade elasticity regressions

at the country-pair level. We first follow standard practice and estimate the pass-through of bilateral

exchange rates into import prices and volumes.3 We document that when country j’s currency

depreciates relative to country i by 10%, import prices in country j for goods imported from country

i rise by 8%, suggestive of close to complete pass-through at the one year horizon. However, adding

the U.S. dollar exchange rate as an additional explanatory variable and controlling for the global

business cycle with time fixed-effects knocks the coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate from

0.76 down to 0.16. The coefficient on the dollar exchange rate of 0.78 largely dominates that of the

bilateral exchange rate. Moreover, the magnitude of the dollar pass-through is systematically related

to the dollar invoicing shares of countries. Specifically, increasing the dollar invoicing share by 10
   3
    This follows naturally from the classic Mundell-Fleming paradigm, according to which the price an importing country
faces (when expressed in the importing country’s currency) fluctuates closely with the bilateral exchange rate. Accordingly,
studies of exchange rate pass-through focus on trade-weighted or bilateral exchange rate changes (Goldberg and Knetter,
1997; Burstein and Gopinath, 2014).


                                                             4
percentage points causes the contemporaneous dollar pass-through to increase by 3.5 percentage

points. Similar to the price regressions, adding the U.S. dollar exchange rate to a bilateral volume

forecasting regression knocks down the coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate by a substantial

amount. The contemporaneous volume elasticity for the dollar exchange rate is -0.19, while the

elasticity for the bilateral exchange rate is an order of magnitude smaller at -0.03.

   These pass-through estimates point to a potential misspecification in the standard pass-through

regressions that ignore the role of the dollar. We also show that the dollar’s role as an invoicing

currency is indeed special, as it handily beats the explanatory power of the euro in price and volume

regressions. The data is also consistent with an additional key prediction of the dominant currency

paradigm: U.S. import prices and volumes are significantly less sensitive to the exchange rate, as

compared to other countries’ imports.

   Third, we demonstrate empirically that the strength of the U.S. dollar is a key predictor of rest-

of-world (i.e. excluding the U.S.) trade volume and inflation, again controlling for measures of the

global business cycle. We find that a 1% appreciation of the U.S. dollar relative to all other curren-

cies is associated with a 0.6% contraction in rest-of-world aggregate import volume within the year.

Furthermore, countries with larger dollar import invoicing shares experience higher pass-through

of the dollar exchange rate into consumer and producer price inflation.

   The global database has the advantage of covering almost all of world trade, but it is not at the

firm level and is only available at an annual frequency. In Section 4, we demonstrate that all our

aggregate findings hold also when we use firm-level data from Colombia, a small open economy that

is representative of emerging markets in its heavy reliance on dollar invoicing with 98% of exports

invoiced in dollars. Using prices and quantities defined at the firm-10-digit product-country (origin or

destination)-quarter (or year) level for manufactured goods (excluding petrochemical and basic metal

industries), we confirm that the U.S. dollar exchange rate knocks down the bilateral exchange rate

for price pass through and trade elasticity of exports and imports to/from non-dollarized economies.

Further, we demonstrate that DCP is able to match the dynamics of price pass-through.


                                                   5
   To further contrast the different pricing paradigms, in Section 4.2 we simulate a model economy

that is subject to commodity price shocks, productivity shocks, and third country exchange rate

shocks, all calibrated to Colombia, and test its ability to match the data. Using a combination of cali-

bration and estimation, we document that the data strongly rejects PCP and LCP in favor of DCP. We

demonstrate that all features of DCP matter for quantitatively matching the facts, including strategic

complementarities in pricing and imported input use. Under our benchmark DCP specification we

find, in line with the data, the export pass-through at four quarters to both dollar and non-dollar

destinations to be 65%. Instead, when we shut down strategic complementarities and imported input

use, the predicted pass-through declines by half to 30%.


Related literature.    Our paper is related to a relatively small literature that models dollar pricing.

These include Corsetti and Pesenti (2005), Goldberg and Tille (2008), Goldberg and Tille (2009), De-

vereux et al. (2007), Cook and Devereux (2006) and Canzoneri et al. (2013). All of these models, with

the exception of Canzoneri et al. (2013), are effectively static with one-period-ahead price stickiness.

Unlike Canzoneri et al. (2013), we explore a three region world, which is crucial to analyze differences

between dominant and non-dominant currencies. Goldberg and Tille (2009) explore three regions but

in a static environment. In addition, the dollar pricing literature assumes constant desired mark-ups

and production functions that use only labor.

   Our contribution to this literature is two-fold. Firstly, we develop a new Keynesian open economy

model that combines dynamic dominant currency pricing, variable mark-ups and imported input

use in production. We develop testable implications and demonstrate the differential transmission of

monetary policy shocks across countries. Secondly, we empirically evaluate the dominant currency

paradigm using two novel databases described previously.

   Our empirical evidence on the terms of trade is related to Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), who con-

duct one of the earliest tests of the Mundell-Fleming paradigm against the Betts-Devereux-Engel

paradigm. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) examine the correlation between country-level terms of trade



                                                   6
and the trade-weighted exchange rate for 21 countries, using quarterly data for 1982-1998. They

report an average correlation of 0.26, which they interpret as a rejection of local currency pricing.

Even though the correlation is well less than 1, which would lend weak support for producer cur-

rency pricing, they conjecture that the low correlation could be because of the construction of the

trade-weighted exchange rates and/or because their terms of trade measures include commodity

prices. With the help of our globally representative data set, we improve upon Obstfeld and Rogoff

(2000) in several dimensions. Specifically, we examine the bilateral terms of trade, excluding com-

modity prices and we estimate pass-through coefficients as opposed to correlations. Moreover, we

test additional predictions of the different pricing paradigms.

       Our exchange rate pass-through analysis is among the first to exploit a globally representative

data set on bilateral trade volumes and values. To our knowledge, the only other work that utilizes a

similarly rich data set is Bussière et al. (2016), who analyze trade prices and quantities at the product

level.4

       The remaining literature on exchange rate pass-through falls into two main camps. First, many

papers use unilateral (i.e., country-level) time series, which limits the ability to analyze cross-sectional

heterogeneity and necessitates the use of trade-weighted rather than truly bilateral exchange rates

(e.g., Leigh et al., 2015). Second, a recent literature estimates pass-through of bilateral exchange rates

into product-level prices, as opposed to unit values, but these micro data sets are available for only

a few countries (see the review by Burstein and Gopinath, 2014).

       The evidence on asymmetric responses of the volume of exports and imports is consistent with

that documented by Alessandria et al. (2013) for exports and Gopinath and Neiman (2014) for im-

ports.5
   4
      The goal of that paper is to quantify the elasticity of prices and quantities to the bilateral exchange rate and check
if Marshall-Lerner conditions hold. In contrast, our goal is to empirically evaluate the predictions of the various pricing
paradigms and in the process highlight the dollar’s central role in global trade.
    5
      The typical explanations for the sluggish export response relies on quantity frictions arising from sunk or search costs
under PCP. DCP, consistent with the data, predicts that such relative prices are stable and therefore, does not require
quantity frictions in the short-term to generate slow adjustments in exports.




                                                              7
Outline.   Section 2 presents the DCP model, proposes testable implications, and contrasts the trans-

mission of monetary policy shocks across pricing paradigms. Sections 3 and 4 empirically test the

implications derived in Section 2 using the global database and the Colombian data respectively.

Section 5 concludes.


2     Model

Consider an economy j that trades goods and assets with the rest of the world. The nominal bilateral

exchange rate between country j and another country i is denoted Eij , expressed as the price of

currency i in terms of currency j. We assume that the U.S. dollar is the dominant currency and

let E$j denote the price of a U.S. dollar in currency j. An increase in Eij (resp. E$j ) represents a

depreciation of country j’s currency against that of country i (resp. the dollar).

    As in the canonical open economy framework of Galı́ (2008), firms adjust prices infrequently à

la Calvo. However, we depart from Galı́ (2008) along four dimensions. First, we nest three different

pricing paradigms: producer currency pricing, local currency pricing as well as dominant currency

pricing. Second, the production function uses not just labor but also intermediate inputs produced

domestically and abroad. Third, we allow for strategic complementarity in pricing that gives rise to

variable, as opposed to constant, mark-ups. Last, international asset markets are incomplete with

only risk-less bonds being traded, while Galı́ (2008) assumes complete markets. We describe the

details below.

2.1   Households

Country j is populated with a continuum of symmetric households of measure one. In each period

household h consumes a bundle of traded goods Cj,t (h). Each household also sets a wage rate Wj,t (h)

and supplies an individual variety of labor Nj,t (h) in order to satisfy demand at this wage rate.

Households own all domestic firms. To simplify exposition we omit the indexation of households




                                                  8
when possible. The per-period utility function is separable in consumption and labor and given by,

                                                       1     1−σc    κ   1+ϕ
                             U (Cj,t , Nj,t ) =             Cj,t  −     Nj,t                          (1)
                                                     1 − σc         1+ϕ

where σc > 0 is the household’s coefficient of relative risk aversion, ϕ > 0 is the inverse of the

Frisch elasticity of labor supply and κ scales the disutility of labor.

   The consumption aggregator Cj,t is implicitly defined by a Kimball (1995) homothetic demand

aggregator:
                                                                 
                              X 1 Z                |Ωi |Cij,t (ω)
                                           γij Υ                    dω = 1.                           (2)
                              i
                                |Ωi | ω∈Ωi           γij Cj,t
In Eq. (2), Cij,t (ω) represents the consumption by households in country j of variety ω produced by

country i at time t. γij is a set of preference weights that captures home consumption bias in country
       P
j, with i γij = 1, while |Ωi | is the measure of varieties produced in country i. The function Υ(.)

satisfies the constraints Υ (1) = 1, Υ0 (.) > 0 and Υ00 (.) < 0. As is well-known, this demand

structure gives rise to strategic complementarities in pricing and variable mark-ups. It captures the

classic Dornbusch (1987) and Krugman (1987) channel of variable mark-ups and pricing-to-market

as described below.

   Households in country j solve the following dynamic optimization problem,
                                                                      ∞
                                                                      X
                                          max                    E0         β t U (Cj,t , Nj,t ),     (3)
                             Cj,t ,Wj,t ,B$j,t+1 ,Bj,t+1 (s0 )
                                                                      t=0

where Et denotes expectations conditional on information available at time t, subject to the per-

period budget constraint expressed in home currency,


          Pj,t Cj,t + E$j,t (1 + i$j,t−1 )Bj,t
                                           $
                                               + Bj,t = Wj,t (h)Nj,t (h) + Πj,t                       (4)
                                                                         X
                                                                $
                                                        +E$j,t Bj,t+1 +     Qj,t (s0 )Bj,t+1 (s0 ).
                                                                                          s0 ∈S

In this expression, Pj,t is the price index for the domestic consumption aggregator Cj,t . Πj,t repre-

sents domestic profits transferred to domestic households, owners of domestic firms. On the financial

side, households trade a risk-free international bond denominated in dollars that pays a nominal in-

                                                             9
terest rate i$j,t .6 Bj,t+1
                      $
                            denotes the dollar debt holdings of this bond at time t. They also have access

to a full set of domestic state contingent securities (in j currency) that are traded domestically and

in zero net supply. Denoting S the set of possible states of the world, Qj,t (s) is the period-t price of

the security that pays one unit of home currency in period t + 1 and state s ∈ S, and Bj,t+1 (s) are

the corresponding holdings.

    The optimality conditions of the household’s problem yield the following demand system:
                                                                            
                                                                 Pij,t (ω)
                                          Cij,t (ω) = γij ψ Dj,t                 Cj,t ,                                        (5)
                                                                   Pj,t
                                                                                                      
                                                                                      |Ωi |Cij,t (ω)       Cij,t (ω)
where ψ (.) := Υ0−1 (.) > 0 so that ψ 0 (.) < 0, Dj,t :=                      0
                                                                    P R
                                                                      i   Ωi Υ          γij Cj,t             Cj,t dω   is a demand

index and Pij,t (ω) denotes the price of variety ω produced in country i and sold in country j, in

currency j. Define the elasticity of demand σij,t (ω) := − ∂∂ log Cij,t (ω)
                                                              log Zij,t (ω) , where Zij,t (ω)
                                                                                              := Dj,t Pij,t (ω)
                                                                                                        Pj,t .
                                                                              
                                                                         σij,t
The log of the optimal flexible price mark-up is µij,t (ω) := log σij,t     −1 . It is time-varying and we
                       ∂µij,t
let Γij,t (ω) :=   ∂ log Zij,t (ω)   denote the elasticity of that markup. By definition, the price index Pj,t
                        P R
satisfies Pj,t Cj,t =      i Ωi      Pij,t (ω)Cij,t (ω)dω.

    Inter-temporal optimality conditions for international and domestic bonds are given by the usual

Euler equations:
                                                               −σc Pj,t E$j,t+1
                                                                                
                                       −σc
                                      Cj,t  = β(1 +    i$j,t )Et
                                                             Cj,t+1                                                            (6)
                                                                    Pj,t+1 E$j,t
                                                                              
                                           −σc                    −σc Pj,t
                                          Cj,t = β(1 + ij,t )Et Cj,t+1                                                         (7)
                                                                        Pj,t+1
where (1 + ij,t ) = ( s0 ∈S Qj,t (s0 ))−1 is the inverse of the price of a nominally risk-free j-currency
                     P

bond at time t that delivers one unit of j currency in every state of the world in period t + 1.

    Households are subject to a Calvo friction when setting wages in j-currency: in any given period,

they may adjust their wage with probability 1 − δw , and maintain the previous-period nominal wage

otherwise. As we will see, they face a downward sloping demand for the specific variety of labor
                                         −ϑ
                                 Wj,t (h)
they supply given by Nj,t (h) = Wj,t          Nj,t , where ϑ > 1 is the elasticity of labor demand and
    6
      This dollar interest rate can be country specific, hence the dependency on j to reflect country risk premia, financial
frictions or to ensure stationarity of the linearized model.


                                                               10
Wj,t is the aggregate nominal wage in country j, defined below. The standard optimality condition

for wage setting is given by:
                   ∞
                                                     "                                       #
                                                                                        1+ϑϕ
                   X                        ϑ(1+ϕ)        ϑ              ϕ     W̄j,t (h)
              Et         δws−t Θj,t,s Nj,s Wj,s                     σ
                                                             κPj,s Cj,s Nj,s −         ϑϕ
                                                                                               = 0,    (8)
                   s=t
                                                         ϑ−1                       Wj,s

                         C −σc
                           Pj,t
where Θj,t,s := β s−t Cj,s
                       −σc P
                            j,s
                                is the stochastic discount factor between periods t and s ≥ t used to
                           j,t

discount profits and W̄j,t (h) is the optimal nominal reset wage in period t and country j. This implies

that W̄j,t (h) is preset as a constant mark-up over the expected weighted-average of future marginal

rates of substitution between labor and consumption and aggregate wage rates, during the duration

of the wage. Sticky wages are useful to match the empirical fact that wage-based real exchange rates

move closely with the nominal exchange rates.

2.2   Producers

Each producer in j manufactures a unique variety ω, which is sold both domestically and interna-

tionally. The output of the firm is used both for final consumption and as an intermediate input for

production. The production function uses a combination of labor Lj,t and intermediate inputs Xj,t ,

with a Cobb Douglas production function:


                                               Yj,t = eaj,t L1−α  α
                                                             j,t Xj,t                                  (9)


where α is the share of intermediates in production and aj,t is an aggregate productivity shock. The

intermediate input aggregator Xj,t takes the same form as the consumption aggregator in Eq. (2):
                                                                    
                                 X 1 Z                |Ωi |Xij,t (ω)
                                              γij Υ                    dω = 1,                        (10)
                                 i
                                   |Ωi | ω∈Ωi
                                                        γ  ij X j,t


where Xij,t (ω) represents the demand by firms in country j for variety ω produced in country i as

intermediate input. The labor input Lj,t is a constant elasticity aggregator of the individual varieties
                                             hR                    iϑ/(ϑ−1)
                                                1
Lj,t (h) supplied by each household, Lj,t = 0 Lj,t (h)(ϑ−1)/ϑ dh            , with ϑ > 1.

   By symmetry, a good produced in j can be used for consumption or as an intermediate input


                                                             11
in each country i and the demand for domestic individual varieties (both for consumption and as

intermediate input) takes a form similar to that in Eq. (5).

   Markets are assumed to be segmented so firms can set different prices by destination market and
                            k
invoicing currency. Denote Pji,t (ω) the price of a variety ω originating in j, sold in country i and

invoiced in currency k. The per-period nominal profits of the domestic firm producing variety ω are

then given by:
                                      X
                                                   k         k
                         Πj,t (ω) =         Ekj,t Pji,t (ω)Yji,t (ω) − MC j,t Yj,t (ω)                   (11)
                                      i,k
                                                           k          k           k
with the convention that Ejj,t := 1. In that expression, Yji,t (ω) = Cji,t (ω) + Xji,t (ω) is the demand

for domestic variety ω from country j invoiced in currency k in country i, both for consumption
                                                      k
                                               P
and as an input in production, while Yj,t (ω) = i,k Yji,t (ω) is the total demand across destination

markets i and invoicing currencies k. MC j,t denotes the nominal marginal cost of country j firms

in their home currency. Given Eq. (9), it is given by:
                                                             1−α α
                                                  1         Wj,t  Pj,t
                                 MC j,t     = α           ·            .                                 (12)
                                             α (1 − α)1−α     eaj,t

The optimality conditions for hiring labor are given by,
                                                                                  −ϑ
                              Yj,t   Wj,t                               Wj,t (h)
                      (1 − α)      =        ,          Lj,t (h) =                        Lj,t ,          (13)
                              Lj,t   MC j,t                              Wj,t
                                                                  R                   1
with the aggregate nominal wage Wj,t defined as Wj,t =                  Wj,t (h)1−ϑ dh 1−ϑ , while the demand

for intermediate inputs is determined by,
                                                                                
                       Yj,t   Pj,t                                     Pij,t (ω)
                     α      =        ,          Xij,t (ω) = γij ψ Dj,t             Xj,t .                (14)
                       Xj,t   MC j,t                                     Pj,t

2.3   Pricing

Firms choose prices at which to sell in j and in international markets i, with prices reset infrequently.

As in Galı́ (2008), we consider a Calvo pricing environment where firms are randomly allowed to reset

prices with probability 1 − δp . A core focus of this paper is on the implications of various pricing


                                                       12
choices by firms, in particular under dominant currency pricing. Consequently, we assume that

firms can set their prices either in the producer currency (j), in the destination currency (i), or in the

dominant currency ($).
            k
    Denote θji the fraction of exports from region j to region i that are priced in currency k, with
     k
P
  k θji   = 1 for any pair {i, j}. We allow for all pricing combinations but will focus on subsets.
                                                    j
The benchmark of PCP corresponds to the case where θj,i = 1 for every i 6= j. The case of LCP
                i                                    $
corresponds to θji = 1 for every i 6= j. Under DCP, θji = 1 for every i 6= j. Lastly, we assume that

all domestic prices are sticky in the home currency, an assumption consistent with a large body of
           j
evidence: θjj = 1 for every j.

    Consider the pricing problem of a firm from country j selling in country i and invoicing in cur-
                      k
rency k, and denote P̄ji,t (ω) its reset price. This reset price satisfies the following optimality condi-

tion:
               ∞
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                    k
               X                                                                   σji,s (ω)
          Et         δps−t Θj,t,s Yji,s|t
                                    k          k
                                          (ω)(σji,s                  k
                                                    (ω) − 1) Ekj,s P̄ji,t (ω) −    k (ω) − 1
                                                                                               MC j,s       = 0.   (15)
               s=t
                                                                                  σji,s

                      k
In this expression, Yji,s|t (ω) is the quantity sold in country i invoiced in currency k at time s by a
                                           k
firm that resets prices at time t ≤ s and σji,s (ω) is the elasticity of demand. This expression im-
             k
plies that P̄ji,t (ω) is preset as a markup over expected future marginal costs expressed in currency k,

MC j,s (ω)/Ekj,s , over the duration of the price spell. Observe that because of strategic complemen-

tarities, the mark-up over expected future marginal costs is not constant.

2.4     Testable Implications

Before we close the model, we can already outline a number of testable implications of our framework

for the joint behavior of exchange rates, export and import prices, and quantities. We explore them

empirically in Section 3.

    Using lower cases to denote the log of variables (e.g., pij = ln Pij ), country j’s import price




                                                            13
inflation for goods originating from country i can be expressed as:

                                              X
                                                    k
                                                       ∆pkij,t + ∆ekj,t ,
                                                                       
                                   ∆pij,t =        θij
                                               k
                                                                                                           
where the summation is over invoicing currencies. Under Calvo pricing, ∆pkij,t = (1−δp ) p̄kij,t − pkij,t−1 ,

and p̄kij,t is the (log) reset-price defined in Eq. (15). If all goods from i to j are either producer-priced
                                                                       i     j     $
(PCP), locally-priced (LCP) or priced in the dominant currency (DCP), θij + θij + θij = 1 and we

obtain:
                                                                  X
                             i            $                                k
                                                                              p̄kij,t − pkij,t−1 .
                                                                                                
                   ∆pij,t = θij ∆eij,t + θij ∆e$j,t + (1 − δp )           θij                           (16)
                                                                      k
In the very short run, δp → 1, and we can ignore the last term of the previous equation: changes

in bilateral import prices and in the bilateral terms of trade T OTij = Pij /(Pji Eij ) only depend on

the bilateral nominal exchange rates, the dollar exchange rate, and the share of trade invoiced in

different currencies.

   On the quantity side a log-linear approximation (around a symmetric steady state) of Eqs. (5)

and (14) yields,
                                                                     d
                                 ∆yij,t = −σij (∆pij,t − ∆pj,t ) + ∆yj,t ,

                                           d
where σij is the elasticity of demand and yj,t is the (log) of aggregate demand in country j.

Proposition 1 (pass-through). When prices are fully rigid and pre-determined in their currency of in-
voicing (δp → 1), pass-through into bilateral import prices expressed in currency j and quantities from
country i to country j (controlling for destination prices pj,t and demand yj,t
                                                                            d
                                                                                ) are given by:
                                           i            $
                                 ∆pij,t = θij ∆eij,t + θij ∆e$j,t                                       (17)
                                                      i                $
                                                                                   
                                 ∆yij,t = −σij       θij ∆eij,t   +   θij ∆e$j,t                        (18)

    • In the case of PCP, θij
                           i     j
                              = θji = 1 and

                                 ∆pij,t = ∆eij,t ,    ∆pji,t = −∆eij,t
                                ∆totij,t = ∆pij,t − (∆pji,t + ∆eij,t ) = ∆eij,t .
                                 ∆yij,t = −σij ∆eij,t




                                                      14
       • In the case of LCP, θij
                              j     i
                                 = θji = 1 and

                                   ∆pij,t = 0,      ∆pji,t = 0
                                  ∆totij,t = ∆pij,t − (∆pji,t + ∆eij,t ) = −∆eij,t
                                   ∆yij,t = 0.

       • In the case of DCP, θij
                              $     $
                                 = θji = 1 and

                                      ∆pij,t = ∆e$j,t ,      ∆pji,t = ∆e$i,t
                                     ∆totij,t = ∆pij,t − (∆pji,t + ∆eij,t ) = 0
                                      ∆yij,t = −σij,t ∆e$j,t .


       It should be clear that the predictions for prices, when prices are yet to change, do not depend

on what drives the exchange rate variation, that is, whether it arises from monetary policy shocks,

financial shocks or other shocks. Empirically, we should expect those countries relying more heavily

on dollar pricing to display greater sensitivity to the dollar exchange rate, even when controlling for

the bilateral exchange rate between countries i and j.7 We summarize the testable implications of

DCP below.

Testable Implications. (Import Price and Quantity Pass-Through)

   1. The bilateral terms of trade should be insensitive to bilateral exchange rates.

   2. For non-U.S. countries exchange rate pass-through into import prices (in home currency) should be

         high and driven by the dollar exchange rate as opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. Countries

         that rely more heavily on dollar import invoicing should see more of this effect. For the U.S., on

         the contrary, pass-through into import prices should be low.

   3. For non-U.S. countries, import quantities should be driven by the dollar exchange rate as opposed

         to the bilateral exchange rate. U.S. import quantities should be less responsive to dollar exchange

         rate movements as compared to non-U.S. countries.
   7
    Note that if the source of the shock generates co-movement across exchange rates, the resulting collinearity would
show up in the regressions as large standard errors around the point estimates on each bilateral exchange rate. As we
report below, this is not an issue.


                                                         15
   4. When all countries’ currencies uniformly depreciate relative to the dollar, it should lead to a decline

       in trade between the rest of the world (i.e. excluding the U.S.).

    The first three implications follow directly from Proposition 1. The last implication is obtained

from the aggregation of import volumes across country-pairs where the U.S. is neither the origin nor

the destination country. Denote R the set of such country-pairs: R ≡ {(i, j), i 6= j, i 6= $, j 6= $}.

Let ωij denote country j total non-commodity import value from country i in some reference year,
                   P
normalized so that R ωij = 1. We conceptualize the rest-of-the-world aggregate trade bundle,

yR,t , as a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of individual-country bilateral (log) gross imports with weights

ωij : yR,t := R ωij yij,t . Ceteris paribus, under DCP, a uniform depreciation relative to the dollar
              P

∆e$,t > 0, leads to a decline in non-commodity trade in the rest of the world:
                                                                 !
                                  X                 X
                        ∆yR,t =      ωij ∆yij,t = −     ωij σij,t ∆e$,t < 0.                                            (19)
                                         R                         R

Under either PCP or LCP, the growth of the rest-of-the-world trade is instead ∆yR,t = 0, either be-

cause bilateral non-dollar exchange rates are unchanged (under PCP) or because there is no bilateral

pass-through (LCP).

    As the horizon increases, the frequency of price adjustment increases and the pass-through pre-

dictions depend also on the response of reset prices p̄kij,t to exchange rates. We demonstrate in Sec-

tion 4.2 that the divergent predictions across the different paradigms hold at longer than annual

frequencies in the presence of strategic complementarities in pricing and imported input use.8
    8
      This result does not depend on the exogeneity of the currency of invoicing. Some of the ingredients from our model,
namely imported input use in production and strategic complementarities in pricing, are precisely those that would give
rise endogenously to dominant currency in pricing. This is demonstrated by Gopinath et al. (2010) in a partial equilibrium
environment and Mukhin (2018) in a general equilibrium environment. Nonetheless, our testable predictions continue to
hold, even after endogenizing the currency choice: as shown in Gopinath et al. (2010), firms choose to price in currencies
in which their reset prices are most stable, i.e., desired medium-run pass-through into the price (expressed in the invoicing
currency) is low. In other words, our empirical findings will continue to be relevant in an environment with endogenous
currency choice.
   Lastly, as the horizon increases the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on prices and quantities depend on the source of
the shock. The ideal test would be to examine the joint response of exchange rates, prices, and quantities to an exogenous
shock such as a monetary policy shock. The problem is that in the data exchange rate fluctuations have little to do with
monetary policy shocks or other identified policy shocks. Instead exchange rates appear to be driven by a ‘residual’ that the
literature names ‘financial shocks.’ Practically this shows up as low power in testing the channel from identified exogenous
shocks to exchange rates and to trade.

                                                             16
2.5       Closing the Model and Contrasting Shock Transmission

Before turning to our empirical results, this subsection demonstrates the differential transmission of

monetary policy (MP) shocks across different pricing paradigms in a small open economy. Using a

3-country large open economy framework, it further documents the asymmetry in monetary policy

spillovers under DCP, depending on whether the MP shocks originate in the dominant currency

country or elsewhere. We show that when countries follow a Taylor rule: (i) The inflation-output

trade-off in response to a monetary policy shock for a small open economy worsens under DCP

relative to PCP. (ii) MP shocks in the dominant country have strong spillovers to MP in the rest-of-

the world and reduce rest-of-world and global trade, while MP shocks in non-dominant currency

countries generate only weak spillovers and little impact on world trade. Details of the simulations

are provided in an online appendix.

2.5.1     Closing the Model

To evaluate shock transmission, we need to close the model. This requires that in addition to the

equilibrium conditions specified in Section 2 we spell out the processes for interest rates and impose

market clearing conditions. We assume that the nominal interest rate in each country i is set by its

monetary authority and follows a Taylor rule with inertia:


                      ii,t − i∗ = ρm (ii,t−1 − i∗ ) + (1 − ρm ) (φM πi,t + φY ỹi,t ) + εi,t .


       In this expression, φM captures the sensitivity of policy rates to consumer price inflation πi,t =

∆ ln Pi,t , φY measures the sensitivity to the output gap ỹi,t , ρm captures the inertia in setting policy

rates, while the target nominal interest rate is assumed equal to the steady state international bor-

rowing rate i∗ . εi,t evolves according to an AR(1) process, εi,t = ρε εi,t−1 + m          m
                                                                                 i,t where i,t are serially

independently distributed innovations.9
   9
    In Section 4.2 we examine moments of the stationary distribution for a small open economy. As is well known, in
the absence of further assumptions the SOE model just described when solved around a well behaved steady state with
β(1 + i∗ ) = 1 is non-stationary in that the level of real debt and therefore other real variables are permanently changed
even in response to transitory shocks. To induce stationarity we follow Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) and assume the


                                                           17
                                                                                                               P
    Goods, labor and domestic bond market-clearing conditions require Yi,t (ω) =                                   j   (Cij,t (ω) + Xij,t (ω)),

Ni,t = Li,t , and Bi,t (s0 ) = 0, ∀s0 ∈ S. The remaining market clearing conditions depend on whether

we consider a small open economy (SOE) or a large open economy (LOE) environment. In the SOE

case, all foreign variables are taken as exogenous and not impacted by shocks in the SOE. In the LOE
                                                  P $
case, we impose the additional requirement that j Bj,t     = 0.

2.5.2    Calibration

Preference aggregator.              We adopt the Klenow and Willis (2016) functional form for the demand

function Υ(.). This gives rise to the following demand for individual varieties:
                                                                                           σ/
                                                                        σ−1
           Yij,t (ω) ≡ Cij,t (ω) + Xij,t (ω) = γi              1 +  ln     −  ln Zij,t (ω)     (Cj,t + Xj,t )
                                                                         σ

where Zij,t (ω) ≡ Dj,t Pij,t
                         Pj,t
                             (ω)
                                 as previously defined and σ and  are two parameters that determine

the elasticity of demand and its variability as follows:

                                       σ                                                                  
     σij,t (ω) =                 σ−1
                                                       ,           Γij,t (ω) =                       σ−1
                                                                                                                              
                      1 +  ln    σ    −  ln Zij,t (ω)                              σ − 1 −  ln      σ      +  ln Zij,t (ω) .

In a symmetric steady state Zij,t (ω) = (σ − 1)/σ, the elasticity of demand is σ while the elasticity of

the mark-up is Γ = /(σ − 1). Strategic complementarities and variable markups arise when  > 0,

while  = 0 corresponds to the constant elasticity case.


Parameter values.            Table 1 lists parameter values employed in the simulation. The time period is a

quarter. Several parameters are set to values standard in the literature (see e.g., Galı́, 2008). Following

Christiano et al. (2011) we set the wage stickiness parameter δw = 0.85 corresponding roughly to a

year and a half average duration of wages. The steady state elasticity of substitution between varieties
                                                                                                               $            $
dollar interest rate in country i 6= $ is an increasing function of its external debt, i$i,t = i$,t + ψ(e(Bi,t+1 /P$ )−B̄i − 1) + $i,t ,
                                                                                                                      $
where ψ > 0 measures the responsiveness of the dollar rate to the country’s real dollar debt holdings Bi,t+1               /P$ where
                                                  $
P$ is exogenous from the SOE perspective. B̄i is the exogenous steady-state real dollar debt holdings. This is a standard
assumption in the small open economy literature to induce stationarity in a log-linearized environment. Because of the
dependence on aggregate debt individual households do not internalize the effect of their borrowing choices on the interest
rate. In this section we study the impulse response to a small one time shock and consequently the model with or without
the stationarity assumption delivers almost identical results, as also shown by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003).


                                                                  18
σ is assumed in the model to be the same across and within regions. Accordingly, we calibrate to

an average of these elasticities measured in the literature. Specifically, Broda and Weinstein (2006)

obtain a median elasticity estimate of 2.9 for substitution across imported varieties, while Feenstra

et al. (2010) estimate a value close to 1 for the elasticity of substitution across domestic and foreign

varieties. Thus, we set σ = 2.

       To parameterize , which controls the strength of the strategic complementarities, we rely on

estimates from the micro pass-through literature that converges on very similar values for Γ despite

the differences in data and methodology. Following Amiti et al. (2016), Amiti et al. (2014), Gopinath

and Itskhoki (2010) we set Γ = 1. Because in steady state Γ = /(σ − 1) this implies  = 1. The home

bias share is set to 0.7. This implies steady-state spending on imported goods in the consumption

bundle and intermediate input bundle equal to thirty percent.10

2.5.3     Small Open Economy

In this section we contrast the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in a SOE (labeled H)

under different pricing regimes. Fig. 1 plots the impulse response to a 25 basis point exogenous cut in

domestic interest rates. In each sub-figure, we contrast the response under three regimes: DCP, PCP,

and LCP.


Exchange rate and inflation.        Following the monetary shock, domestic interest rates decline (Fig. 1(b))

but less than one-to-one as the exchange rate E$H depreciates by around 0.8% (Fig. 1(d)) raising infla-

tionary pressures on the economy (Fig. 1(c)). This in turn dampens the fall in nominal interest rates

via the monetary policy rule. As seen in Fig. 1(c) the increase in inflation in the case of DCP and

PCP far exceeds that of LCP since exchange rate movements have a smaller impact on the domestic

prices of imported goods when import prices are sticky in local currency.
  10
    For the SOE case we assume exogenous rest-of-the world demand such that exports as a ratio of GDP is 45%. The
specific value of this ratio is not essential to the results.




                                                       19
                             Parameter values for calibrated model

                                                        Parameter      Value
                         Household Preferences
                          Discount factor                   β           0.99
                          Risk aversion                    σc           2.00
                          Frisch elasticity of N            ϕ−1         0.50
                          Disutility of labor               κ           1.00
                          Labor demand elasticity           ϑ           4.00
                           Steady state NFA                B̄ $          0
                         Production
                           Intermediate share               α           2/3
                           (log) Productivity               a            1
                         Demand
                           Elasticity                       σ           2.00
                           Super-elasticity                            1.00
                           Home-bias                        γ           0.70
                         Rigidities
                          Wage                             δw           0.85
                          Price                            δp           0.75
                         Monetary Rule
                          Inertia                          ρm           0.50
                          Inflation sensitivity            φM            1.5
                          Output gap sensitivity           φY          0.50/4
                          Shock persistence                ρε           0.50
                          SS. interest rate                 i∗       (1/β) − 1

                             Table 1: Parameter values for calibrated model.


Terms-of-trade.     The exchange rate depreciation is associated with almost a one-to-one depreci-

ation of the terms-of-trade in the case of PCP and a one-to-one appreciation in the case of LCP

(Fig. 1(e)). In contrast, under DCP, the terms-of-trade depreciate negligibly and remain stable be-

cause both export and import prices are stable in the dominant currency.


Exports and imports.     With stable export and import prices in the dominant currency under DCP,

the home currency price of exports and imports rises with the exchange rate depreciation as depicted

in Figs. 1(f) and 1(g). This in turn generates a significant decline in trade-weighted imports (0.43%),

despite the expansionary effect of monetary policy, and only a modest increase in trade-weighted

exports (0.1%) (Figs. 1(h) and 1(i)). This contrasts with the PCP benchmark that generates a large

increase in exports and with the LCP benchmark that generates an increase in imports (from the


                                                   20
     0                                          0.05                                            0.25                                     0.9

                                                                                                                                         0.8
  -0.05                                            0                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                         0.7

   -0.1                                         -0.05                                           0.15                                     0.6

                                                                                                                                         0.5
  -0.15                                          -0.1                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                         0.4

   -0.2                                         -0.15                                           0.05                                     0.3

                                                                                                                                         0.2
  -0.25                                          -0.2                                             0
                                                                                                                                         0.1

   -0.3                                         -0.25                                       -0.05                                          0
          0       5         10     15      20           0      5         10     15    20               0     5         10     15    20          0       5         10     15    20
                      DCP    PCP   LCP                             DCP    PCP   LCP                              DCP    PCP   LCP                           DCP    PCP   LCP


                  (a) Shock                                 (b) Interest Rates                              (c) Inflation                           (d) Exchange Rate

    0.6                                           0.8                                            0.7                                     1.2

    0.4                                           0.7                                            0.6                                       1

                                                  0.6
    0.2                                                                                          0.5                                     0.8
                                                  0.5
     0                                                                                           0.4                                     0.6
                                                  0.4
   -0.2                                                                                          0.3                                     0.4
                                                  0.3
   -0.4                                                                                          0.2                                     0.2
                                                  0.2

   -0.6                                           0.1                                            0.1                                       0

   -0.8                                            0                                              0                                      -0.2
          0       5         10     15      20           0      5         10     15    20               0     5         10     15    20          0       5         10     15    20
                      DCP    PCP   LCP                             DCP    PCP   LCP                              DCP    PCP   LCP                           DCP    PCP   LCP


              (e) Terms-of-Trade                            (f) Export Price                               (g) Import Price                         (h) Export Quantity

    0.3                                            1                                             0.8                                     0.1

    0.2                                                                                          0.7                                       0

    0.1                                           0.8                                            0.6                                     -0.1

     0                                                                                           0.5                                     -0.2
                                                  0.6
   -0.1                                                                                          0.4                                     -0.3

   -0.2                                                                                          0.3                                     -0.4
                                                  0.4
   -0.3                                                                                          0.2                                     -0.5

   -0.4                                           0.2                                            0.1                                     -0.6

   -0.5                                                                                           0                                      -0.7

   -0.6                                            0                                            -0.1                                     -0.8
          0       5         10     15      20           0      5         10     15    20               0     5         10     15    20          0       5         10     15    20
                      DCP    PCP   LCP                             DCP    PCP   LCP                              DCP    PCP   LCP                           DCP    PCP   LCP


              (i) Import Quantity                              (j) Output                                   (k) Mark-up                         (l) Pricing to Market


                                         Figure 1: Impulse response to a monetary policy shock in a SOE


demand expansion). The decline in imports in the case of PCP is lower than that under DCP because

of export expansion under PCP and the use of imported inputs.


Output.               As depicted in Fig. 1(j) the expansionary impact on output is muted under DCP relative

to PCP, with the lowest impact under LCP. Under DCP, there is an expenditure switching effect from

imports towards domestic output that is absent under LCP, while DCP misses out on the expansion-

ary impact on exports under PCP. Comparing Figs. 1(c) and 1(j), the inflation-output trade-off in


                                                                                           21
response to expansionary monetary policy worsens under DCP relative to both PCP and LCP (where

output does not expand much, but inflation increases the least). In the case of DCP, inflation rises by

0.35% on impact and output by 0.56%, a ratio of 0.4. In the case of PCP, that ratio is almost halved to

0.2/0.8 = 0.25. The ratio is lowest for LCP at 0.07.


Mark-up, Pricing-to-market.               The stability of prices in the dominant currency alongside the rigid-

ity of wages in home currency generates an increase in mark-ups in the case of DCP as depicted in

Fig. 1(k). While this is similar to the case of LCP where mark-ups also rise, there is a more modest

increase in mark-ups in the case of DCP because of the increase in marginal costs arising from the

higher price of imported inputs, an effect absent in the case of LCP. In contrast, mark-ups decline in

the case of PCP, as marginal costs increase alongside a stable price in home currency.

       Lastly, Fig. 1(l) plots the differences in (log) prices at which goods are sold at home relative to

those exported. As is evident, there is a large decline in the relative price of goods sold at home in

the case of LCP and DCP. This is far more muted in the case of PCP, where it arises entirely through

the variable mark-up channel.

2.5.4     Large Open Economies

For the LOE case we consider three economies, U , G and R. These economies are symmetric, except

for international pricing and bond markets in which the the dollar (the currency of U ) is dominant.11

Assuming 100% dollar pricing in international trade, we focus on the asymmetry in the transmission

of monetary policy shocks that originate in U , relative to those in G/R.


Monetary policy shock in dominant currency country.                         We first consider a positive 25 basis point

shock to the nominal interest rate in U . The impulse responses to this monetary tightening are plotted
  11
    We simulate the model also for the case when there is a full set of Arrow-Debreu securities traded. The impulse re-
sponses, qualitatively and quantitatively, are very close. This is intuitive because under perfect foresight, the noncontingent
bond is sufficient to complete the market, i.e., the equilibrium conditions of the cases with complete markets and incomplete
markets with a bond are the same. When an unanticipated shock hits, only the initial period’s equilibrium conditions differ
across the two cases.



                                                              22
in Fig. 2. The outcomes in G and R are the same for all variables, including their exchange rates,

both of which depreciate by 0.65% relative to the dollar on impact.

   The rise in interest rates in U leads to a decline in output (-0.6%, Figure 2(e)) and consumption (-

0.36%, Fig. 2(f)), and a fall in inflation (-0.02%, Fig. 2(d)). The decline in inflation is, however, negligible

(in contrast to PCP) because dollar pricing generates a low pass-through of the dollar appreciation

into the price of imported goods, as seen in Fig. 2(k). On the other hand, the pass-through into

export prices (in the destination currency) is high, as depicted in Fig. 2(l), which in turn generates a

significant decline in exports (Fig. 2(m)). Imports decline because of the decline in overall demand

given MP tightening. The trade balance to GDP, plotted in Fig. 2(i), deteriorates mildly. The terms of

trade are largely unchanged.

   The monetary tightening in U has a larger effect on inflation on impact in G/R (0.2%, Fig. 2(d))

than in U because the depreciation has high pass-through into import prices of the former countries.

This in turn generates an endogenous increase in interest rates (0.15%, Fig. 2(b)) in G/R via the Taylor

rule, leading to a mild contraction in output (-0.03%, Fig. 2(e)) and consumption (-0.13%, Fig. 2(f))

in G/R. Despite the depreciation of the G/R exchange rates relative to the dollar, their exports

to U decline (-0.4%, Fig. 2(n)) because dollar prices to U change by little so there is no significant

positive expenditure switching effect, and the decline in overall demand in U generates a decline in

exports to U . Also, because of dollar pricing, there is a sharp decline in exports from G to R (-0.85%,

Fig. 2(n)) and vice versa. This is because the depreciation of these countries’ currencies relative to the

dollar makes all imports more expensive, leading to a switch in expenditures away from imported

goods. This is then further accentuated by the (mild) negative impact on consumption from the rise

in interest rates in response to the inflationary effect.

   As follows from the previous discussion, a monetary tightening in U and the accompanying

uniform appreciation of the dollar relative to other countries generate a decline in rest-of-world

trade (-0.83%, Fig. 2(o)), defined as the sum of quantities traded between G and R. It also causes a

decline in global trade (-0.73%, Fig. 2(p)), defined as the sum of export quantities from all countries.


                                                      23
    0.3                                                        0.2                                                                     0.7                                                  0.2

   0.25                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                             0.15                                                                                                                         0.15
    0.2                                                                                                                                0.5

                                                               0.1                                                                                                                          0.1
   0.15                                                                                                                                0.4

    0.1                                                                                                                                0.3
                                                             0.05                                                                                                                         0.05

   0.05                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                0                                                                                                                            0
      0                                                                                                                                0.1

  -0.05                                                      -0.05                                                                       0                                                -0.05
          0     5             10              15        20           0          5               10               15          20               0       5         10              15   20           0           5             10              15        20
                                                                                           iU        iG      iR                                                eG        eR
                          U        G          R                                                                                                                                                                        U         G          R


               (a) MP shock                                               (b) Interest rate                                             (c) Exchange rate vs. U                                              (d) Inflation

    0.1                                                        0.1                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      10-3
                                                                                                                                                                                            10
      0                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                0
   -0.1                                                                                                                                -0.1

   -0.2                                                       -0.1                                                                     -0.2                                                  5

   -0.3                                                                                                                                -0.3

   -0.4                                                       -0.2                                                                     -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
   -0.5                                                                                                                                -0.5
                                                              -0.3
   -0.6                                                                                                                                -0.6

   -0.7                                                       -0.4                                                                     -0.7                                                 -5
          0     5             10              15        20           0          5               10               15          20               0       5         10              15   20          0           5             10          15        20
                      yU           yG     yR                                           yU            yG      yR                                           xU        xG        xR                                  BU        BG        BR


                (e) Output                                                (f) Consumption                                                         (g) Interm. inputs                                             (h) Debt

                                                                         10-3                                                      -0.04                                                    0.7
                                                               10
    0.01
                                                                                                                                   -0.05                                                    0.6
                                                                8
   0.005
                                                                                                                                   -0.06                                                    0.5
                                                                6
      0                                                                                                                            -0.07                                                    0.4
                                                                4
                                                                                                                                   -0.08                                                    0.3
  -0.005
                                                                2
                                                                                                                                   -0.09                                                    0.2
   -0.01                                                        0                                                                      -0.1                                                 0.1

  -0.015                                                       -2                                                                  -0.11                                                     0
           0    5             10          15       20                0          5               10           15             20                0       5         10              15   20           0           5             10              15        20
                    TBU       TBG        TBR                                    tot             tot              tot                                       p GU          p RU                                          p UG          p UG
                                                                                      GU              RU               GR


  (i) Trade balance-to-output                                            (j) Terms of trade                                                   (k) U import prices                             (l) G/R import prices

    0.2                                                        0.2                                                                     0.2                                                  0.2

      0                                                         0                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                             0

   -0.2                                                       -0.2                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.2
   -0.4                                                       -0.4                                                                     -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.4
   -0.6                                                       -0.6                                                                     -0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.6
   -0.8                                                       -0.8                                                                     -0.8

     -1                                                         -1                                                                       -1                                                -0.8
          0     5             10              15        20           0          5               10               15          20               0       5         10              15   20           0           5             10              15        20
                          yUG           yUR                                                 yGU            yGR                                                 Trade GR                                                World trade


      (m) U export volume                                      (n) G/R export volume                                                               (o) ROW trade                                       (p) World trade


Figure 2: Impulse responses to a 25 basis point monetary tightening in U . Rest-of-world trade is defined as
the sum of quantities traded between G and R. World trade is defined as the sum of export quantities from all
countries.



                                                                                                                                  24
Monetary policy shock in non-dominant currency country.              We next consider a 25 basis point

monetary tightening in a non-dominant currency country. Without loss of generality, we set this to be

G. As depicted in Fig. 3(c), G’s currency appreciates uniformly relative to U and R on impact, and

by a magnitude similar to that in Fig. 2(c). This is because, despite the endogenous change in interest

rates in each country (Fig. 3(b) differs from Fig. 2(b)), the change in the interest rate differential

between countries is quite similar, which is what matters for the exchange rate change.

   The transmission of the shock to interest rates in G (Fig. 3(b)) is partly muted because the decline

in inflation is endogenously contained through the Taylor rule. The negative impact on inflation of

-0.2% (Fig. 3(d)) contrasts with the much smaller effect of a MP shock in U on U ’s inflation. This

differential response arises from the strong pass-through of the appreciation of G’s currency into

its import prices. The rise in interest rates in G leads to a decline in output (-0.6%, Fig. 3(e)) and

consumption (-0.27%, Fig. 3(f)). While pass-through into import prices (in G’s currency) is high,

pass-through into export prices (in destination currency) is low. Consequently, there is only a small

negative impact on exports from G, in contrast to the large negative impact of a MP tightening in

U on U ’s exports. While exports are not responsive, there is a significant increase in imports into

G from U , and R through the expenditure switching channel following the depreciation of their

currencies relative to G’s. The terms of trade are stable, as in the case of the MP shock in U .

   The monetary tightening in G is associated with an expansion in global trade and almost no

effect on rest-of-world trade (gross trade between U and R). Exports from U and R to G increase

significantly, while exports out of G decline only marginally. Consequently, global trade as a whole

expands. Even though the exchange rate between U and R remains unchanged, the expansionary

effect of the depreciation of their currencies relative to G and the commensurate increase in their

outputs are associated with higher purchases of intermediate inputs from each other. This in turn

results in a small increase in gross trade between the two countries.




                                                  25
    0.3                                                                  0.14                                                                     0.1                                                        0.05

   0.25                                                                  0.12                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                           0.1                                                                   -0.1
    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.05
                                                                         0.08                                                                    -0.2
   0.15
                                                                         0.06                                                                    -0.3                                                         -0.1
    0.1
                                                                         0.04                                                                    -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.15
   0.05
                                                                         0.02                                                                    -0.5
     0                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.2
                                                                            0                                                                    -0.6

  -0.05                                                                  -0.02                                                                   -0.7                                                        -0.25
          0           5              10             15              20           0             5             10              15        20               0       5           10              15          20           0           5             10              15        20
                                                                                                        iU        iG     iR                                                eG        eR
                                U         G         R                                                                                                                                                                                     U         G          R


                     (a) MP shock                                                     (b) Interest rate                                           (c) Exchange rate vs. U                                                       (d) Inflation

    0.1                                                                  0.05                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
     0                                                                      0                                                                      0

                                                                         -0.05
   -0.1                                                                                                                                          -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                          -0.1
   -0.2                                                                                                                                          -0.2
                                                                         -0.15
   -0.3                                                                                                                                          -0.3                                                           0
                                                                          -0.2

   -0.4                                                                  -0.25                                                                   -0.4

   -0.5                                                                   -0.3                                                                   -0.5                                                          -5
          0           5              10             15              20           0             5             10              15        20               0       5           10              15          20          0           5             10          15        20
                            yU           yG     yR                                                  cU            cG     cR                                           xU        xG        xR                                         BU        BG        BR


                      (e) Output                                                     (f) Consumption                                                        (g) Interm. inputs                                                      (h) Debt
                                                                                          -3
                                                                                     10                                                          0.08                                                           0
              10-3                                                          2
     5
                                                                                                                                                 0.07                                                         -0.1
                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                 0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.2
     0
                                                                           -2
                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.3
                                                                           -4                                                                    0.04
    -5                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.03
                                                                           -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.5
   -10
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
                                                                           -8                                                                                                                                 -0.6
                                                                                                                                                 0.01

   -15                                                                    -10                                                                      0                                                          -0.7
         0            5             10         15              20                0             5             10          15           20                0       5           10              15          20           0           5             10              15        20
                          TBU        TBG       TBR                                             tot GU        tot RU          tot GR                            p GU    p RU          p RU        p GR                                     p UG          p RG


  (i) Trade balance-to-output                                                        (j) Terms of trade                                             (k) U/R import prices                                               (l) G import prices

    0.6                                                                  0.02                                                                    0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.15
    0.5                                                                     0                                                                0.025

    0.4                                                                  -0.02                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                                                 0.02
    0.3                                                                  -0.04
                                                                                                                                             0.015                                                           0.05
    0.2                                                                  -0.06
                                                                                                                                                 0.01
    0.1                                                                  -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
     0                                                                    -0.1                                                               0.005

   -0.1                                                                  -0.12                                                                     0                                                         -0.05
          0           5              10             15              20           0             5             10              15        20               0       5           10              15          20           0           5             10              15        20
                      yUG       yUR           yRU        yRG                                             yGU           yGR                                                 Trade UR                                                       World Trade


    (m) U/R export volume                                                       (n) G export volume                                                          (o) ROW trade                                                (p) World trade


Figure 3: Impulse responses to a 25 basis point monetary tightening in G. Rest-of-world trade is defined as
the sum of quantities traded between U and R. World trade is defined as the sum of export quantities from all
countries.



                                                                                                                                            26
3     Global Empirical Evidence

This section tests the model predictions derived in Section 2.4, using bilateral trade volumes and unit

values for a large number of countries. We show that, consistent with DCP, the U.S. dollar plays an

outsized role in driving international trade prices and quantities. We first document that bilateral

terms of trade are essentially uncorrelated with bilateral exchange rates. Next, we demonstrate that

the bilateral (importer vs. exporter) exchange rates matter less than the exchange rate vis-à-vis the

U.S. dollar for pass-through and trade elasticities of the average country in our sample. We also find

the euro to be much less important than the dollar. The effects of the dollar are stronger when the

importing country has a higher fraction of trade invoiced in dollars. The dollar’s role is greatest

for trade between emerging market pairs, consistent with their higher reliance on dollar pricing.

Finally, we show that the overall strength of the U.S. dollar is a key predictor of gross trade and

producer/consumer price inflation in the rest of the world.

3.1   Data

The core of our data set consists of panel data on bilateral trade values and volumes from Comtrade.

UN Comtrade provides detailed annual customs data for a large set of countries at the HS 6-digit

product level with information about the destination country, dollar value, quantity, and weight of

imports and exports. This dataset makes it possible to compute volume changes over time for each

product, and use the value data to infer unit values. Once unit values are calculated, we compute

chained Fisher price indices to aggregate up from the product level to the bilateral country level.

We focus entirely on data for non-commodity goods, except noted otherwise. Given the inherent

difficulty in drawing a line between commodities and non-commodities, we define commodities fairly

broadly as HS chapters 1–27 and 72–83, which comprise animal, vegetable, food, mineral, and metal

products.

    To this global data set we append macroeconomic country aggregates from the World Bank’s

World Development Indicators, financial variables from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis’s FRED


                                                  27
database, and currency invoicing shares from Gopinath (2015). The description of the construction of

the bilateral volume and unit value indices using Comtrade data and of other databases is relegated

to the online appendix.

3.2   Terms of Trade and Exchange Rates

We first relate bilateral terms of trade to bilateral exchange rates using panel regressions (testable

implication 1). In this subsection, a cross-sectional unit is defined to be an unordered country pair,

so that both trade flows between two countries i and j are associated with the cross-sectional unit

{i, j}. Recall that pij denotes the (log) price of goods exported from country i to country j measured

in currency j, eij the (log) bilateral exchange rate between country i and country j expressed as the

price of currency i in terms of currency j and totij = pij − pji − eij the (log) bilateral terms of trade,

defined as the ratio of import prices to export prices (measured in the same currency). Moreover, let

ppiij denote the (log) ratio of the producer price index (PPI) in country i divided by PPI in country

j, with indices expressed in the same currency.

   We consider regressions of the following form:
                                           2
                                           X                     2
                                                                 X
                   ∆totij,t = λij + δt +         βk ∆eij,t−k +         θk ∆ppiij,t−k + εij,t ,        (20)
                                           k=0                   k=0

where λij and δt are dyad (i.e., country pair) and time fixed effects. Regression Eq. (20) relates the

growth rate of the bilateral terms of trade to the growth rate of the bilateral nominal exchange

rate (and lags). As discussed in Section 2.4, if exporting firms set prices in their local currencies as

in PCP and prices are sticky, the contemporaneous exchange rate coefficient β0 should equal 1. If

instead exporting firms set prices in the destination currency as in LCP and prices are sticky, the

contemporaneous exchange rate coefficient should be −1. If most prices are invoiced in U.S. dollars

and are sticky in nominal terms, the coefficients βk should be close to zero. As indicated in Eq. (20),

some of our specifications control for lags 0–2 of the growth rate of the ratio of PPI in both countries,

since firms’ optimal reset prices should fluctuate with domestic cost conditions.



                                                     28
                                      Terms of trade and exchange rates

                                                  unweighted                trade-weighted
                                                 (1)       (2)                (3)      (4)
                                                ∆totij,t ∆totij,t          ∆totij,t ∆totij,t

                           ∆eij,t              0.0369***     -0.00938     0.0813*** 0.0218
                                               (0.00863)     (0.0130)      (0.0235) (0.0317)

                           PPI                    no            yes           no          yes
                           R-squared             0.008         0.011         0.028       0.042
                           Observations         24,270        19,847        24,270       19,847
                           Dyads                 1,347         1,200         1,347       1,200

Table 2: The first (resp., last) two columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. The number of dyads is about half that in Table 3 since
here the two ordered country tuples (i, j) and (j, i) are collapsed into one cross-sectional unit {i, j}. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


       We consider both unweighted and trade-weighted regressions. To obtain trade weights, for each

dyad and year, we compute the share of world non-commodities trade value (in dollars) attributable

to that dyad. Then, for each dyad, we compute the average share across the years 1992–2015.

       In line with DCP, we find that bilateral exchange rates are virtually uncorrelated with bilateral

terms of trade. The results of the panel regressions are shown in Table 2. If we do not control for

relative PPI, the regression results indicate that the contemporaneous effect of the exchange rate

on the terms of trade is positive. While the sign is consistent with PCP, the magnitude is not, as

the 95% confidence interval equals [0.02, 0.05] in the unweighted regression, and [0.04 , 0.13] in

the weighted regression.12 The coefficients on the lags (not reported) are also small in magnitude.

When controlling for relative PPI, the point estimates of the coefficients on the bilateral exchange

rate shrink further toward zero, and confidence intervals remain narrow. Hence, our results lend

strong support to DCP: the terms of trade are unresponsive to bilateral exchange rates.

       Although the lack of correlation could in principle be consistent with a world of 50% PCP and
  12
   Attenuation bias is not a worry in this context, since the explanatory variables of interest (exchange rates) are precisely
measured, except perhaps for time aggregation issues at the annual frequency.




                                                             29
50% LCP, the next subsections refute that possibility. In addition, while the lack of correlation is

consistent with any currency being a dominant currency, we provide evidence next that the major

dominant currency is indeed the dollar. The stability of the terms of trade for the average country

in our sample cannot be explained by a model with flexible prices and strategic complementarities

in pricing as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and Itskhoki and Mukhin (2017) because, as we show

next, the import pass-through into destination country prices at-the-dock is high, contrary to the

presence of strong complementarities in pricing. Lastly, online appendix A.2.1 demonstrates that the

terms of trade are nearly uncorrelated with the bilateral exchange rate across all advanced/emerging

economy trade flows.

3.3    Exchange Rate Pass-through Into Prices

Next, we relate international prices and exchange rates (testable implication 2). Exchange rate pass-

through regressions are reduced-form regressions that relate price changes to exchange rate changes

and other control variables relevant for pricing. We follow the literature and estimate the standard

pass-through regression as described in Burstein and Gopinath (2014). In the rest of this section, the

cross-sectional unit is an ordered country pair (i, j). We estimate
                                          2
                                          X                     2
                                                                X
                 ∆pij,t = λij + δt +            βk ∆eij,t−k +         βk$ ∆e$j,t−k                                (21)
                                          k=0                   k=0
                                2
                                X                          2
                                                           X
                            +         ηk ∆eij,t−k × Sj +         ηk$ ∆e$j,t−k × Sj + θ0 Xi,t + εij,t ,
                                k=0                        k=0

where λij and δt are dyadic and time fixed effects. Xi,t are other country i controls, namely the

change in the (log) producer price index of the exporting country i measured in currency i (and two

lags).13 We have modified the textbook pass-through regression by including the dollar exchange

rate, i.e., the log price e$j of a U.S. dollar in currency j, alongside the bilateral exchange rate, as

suggested in Section 2.4. Lastly, we interact the bilateral and dollar exchange rates with the importing
  13
    Online appendix A.2.4 shows that our results are robust to adding importer PPI and GDP growth as additional control
variables.



                                                           30
                                 Exchange rate pass-through into prices

                                           unweighted                          trade-weighted
                                  (1)         (2)      (3)               (4)         (5)      (6)
                                 ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t   ∆pij,t            ∆pij,t     ∆pij,t    ∆pij,t

               ∆eij,t           0.757***    0.164***      0.209***     0.765***    0.345***     0.445***
                                (0.0132)    (0.0126)      (0.0169)     (0.0395)    (0.0449)     (0.0336)
               ∆eij,t × Sj                              -0.0841***                             -0.253***
                                                         (0.0240)                               (0.0482)
               ∆e$j,t                       0.781***      0.565***                 0.582***      0.120*
                                            (0.0143)      (0.0283)                 (0.0377)     (0.0622)
               ∆e$j,t × Sj                                0.348***                              0.756***
                                                          (0.0326)                              (0.0796)

               R-squared         0.356       0.398          0.515        0.339       0.371        0.644
               Observations      46,820      46,820        34,513       46,820      46,820       34,513
               Dyads             2,647       2,647          1,900        2,647       2,647        1,900

Table 3: The first (resp., last) three columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of exporter ∆PPI, and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


country’s dollar invoicing share Sj . We consider different versions of this general specification,

omitting dollar exchange rates and/or interaction terms.

       As a benchmark, the estimates from bilateral pass-through regressions on bilateral exchange rates

(i.e., omitting the dollar exchange rates and interaction terms) are reported in columns (1) and (4) of

Table 3. The two columns correspond to unweighted and trade-weighted regressions, respectively.14

According to the regression estimates, when country j’s currency depreciates relative to country i

by 10%, import prices in country j rise by 8%, suggestive of close to complete pass-through at the

one year horizon.15 The second and third lags (not reported) are economically less important.

       Columns (2) and (5) report estimates from regressions that include the dollar exchange rate in

addition to the bilateral one. Including the dollar exchange rate sharply reduces the relevance of the
  14
      Henceforth, the trade weights are given by the average (across the years 1992–2015) share of world non-commodities
trade value attributable to an ordered dyad (i, j).
   15
      With year fixed effects this should be interpreted as fluctuations in excess of world annual fluctuations.



                                                          31
bilateral exchange rate. It knocks the coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate from 0.76 to 0.16 in

the unweighted regression, and from 0.77 to 0.34 in the weighted regression. Instead, almost all of

the effect is absorbed by the dollar exchange rate.16 Notice that, due to our inclusion of time fixed

effects, the apparent dominance of the dollar cannot be an artifact of special conditions that may

apply in times when the dollar appreciates or depreciates against all other currencies, for example

due to global recessions or flight to safety in asset markets. Online appendix A.2.4 shows that our

results are robust to the choice of time sample, including removing the post-2008 period.

       The cross-dyad heterogeneity in pass-through coefficients is related to the propensity to invoice

imports in dollars. Columns (3) and (6) interact the dollar and bilateral exchange rates with the share

of invoicing in dollars at the importer country level, as in regression Eq. (21). Notice that we do

not have data on the fraction of bilateral trade invoiced in dollars, so we use the importer’s country-

level share as a proxy. As expected, the import invoicing share plays an economically and statistically

significant role for the dollar pass-through. Depending on whether we use trade weights or not, the

regression results indicate that increasing the dollar invoicing share by 10 percentage points causes

the contemporaneous dollar pass-through to increase by 3.5–7.6 percentage points. The R2 values

of the panel regressions are substantially improved by adding the invoicing share interaction terms.

       Figs. 4 and 5 depict the regression results visually in the form of impulse response functions.

Fig. 4 shows the impulse responses of the bilateral import price level. The top row shows unweighted

regression results, the bottom row uses trade weights as described above. The left column shows the

bilateral pass-through in the specifications without the dollar exchange rate, while the right column

compares the bilateral and dollar pass-throughs in specifications with both exchange rates. Fig. 5

illustrates the pass-through heterogeneity as a function of the invoicing share Sj , as implied by the

regression specifications with interactions. The figure focuses on three dollar shares: Sj = 0.13

(corresponding to Switzerland), Sj = 0.59 (Turkey), and Sj = 0.88 (Argentina). As depicted in
  16
     In the literature, unilateral exchange rate pass-through is sometimes estimated using a Vector Error Correction Model
(VECM) that allows for cointegration between price levels and exchange rates. However, Burstein and Gopinath (2014, p.
403) find VECM results to be highly unstable across specifications, and this issue is likely to be compounded by measurement
error in our bilateral data.


                                                            32
Fig. 5, dollar pass-through is highest for Argentina with the largest dollar invoicing share and the

least for Switzerland with its low dollar share. In the trade-weighted regressions (bottom row of

Fig. 5), dollar pass-through is lower than bilateral pass-through for Switzerland, and that ranking is

flipped for the case of Turkey and Argentina.

       Online appendix A.2.1 shows that dollar dominance holds up qualitatively across flows between

different country groups, advanced or emerging. Although flows between emerging markets exhibit

stronger dollar dominance, our results are not limited to flows involving emerging markets.17

3.4      Trade Volume Elasticity

Having demonstrated the outsized role of the U.S. dollar for international prices, we now show that

the dollar also dominates the bilateral exchange rate when predicting bilateral trade volumes (testable

implication 3). Table 4 shows the results from panel regressions of trade volumes on bilateral and

dollar exchange rates. Let yij denote the log volume of goods exported from country i to country

j. Our volume regressions take the same form as in the price pass-through regression, Eq. (21),

except that the dependent variable is now the log growth rate ∆yij,t of bilateral trade volumes, and

the extra controls Xj,t (here indexed by j rather than i) consist of the log growth rate of real GDP

(and two lags) for the importing country j. These regressions do not capture structural demand

elasticity parameters, since we do not attempt to control for all relevant relative prices, and the

importer’s GDP growth is an imperfect proxy for the level of import demand. In particular, we cannot

simply add importer × year fixed effects since these would absorb the dollar exchange rate. Hence

our results will invariably conflate expenditure switching and shifts in aggregate import demand.

The correct interpretation is to view these regressions as predictive relationships that may inform

potential structural estimation exercises. Nevertheless, we will refer to the coefficients on exchange

rates as “trade elasticities” for simplicity.

       The volume regressions underline the dominant role played by the U.S. dollar. As in the case of
  17
   These facts are in line with the results in Table 3 for regressions that interact with the dollar invoicing share, since
emerging markets tend to have higher dollar invoicing shares.



                                                            33
                                                                                         Average price pass-through
                                                                  unweighted, bilateral only                      unweighted, bilateral vs. USD



                                                    1
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                            Bilateral
                                                                trade−weighted, bilateral only                   trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                                            USD
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                         0                    1                      2       0                     1                    2
                                                                                              years after shock

Figure 4: Impulse responses of bilateral price level to bilateral eij,t and USD e$j,t exchange rates. Based on the
regressions in Table 3 without interactions. Top row: unweighted regression, bottom row: trade-weighted. Left
column: specifications (1) and (4), right column: specifications (2) and (5). Error bars: 95% confidence intervals,
clustering by dyad.

                                                                 Price pass-through as a function of invoicing share
                                                              unweighted, S=.13                unweighted, S=.59                 unweighted, S=.88
                                                    1
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                            Bilateral
                                                             trade−weighted, S=.13            trade−weighted, S=.59             trade−weighted, S=.88
                                                                                                                                                            USD
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                         0             1             2    0              1              2   0            1              2
                                                                                              years after shock

Figure 5: Impulse responses of bilateral price level to bilateral eij,t and USD e$j,t exchange rates, as a function of
importer’s dollar invoicing share Sj . Based on regression specifications (3) and (6) in Table 3 with interactions.
Top row: unweighted regression, bottom row: trade-weighted. Error bars: 95% confidence intervals, clustering
by dyad.


                                                                                                                 34
                           Trade elasticity with respect to exchange rate

                                         unweighted                       trade-weighted
                               (1)          (2)      (3)            (4)         (5)       (6)
                              ∆yij,t       ∆yij,t   ∆yij,t         ∆yij,t      ∆yij,t    ∆yij,t

           ∆eij,t            -0.119***    -0.0310*    -0.0765*   -0.0901***    -0.0163     -0.0971**
                              (0.0139)    (0.0160)    (0.0403)    (0.0182)     (0.0236)     (0.0380)
           ∆eij,t × Sj                                 0.118*                                0.124**
                                                      (0.0684)                              (0.0519)
           ∆e$j,t                         -0.186***   -0.140**                 -0.155***    -0.131**
                                           (0.0250)   (0.0600)                  (0.0277)    (0.0658)
           ∆e$j,t × Sj                                -0.0903                              -0.00581
                                                      (0.0871)                             (0.0846)

           R-squared          0.069        0.071      0.074         0.172       0.179       0.215
           Observations       52,272       52,272     38,582       52,272       52,272      38,582
           Dyads              2,807        2,807      2,014         2,807       2,807       2,014

Table 4: The first (resp., last) three columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of importer ∆GDP, and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


the price pass-through regressions, adding the dollar exchange rate to the volume regressions knocks

down the coefficient on the bilateral exchange rate by a substantial amount. The contemporaneous

elasticity for the dollar exchange rate is about -0.19 to -0.13 across specifications, while the elastic-

ity for the bilateral exchange rate is an order of magnitude smaller. Unlike the price pass-through

regressions, the interactions of exchange rate changes with the importer’s dollar invoicing share are

mostly imprecisely estimated here.

   Fig. 6 visually depicts the regression results in the form of impulse responses. The figure shows

the response of the level of bilateral trade volume to exchange rate shocks. The right column shows

results from regressions with both bilateral and dollar exchange rates. It is apparent from the figure

that the dollar exchange rate has a much more negative impact effect than the bilateral exchange rate.

Yet, the figure also shows that the effect of either exchange rate on the level is essentially neutral at

horizons of 1–2 years. One potential explanation is that the ratio of import prices and domestic prices


                                                       35
                                                                                    Average trade elasticity
                                                                unweighted, bilateral only              unweighted, bilateral vs. USD




                                                    .4
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    .2
                                                    0
                                                    −.2




                                                                                                                                               Bilateral
                                                              trade−weighted, bilateral only           trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                               USD
                                                    .4
                                                    .2
                                                    0
                                                    −.2




                                                          0                 1                  2   0                  1                    2
                                                                                       years after shock

Figure 6: Impulse responses of bilateral volume to bilateral eij,t and USD e$j,t exchange rates. Based on re-
gressions in Table 4 without interactions. Top row: unweighted regression, bottom row: trade-weighted. Left
column: specifications (1) and (4), right column: specifications (2) and (5). Error bars: 95% confidence intervals,
clustering by dyad.


adjust with a lag to exchange rate changes, implying that a year after the initial shock, relative prices

faced by consumers are mostly unchanged compared to the period before the shock. However, we

show in online appendix A.2.4 that this particular finding is driven by the early years in our sample,

as results on the 2002–2015 subsample point toward a large and persistent negative effect of dollar

appreciations on the volume of bilateral trade.

    Online appendix A.2.1 confirms that the contemporaneous trade elasticity of the dollar dom-

inates the bilateral exchange rate elasticity in most breakdowns of emerging/advanced economy

trade flows. Overall, the data indicates that a substantially negative dollar elasticity, coupled with a

smaller bilateral exchange rate elasticity, is a common feature to emerging and advanced economy

trade flows.




                                                                                                       36
                                                            Price pass-through: Flows to and from U.S.
                                                            exports from U.S.                       imports to U.S.



            cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                   1
                                                   .5
                                                   0




                                                        0          1                   2   0              1           2
                                                                                years after shock

Figure 7: Impulse response of bilateral price level to bilateral exchange rate eij,t . Left column: U.S. exports,
right column: U.S. imports. Error bars: 95% confidence intervals, clustering by dyad and applying small-sample
“LZ2-BM” adjustment in Imbens and Kolesár (2016).


3.5    Trade Flows to and from the U.S.

The data is consistent with an additional key prediction of DCP: trade flows with the U.S. are special

(testable implications 2-3). Specifically, we show that bilateral exchange rate pass-through into U.S.

export prices (in the destination currency) is complete and immediate, while U.S. import prices (in

dollars) are insensitive to bilateral exchange rates. Moreover, U.S. import volumes are insensitive to

the bilateral exchange rate, as predicted by theory.

   Fig. 7 shows impulse response functions of import prices for goods flowing from or to the U.S.

These figures are obtained from panel regressions as in the baseline unweighted fixed effects speci-

fications in Section 3.3, except we drop the dollar exchange rate (but preserve the time fixed effects).

Consistent with the very high fraction of U.S. exports and imports being invoiced in dollars (97%

and 93%, respectively), bilateral exchange rate pass-through into prices is 100% on impact for U.S.

exports and close to zero for U.S. imports.

   Table 5 confirms that U.S. import volumes are insensitive to bilateral exchange rates, unlike the

imports of the rest of the world from the U.S. We run a fixed effects regression of trade volume

growth on lagged bilateral exchange rates, importer GDP, and year fixed effects, as in specifications



                                                                                     37
                               Trade elasticity: U.S. vs. non-U.S. imports

                                                  unweighted       trade-weighted
                                                     (1)                 (2)
                                                    ∆yij,t              ∆yij,t

                              ∆eij,t                -0.121***         -0.107***
                                                     (0.0141)          (0.0194)
                              ∆eij,t × ImpUS         0.124***          0.117***
                                                     (0.0329)          (0.0318)

                              R-squared               0.069              0.180
                              Observations            52,272            52,272
                              Dyads                   2,807              2,807

Table 5: “ImpUS” is in indicator for whether importing country is the U.S. Both regressions include two ∆ER
lags, lags 0–2 of importer ∆GDP, and time FE, as well as interactions of these variables with ImpUS. S.e. clustered
by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


(1) and (4) of Table 4. Here, however, we additionally interact all right-hand side variables with an

indicator for whether the importing country is the U.S. When the importing country is not the U.S.,

the within-year bilateral trade volume response is estimated at -0.12% (unweighted) following a 1%

depreciation of the importer currency, similar to the all-country regression in Table 4. In contrast, we

find U.S. imports to be completely insensitive to the bilateral exchange rate on impact, with an im-

plied contemporaneous import volume response of 0.003% following a 1% depreciation of the dollar.

The difference between the contemporaneous import elasticity for the U.S. vs. that for the rest of the

world is highly significant. Hence, the data indicates that U.S. trade balance adjustment following

exchange rate movements occurs primarily through exports rather than imports, a consequence of

the predominance of dollar invoicing in U.S. trade.

3.6    Effect of U.S. Dollar on Rest-of-World Trade and Inflation

Underscoring the quantitative significance of DCP, we argue now that the dollar has substantial

predictive power for aggregate trade among countries in the rest of the world (testable implication

4). That is, the dollar is important for predicting global trade, even when excluding countries’ direct


                                                        38
trade with the U.S. Specifically, a 1% U.S. dollar appreciation against all other currencies in the world

predicts a 0.6% decline within a year in the volume of total trade between countries in the rest of the

world, holding constant various proxies for the global business cycle.

   We measure the elasticity of rest-of-world trade volume to the dollar by aggregating up from

our richest bilateral panel regression specification. This produces results that exploit our panel data

set, unlike a simple annual time series regression of global trade on an effective dollar exchange rate

index. Consider the following regression model with bilateral, dollar, and euro exchange rates, as

well as interactions with dollar and euro import invoicing shares:


                                           βk + ηk (1 − Sj − Sje ) ∆eij,t−k
                                      P2                           
                           ∆yij,t =      k=0

                                      + 2k=0 βk$ + ηk$ Sj ∆e$j,t−k
                                       P                 


                                      + 2k=0 βke + ηke Sje ∆eej,t−k
                                       P                   


                                      + λij + θ0 Xij,t + εij,t .                                      (22)


Here Sj and Sje are the importer’s country-level dollar and euro invoicing shares, respectively, and

λij is a dyad fixed effect. Because we are interested in the effect of a dollar appreciation against all

other currencies, we do not control for time fixed effects. Instead, we control for several proxies for

the global business cycle, as described in online appendix A.2.3, except here we exclude world export

volume growth. Xij,t also includes lags 0–2 of importer real GDP growth.

   The object of interest is the response of rest-of-world (i.e., ex-U.S.) aggregate trade volume to a

1% appreciation of the dollar relative to all other currencies, holding constant the global business

cycle. As in Eq. (19) of Section 2.4, we consider the weighted average trade elasticity to a dollar

appreciation, where we average over all trading pairs in the world, excluding the U.S. Consistent

with the focus on importers in the rest of this section, our empirical specification in Eq. (22) assumes

that the trade elasticity is heterogeneous across importers but homogeneous across exporters. That

is, in the notation of Eq. (19), the trade elasticity at lag k with respect to the dollar exchange rate is

given by σij = σj = βk$ +ηk$ Sj . Let wj denote country j’s total non-commodity import value from all

                                                      39
countries except the U.S. in some reference year, normalized so that j6=$ wj = 1.18 Then the ceteris
                                                                    P

paribus effect of a 1% dollar appreciation on j6=$ wj ∆yij,t , the weighted growth of rest-of-world
                                              P

imports from destination i, is given by

                                               $
                                                   + ηk$ Sj ) = βk$ + ηk$
                                  P                                         P
                                     j6=$ wj (βk                             j6=$ wj Sj


k years after the appreciation, and this quantity is by assumption the same for each exporter i other

than the U.S. Thus, to measure the response of rest-of-world aggregate imports to a dollar appre-

ciation, we simply use the estimated Eq. (22) to compute the impulse response of trade volume for
                                                                P
an importer j whose U.S. dollar invoicing share happens to equal j6=$ wj Sj , the weighted average

dollar invoicing share.19

       Fig. 8 shows that rest-of-world aggregate import volume contracts markedly following an ap-

preciation of the dollar against all other currencies. A 1% ceteris paribus dollar appreciation leads

to a 0.6% contraction in rest-of-world trade volume within the year (regardless of whether we use

unweighted or trade-weighted regressions), and this contractionary effect persists out to at least two

years. Recall that the regression controls for various proxies for the global business and financial

cycles. While our regression specification cannot be interpreted structurally, the magnitude of the

predictive effect underscores the importance of the dollar’s role in world trade.

       Finally, country-level regressions reveal significant dollar pass-through to foreign consumer and

producer prices that increases with countries’ dollar invoicing share in imports. Earlier work by

Gopinath (2015) provides back-of-the-envelope calculations of dollar exchange rate spillovers on

foreign consumer and producer prices based on estimated country-level import price pass-through

and the import content of consumption. We take a more direct approach and regress countries’ CPI

or PPI on the dollar exchange rate as well as its interaction with the dollar invoicing share in imports

using a specification with country and time fixed effects, detailed in online appendix A.2.2. We find
  18
      “All countries” refers to the world aggregate in Comtrade, not only the countries in our regression sample. Note that
the weight wj is different from the weights used in the trade-weighted regressions in Table 4 and elsewhere.
   19
      In practice, wjPdepends on the year in which import values are measured, but online appendix A.2.4 shows that the
weighted average j6=$ wj Sj fluctuates little around a mean of 0.40 in the 2002–2015 sample, so we use that value.


                                                            40
          Response of rest-of-world aggregate trade to USD appreciation, 2002–2015
                                                                             unweighted




                                                               −.4
                        cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                               −.6
                                                               −.8
                                                               −1

                                                                            trade−weighted
                                                               −.4
                                                               −.6
                                                               −.8
                                                               −1




                                                                     0              1        2
                                                                         years after shock

Figure 8: Impulse responses of rest-of-world aggregate trade volume to a 1% U.S. dollar appreciation against all
other currencies, holding constant all other exchange rates and the global business cycle. Top row: unweighted
regression, bottom row: trade-weighted. Error bars: 95% confidence intervals, clustering by dyad.


the average pass-through of the dollar into CPI (resp., PPI) to be 11% (resp., 28%) within the year, and

is higher for countries with a higher dollar invoicing share of imports.

3.7    Robustness

Our results are robust to excluding the global financial crisis and to controlling for the euro exchange

rate. Online appendix A.2.4 documents that our headline results are not driven by the global finan-

cial crisis starting in 2008. The estimated average exchange rate pass-through and trade elasticity

computed on the 1992–2007 sample are almost identical to our baseline Figs. 4 and 6. When comput-

ing the effect of a uniform U.S. dollar appreciation on rest-of-world trade as in Section 3.6, we find

even stronger effects during the pre-crisis period 2002–2007. Online appendix A.2.3 shows that the

euro exchange rate is much less quantitatively important than the dollar exchange rate in price and

volume regressions.




                                                                               41
4     Firm Level Empirical Evidence

We now move from aggregate bilateral data on trade volume and value to firm level customs data on

exports and imports for a small open economy, Colombia. While the global evidence has the virtue

of covering 91% of world trade, it lacks granularity and the indices are at the annual frequency. To

assuage any concerns that our findings may be contaminated by composition effects this section

demonstrates that the findings in Section 3 hold when we define prices and quantities at the firm-

10-digit product-country (origin or destination)-quarter (or year) level. In addition we show that

the DCP model matches the dynamic path of price pass-through in the data unlike the competing

paradigms. The details of the data are relegated to online appendix A.3.

    The Colombian currency (peso) is a commodity currency and fluctuations in its value are strongly

negatively correlated with fluctuations in commodity prices.20 Fig. 9 displays the relation between

the Colombian peso (peso price of the dollar, solid line) and the overall (log) terms-of-trade (dashed

line), defined as the log difference between import and export prices. This terms-of-trade is driven

primarily by commodity prices. The correlation between the two series is 0.62 and a regression of

the overall terms of trade on the peso/dollar exchange rate yields a coefficient on the exchange rate

of 1.15 (R2 of 0.38). If we focus instead on the non-commodity terms-of-trade (dots-and-dash line)

we find that the terms-of-trade is far more stable with a regression coefficient of 0.33 (R2 of 0.36),

consistent with the predictions of the model under DCP.21

    In the rest of our empirical analysis we focus on manufactured goods, consistent with the ap-

proach in Section 3, excluding products in the petrochemicals and basic metals industries. We follow

the ISIC Rev. 3.1 classification to define which products are manufactures.22
   20
      The Colombian peso officially switched to a floating status in 1999. Commodity prices can be considered as exogenous
to the economy: while mining output makes up 58.4% of total exports for Colombia, it is small relative to world commodity
markets. For example, Colombia’s oil production was 1.1% of world oil production in 2014.
   21
      The TOT(manuf) is constructed by excluding ‘traditional’ exports/imports such as oil, coal, metals, coffee, bananas or
flowers. Although it does not consist exclusively of manufactured goods, these represent more than 90 percent of the basket.
   22
      As a robustness check we also use the subsample of differentiated products only (instead of the full set of manufactures
presented) constructed using the classification of goods by Rauch (1999). This is available in online appendix A.4.




                                                             42
                             Exchange rate and terms of trade for Colombia




                                .2
                                0
                                -.2
                                -.4
                                -.6




                                      2005q3    2008q1       2010q3       2013q1         2015q3
                                                             TIME

                                                 ER         TOT (Manuf)            TOT



Figure 9: Data from Banco de la República. TOT is calculated using the PPI of all imports and exports. TOT
(Manuf) is calculated using the PPI for ‘non-traditional’ imports and exports, that exclude products such as oil,
coal and metals, and include mostly manufactured goods.



4.1       Results

We estimate the same pass-through regression of exchange rates into import and export prices (mea-

sured in pesos) as in Section 3, Eq. (21), omitting interaction terms. We include the contemporaneous

effect and eight lags of the quarterly log change in the nominal exchange rate of the peso relative to the

dollar regardless of origin or destination country. We include fixed effects by firm-industry-country

and quarter dummies to account for seasonality.23 The cumulative estimates ks=0 βs and two stan-
                                                                               P

dard error bands with standard errors clustered at the quarter-year level are plotted in Fig. 10. It re-

ports the pass-through into export and import prices (columns) to/from dollarized and non-dollarized

countries (rows).

       Consistent with DCP, all pass-throughs start out close to one and decline slowly over time. This

is the case for both export and import prices and for dollar and non-dollar destinations/origins. In

the case of export prices to dollar destinations the contemporaneous estimate is 0.84 and then the
  23
    We also estimate the regression controlling for contemporaneous and eight lags of quarterly log changes in the producer
price index in Colombia and in the origin/destination country and our estimates are practically unchanged.



                                                            43
                                                                      Exchange rate pass-through into prices
                                                         export prices, dollarized destination                    import prices, dollarized origin

                                              1
                                              .8
       cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                              .6
                                              .4
                                              .2




                                                       export prices, non−dollarized destination              import prices, non−dollarized origin
                                              1
                                              .8
                                              .6
                                              .4
                                              .2




                                                   0           2          4            6            8   0           2            4           6       8
                                                                                           quarters after shock

Figure 10: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices, to/from dollarized and non-dollarized
economies. All regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects and quarterly dummies. 95% confidence
intervals shown with s.e. clustered at the quarter-year level. The sample includes all manufactured products
excluding petrochemicals and basic metals industries. Dollarized economies include USA, Puerto Rico, Panama,
Ecuador and El Salvador. Non-dollarized economies include all other partners, except economies with currencies
pegged to the dollar and Venezuela.



cumulative pass-through slowly decreases after two years to 0.56. The estimates are similar in the

case of non-dollar destinations. In the case of import prices from dollar origins pass-through is very

high, around 1 and the cumulative effect declines to 0.8. For non-dollar origins the estimated pass-

through starts at around 0.87 and decreases to 0.49 after two years.

   The second set of regressions replicates the regressions in Section 3 by aggregating data to the an-

nual frequency (the unit of observation remains firm-10-digit product-country-origin/destination).

The estimates are reported in Table 6 for the various specifications. The results re-confirm the find-

ings in Section 3 of the important role of the dollar in pass-through regressions. Robustness checks

are presented in online appendix A.4.

   Table 7 reports the results from annual quantity regressions. Starting with the dollarized economies,


                                                                                                   44
                       Exchange rate pass-through into prices, annual data

                               dollarized economies               non-dollarized economies
                                 (1)         (2)              (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)
                                ∆pH,t       ∆pH,t            ∆pH,t    ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t    ∆pH,t
                                                      Exports

             ∆eiH,t                                      0.673***     0.0616    0.523***    0.0726
                                                         (0.0937)    (0.0474)    (0.120)   (0.0452)
             ∆e$H,t            0.696***     0.828***                 0.667***              0.633***
                               (0.0331)     (0.0355)                 (0.0507)              (0.0602)

             PPI                 no           yes           no         no         yes         yes
             R-squared          0.288        0.290         0.303      0.305      0.308       0.310
             Observations      169,792      159,041       206,226    206,226    139,318     139,318
                                                    Imports

             ∆eiH,t                                      0.750***    0.315***   0.506***   0.275***
                                                          (0.116)    (0.0777)    (0.127)   (0.0837)
             ∆e$H,t            0.977***     1.007***                 0.528***              0.534***
                               (0.0177)     (0.0309)                 (0.0650)              (0.0510)

             PPI                 no           yes           no         no         yes         yes
             R-squared          0.225        0.225         0.287      0.290      0.291       0.293
             Observations      529,584      529,260       931,993    931,993    808,304     808,304

Table 6: All regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e. clustered at the year level. The sample
includes all manufactured products excluding petrochemicals and basic metals industries. The results are robust
to the inclusion of the peso/euro exchange rate as a potential alternative dominant currency, and to the inclusion
of two ∆ER lags. If we limit the sample to differentiated products only, results are qualitatively unchanged. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                        45
                  Trade elasticity with respect to exchange rate, annual data

                                              dollarized       non-dollarized
                                                  (1)          (2)        (3)
                                                ∆yH,t         ∆yH,t     ∆yH,t
                                                   Exports

                             ∆eiH,t                          -0.763***   -0.0553
                                                              (0.212)    (0.314)
                             ∆e$H,t             -0.425                   -1.007**
                                                (0.370)                   (0.322)

                             Euro ER             yes           no          yes
                             R-squared          0.225         0.250       0.245
                             Observations      159,041       139,318     120,316
                                                   Imports

                             ∆eiH,t                          -0.703***    -0.319
                                                              (0.217)     (0.246)
                             ∆e$H,t            -0.959***                 -0.922***
                                                (0.407)                   (0.245)

                             Euro ER             yes           no          yes
                             R-squared          0.184         0.236       0.254
                             Observations      529,276       808,409     519,002

Table 7: All regressions control for PPI, importer GDP, and Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e. clustered
at the year level. See also caption for Table 6. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


the pass-through to export quantities is insignificantly different from zero. On the other hand, for

imports from dollarized economies there is a pronounced decline in quantities imported across all

specifications. In the case of the non-dollarized economies, the decline in imports is also signifi-

cantly negative and, importantly, the relevant exchange rate is the peso/dollar exchange rates as

opposed to the bilateral exchange rate. For exports we again have that the relevant exchange rate is

the peso/dollar exchange rate.




                                                      46
4.2      Matching Model and Data

In this section we simulate data for a small open economy calibrated to match the Colombian econ-

omy (denoted H) that trades with the dominant currency area (denoted $ in this section) and the

rest-of-the world R. The model is identical to the one described in Section 2 except that we modify

the budget constraint slightly to include shocks to oil earnings. Specifically the budget constraint

takes the form:


              Pj,t Cj,t + E$j,t (1 + i$j,t−1 )Bj,t
                                               $                                                 $
                                                   + Bj,t = Wj,t (h)Nj,t (h) + Πj,t + E$j,t Bj,t+1
                                                              X
                                                            +      Qj,t (s0 )Bj,t+1 (s0 ) + E$j,t ζt .
                                                                    s0 ∈S

where ζt is the dollar value of the endowment of oil. A decline in ζt captures a decline in the price

of oil. We capture the relation between E$H,t and ERH,t using the following reduced form relation

between the two real exchange rates (in logs):

                                                                        
                             eRH,t + pR,t − pH,t = η e$H,t + p$,t − pH,t + εR,t                                      (23)


In Eq. (23), pi,t denotes the (log) consumer price level in country i ∈ $, R in its respective currencies,

εR,t captures idiosyncratic fluctuations in the $-R exchange rate while η captures the co-movement

between the two real exchange rates. With this flexible specification, we can explore separately how

fluctuations in E$H,t and ERH,t impact prices and quantities in H, under different pricing paradigms.24

       The model therefore features three sources of fluctuations: productivity shocks at , endowment

shocks ζt that capture the exogenous fluctuations in the price of oil, and exogenous shocks to the

$-R exchange rate εR,t . These shocks follow autoregressive processes:


                                          ζt − ζ̄ = ρζ (ζt−1 − ζ̄) + ζ,t                                            (24)

                                               at = ρa at−1 + a,t                                                   (25)
  24
     An alternative set-up would be to allow for the small open economy to borrow internationally in both $ and R curren-
cies. Then, even if interest rates in the $ and R do not change, shocks that drive a wedge in the UIP conditions (commonly
used to capture risk-premia shocks) for each of the two currencies will generate fluctuations in E$H,t /ERH,t .



                                                           47
                                        εR,t = ρR εR,t−1 + R,t                                      (26)


where ζ̄ is the steady state value of the commodity price, and ζ,t are serially independently dis-

tributed innovations. We allow the productivity and commodity price innovations to be correlated,

and denote ρa,ζ = corr(a,t , ζ,t ).

   We use a combination of calibration and estimation to parameterize the model, the details of

which are provided in online appendix A.5. We match several moments in the data, including price

pass-through regression coefficients as well as estimated parameters in the time series processes

for Colombia’s real exchange rate, value added and commodity prices. The estimated model is very

close to DCP. The export invoicing shares for Colombia are measured in the data directly and is

100% for exports to $ and 93% for exports to R. The estimated import invoicing shares are 100% for

imports from $ and 93% for those from R. We simulate the parametrized model and plot the pass-

through estimates from the estimated model, and counterfactual DCP, PCP and LCP models against

the estimates from the data. In the case of the latter three we force the invoicing shares to take the

extreme values of each of the paradigms, keeping all other parameter values unchanged.


Dynamics of pass-through.           Fig. 11 reports the values for price pass-through for dollar destina-

tions and Fig. 12 for non-dollar destinations. In each figure, export price pass-through are reported

in the left column, and import price pass-through in the right column. Each row corresponds to a

different model: the estimated model (top row), a full DCP counterfactual (second row), a PCP coun-

terfactual (third row) and a LCP counterfactual (last row). Large solid circles for the pass-through of

export and import prices to/from various destinations at impact represent values that were used in

moment matching. The pass-through at other lags were not used in estimating parameters.

   As is evident, the estimated model replicates the pass-through estimates at various lags for export

prices to $ and R and for import prices from $ quite closely. While the match is less good for import

prices from R, we still obtain that pass-through starts high and declines gradually. Inspecting the

different rows, it is immediate that the estimated model is very close to DCP, and very different from


                                                     48
                        Exchange rate pass-through into prices: Estimated model

                                              (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
                                             ∆pHR,t      ∆pHR,t     ∆pRH,t     ∆pRH,t

                                  ∆eRH,t       0.72       0.28       0.68       0.22
                                  ∆e$H,t                  0.66                  0.70

Table 8: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices to/from non-dollarized economies using
model simulated data. Regressions have the bilateral exchange rate and the dollar exchange rate as controls.




a PCP or LCP counterfactual. PCP implies low initial pass-through into export prices, which then

gradually increases over time, as prices are sticky in the exporting currency. LCP implies low pass-

through into import prices, which then increases over time, as prices are sticky in the importing

currency. In the case of non-dollar trading partners we similarly observe that DCP outperforms both

PCP and LCP.


Relevance of bilateral exchange rates.                The estimated model also matches the empirical fact that

bilateral exchange rates show up as large and significant when they are the only exchange rate con-

trol in price or quantity regressions (for non-dollar destinations and origins), but drop significantly

as a predictor of prices once the dollar exchange rate is also included in the specification. This is re-

ported in Table 8 for price pass-through regressions and in Table 9 for trade elasticity regressions.25

The estimated model generates a weak expansion in exports to $ destinations following a deprecia-

tion and a more pronounced contraction in imports from both $ and R consistent with the empirical

evidence in Table 7. Exports to R are negatively impacted by depreciations relative to the dollar.

Here again the dollar exchange rate is a major predictor of quantities for non-dollar regions.


Importance of non-zero α and Γ.                Finally, Fig. 13 explores the role of strategic complementari-

ties in pricing and imported input use in production for our results. It contrasts the pass-through
  25
       Online appendix A.5 documents that PCP and LCP are unable to match these facts.


                                                           49
         Exchange rate pass-through for dollar origin/destination: Data vs. model

                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0        estimated model, export prices            estimated model, import prices




                                                                  DCP, export prices                        DCP, import prices
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                  PCP, export prices                        PCP, import prices
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                  LCP, export prices                        LCP, import prices
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                         0        2        4       6           8   0        2        4       6          8
                                                                                  quarters after shock
                                                                                       data             model


Figure 11: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices for Colombia with respect to dollar
economies.




                                                                                              50
      Exchange rate pass-through for non-dollar origin/destination: Data vs. model

                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0        estimated model, export prices            estimated model, import prices




                                                                  DCP, export prices                        DCP, import prices
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                  PCP, export prices                        PCP, import prices
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                                  LCP, export prices                        LCP, import prices
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0




                                                         0        2        4       6           8   0        2        4       6          8
                                                                                  quarters after shock
                                                                                       data             model


Figure 12: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices for Colombia with respect to non-dollar
economies.




                                                                                              51
                 Exchange rate pass-through into qantities: Estimated model

                                         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
                                        ∆yH$,t    ∆y$H,t    ∆yHR,t    ∆yRH,t

                              ∆e$H,t     0.26      -1.60     -1.33      -1.19
                              ∆eRH,t     -0.18      0.28      1.43      -0.11

Table 9: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import quantities to/from dollarized and non-dollarized
economies. Regressions have the bilateral exchange rate, the dollar exchange rate, and the level of demand as
controls.




estimates when Γ (the markup elasticity) and α (the intermediate input share) are both set to 0 rel-

ative to the benchmark of Γ = 1 and α = 2/3 (dashed line). This imposes constant mark-ups and

a production function with labor only. The left column reports the dynamic pass-through of export

prices, and the right column that of import prices. The top row reports export and import prices

to/from $ and the bottom row to/from R. Export price pass-through into H prices declines by a half

at the one year horizon when Γ and α are both set equal to 0 (line with solid circles), compared to

the data and the benchmark model predictions. In the case of import pass-through the difference is

smaller (as to be expected given that the marginal cost of foreign firms are taken as exogenous), but

in all cases the model’s match with the data is the best under the benchmark specification. Strategic

complementarities in pricing and imported input use in production are important factors controlling

the (slow) dynamic of price pass-throughs.


5    Conclusion

Most trade is invoiced in very few currencies. Building from this key observation, this paper presents

a dominant currency paradigm characterized by three key features: pricing in a dominant currency,

strategic complementarities in pricing and imported input use in production. We integrate these

new elements into a model of small or large open economies. The model is used to understand the



                                                     52
                                                           Exchange rate pass-through: Role of α and Γ

                                                       price of exports to $                     price of imports from $

                                              1
       cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                              .5
                                              0




                                                       price of exports to R                     price of imports from R
                                              1
                                              .5
                                              0




                                                   0   2         4        6        8   0          2        4         6     8
                                                                          quarters after shock
                                                       data          Γ=1,α=2/3             Γ=0,α=2/3           Γ=0,α=0


Figure 13: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices to/from dollar ($) or non-dollar (R)
economies, for varying choices of α and Γ.


consequences of home or dominant monetary policy shocks on exchange rates and fluctuations. The

model predicts (a) stability in the terms-of-trade; (b) that the dollar (i.e., dominant) exchange rate

dominates bilateral exchange rate in price pass-through and trade elasticity regressions outside the

U.S.; (c) high and persistent pass-through into export and import prices; (d) that global trade outside

the U.S. declines when the dollar appreciates.

   We validate empirically these predictions using two sources of data. First, at the aggregate level,

we use a newly constructed global bilateral trade dataset that covers 91% of world trade. Then,

we test the implications of the theory using micro data at the firm-product-destination-year level

from Colombia. All the key implications of the DCP are confirmed empirically, while other pricing

paradigms are soundly rejected.



                                                                                 53
   Looking forward, the dominant currency paradigm has striking implications for economic policy

and its spillovers. For instance, we demonstrate that the inflation-output trade-off in response to a

monetary policy shock is seriously impaired under DCP compared to the usual case of PCP. Mon-

etary policy shocks in the dominant currency country also have strong spillovers to the rest of the

world, while the converse is not true: the dominant currency country is largely insulated from the

inflationary consequences of fluctuations in its currency, which are absorbed instead into prices and

trade in the rest of the world. This has important implications for monetary policy, which are explore

at greater length in Casas et al. (2016). For instance, under DCP, a small open economy’s optimal

monetary policy is no longer able to attain both zero producer price inflation and zero output gap in

circumstances where producer currency pricing would.

   Our framework takes the invoicing currency choice as given. Yet we have been careful to point

out that most of our results would hold even with endogenous currency invoicing. First, some ingre-

dients from our model, namely imported input use in production and strategic complementarities in

pricing, are precisely those that would give rise endogenously to dominant currency in pricing. This

is demonstrated by Gopinath et al. (2010) in a partial equilibrium environment and more recently

by Mukhin (2018) in a general equilibrium setting. Second, Gopinath et al. (2010) show that firms

choose to price in currencies in which their reset prices are most stable, i.e., the desired medium-run

pass-through into prices (expressed in the invoicing currency) is low. In other words, our empirical

findings will continue to be relevant in an environment with endogenous currency choice.

   Taking a step back, our paper confirms that the dominance of the U.S. dollar is pervasive, from

the structure of external balance sheets (Gourinchas and Rey (2014)), the currency composition of

private portfolios (Maggiori et al. (2018)), the choice of anchor currency (Ilzetzki et al. (2017) and

trade invoicing, with important and complex interactions which we are only starting to explore (e.g.,

Gopinath and Stein (2018)).




                                                  54
References
Alessandria, G., Pratap, S., and Yue, V. Z. (2013). Export dynamics in large devaluations. International Finance
  Discussion Papers 1087, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Amiti, M., Itskhoki, O., and Konings, J. (2014). Importers, exporters, and exchange rate disconnect. American
 Economic Review, 104(7):1942–78.
Amiti, M., Itskhoki, O., and Konings, J. (2016). International shocks and domestic prices: how large are strategic
 complementarities? Staff Reports 771, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Atkeson, A. and Burstein, A. (2008). Trade costs, pricing-to-market, and international relative prices. American
  Economic Review, 98(5):1998–2031.
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., and Schott, P. K. (2009). Importers, Exporters and Multinationals: A Portrait of Firms
  in the U.S. that Trade Goods. In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, NBER Chapters, pages
  513–552. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Betts, C. and Devereux, M. (2000). Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing-to-market. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 50(1):215–44.
Boz, E. and Cerutti, E. (2017). Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown: A New Database. Forthcoming IMF
  Working Paper.
Boz, E., Gopinath, G., Plagborg-Møller, M., and Harvard, I. H. (2017). Global trade and the dollar. Technical
  report, mimeo Harvard University.
Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  121(2):541–85.
Burstein, A. and Gopinath, G. (2014). International Prices and Exchange Rates. In Gopinath, G., Helpman, E.,
  and Rogoff, K., editors, Handbook of International Economics, volume 4, chapter 7, pages 391–451. Elsevier.
Bussière, M., Gaulier, G., and Steingress, W. (2016). Global Trade Flows: Revisiting the Exchange Rate Elasticities.
  Banque de France Document de Travail no. 608.
Canzoneri, M., Cumby, R., Diba, B., and López-Salido, D. (2013). Key currency status: An exorbitant privilege
  and an extraordinary risk. Journal of International Money and Finance, 37:371–393.
Casas, C., Diez, F., Gopinath, G., and Gourinchas, P.-O. (2016). Dominant currency paradigm. Working paper.
Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M., and Rebelo, S. (2011). When is the government spending multiplier large? Journal
  of Political Economy, 119(1):78 – 121.
Cook, D. and Devereux, M. B. (2006). External currency pricing and the east asian crisis. Journal of International
  Economics, 69(1):37–63.
Corsetti, G., Dedola, L., and Leduc, S. (2010). Chapter 16 - optimal monetary policy in open economies? volume 3
  of Handbook of Monetary Economics, pages 861 – 933. Elsevier.
Corsetti, G. and Pesenti, P. (2005). The Simple Geometry of Transmission and Stabilization in Closed and Open
  Economies. NBER Working Papers 11341, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Devereux, M. and Engel, C. (2003). Monetary policy in the open economy revisited: Price setting and exchange
  rate flexibility. Review of Economic Studies, 70:765–84.
Devereux, M. B., Shi, K., and Xu, J. (2007). Global monetary policy under a dollar standard. Journal of International
  Economics, 71(1):113–132.

                                                         55
Dornbusch, R. (1987). Exchange rate and prices. American Economic Review, 77(1):93–106.

Feenstra, R., Obstfeld, M., and Russ, K. (2010). In search of the armington elasticity. Working Paper.

Feenstra, R. C., Lipsey, R. E., Deng, H., Ma, A. C., and Mo, H. (2005). World Trade Flows: 1962–2000. NBER
  Working Paper 11040.

Fleming, J. M. (1962). Domestic financial policies under fixed and under floating exchange rates. Staff Papers
   (International Monetary Fund), 9(3):369–380.

Galı́, J. (2008). Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework.
  Princeton University Press.

Galı́, J. and Monacelli, T. (2005). Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open economy. The
  Review of Economic Studies, 72(3):707–734.

Gaulier, G., Martin, J., Mejean, I., and Zignago, S. (2008). International Trade Price Indices. CEPII Working Paper
  No. 2008/10.

Goldberg, L. and Tille, C. (2008). Vehicle currency use in international trade. Journal of International Economics,
  76(2):177–192.

Goldberg, L. and Tille, C. (2009). Macroeconomic interdependence and the international role of the dollar. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 56(7):990–1003.

Goldberg, P. and Knetter, M. (1997). Goods prices and exchange rates: What have we learned? Journal of
  Economic Literature, 35(3):1243–1272.

Gopinath, G. (2015). The international price system. In Jackson Hole Symposium, volume 27. Federal Reserve
  Bank at Kansas City.

Gopinath, G. and Itskhoki, O. (2010). In search of real rigidities. In Acemoglu, D. and Woodford, M., editors,
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, volume 25. University of Chicago Press.

Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O., and Rigobon, R. (2010). Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-Through. American
  Economic Review, 100(1):304–36.

Gopinath, G. and Neiman, B. (2014). Trade adjustment and productivity in large crises. American Economic
  Review, 104(3):793–831.
Gopinath, G. and Rigobon, R. (2008). Sticky borders. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):531–575.
Gopinath, G. and Stein, J. C. (2018). Banking, trade, and the making of a dominant currency. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gourinchas, P.-O. and Rey, H. (2014). External adjustment, global imbalances, valuation effects. In Handbook of
  International Economics, volume 4, pages 585–645. Elsevier.
Ilzetzki, E., Reinhart, C. M., and Rogoff, K. S. (2017). Exchange arrangements entering the 21st century: Which
   anchor will hold? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Imbens, G. W. and Kolesár, M. (2016). Robust Standard Errors in Small Samples: Some Practical Advice. Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 98(4):701–712.
IMF (2009). Export and Import Price Index Manual: Theory and Practice. International Monetary Fund, Washington,
  D.C.



                                                        56
Itskhoki, O. and Mukhin, D. (2017). Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium. NBER Working Paper
   23401.

Johnson, R. C. (2014). Five facts about value-added exports and implications for macroeconomics and trade
  research. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2):119–42.

Johnson, R. C. and Noguera, G. (2012). Accounting for intermediates: Production sharing and trade in value
  added. Journal of International Economics, 86(2):224 – 236.

Kimball, M. (1995). The quantitative analytics of the basic neomonetarist model. Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 27:1241–77.

Klenow, P. and Willis, J. (2016). Real rigidities and nominal price changes. Economica, 83:443–472.

Krugman, P. (1987). Pricing to market when the exchange rate changes. In Arndt, S. and Richardson, J., editors,
  Real Financial Linkages among Open Economies, pages 49–70. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Kugler, M. and Verhoogen, E. (2009). Plants and imported inputs: New facts and an interpretation. American
  Economic Review, 99(2):501–07.

Leigh, D., Lian, W., Poplawski-Ribeiro, M., and Tsyrennikov, V. (2015). Exchange rates and trade flows: Dis-
  connected? In World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices, chapter 3, pages 105–142.
  International Monetary Fund.

Maggiori, M., Neiman, B., and Schreger, J. (2018). International currencies and capital allocation. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Manova, K. and Zhang, Z. (2009). China’s Exporters and Importers: Firms, Products and Trade Partners. NBER
  Working Papers 15249, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Mukhin, D. (2018). An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System. Working paper.

Mundell, R. A. (1963). Capital mobility and stabilization policy under fixed and flexible exchange rates. The
 Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science / Revue canadienne d’Economique et de Science politique,
 29(4):475–485.

Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K. (1995). Exchange rate dynamics redux. Journal of Political Economy, 103:624–60.

Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K. (2000). New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Models . Journal of International
  Economics, 50(117-153).

Rauch, J. E. (1999). Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of International Economics, 48(1):7–35.
Schmitt-Grohe, S. and Uribe, M. (2003). Closing small open economy models. Journal of International Economics,
  61(1):163–185.
Silver, M. (2007). Do Unit Value Export, Import, and Terms of Trade Indices Represent or Misrepresent Price
   Indices? IMF Working Paper No. 07/121.
Svensson, L. and van Wijnbergen, S. (1989). Excess capacity, monopolistic competition, and international trans-
  mission of monetary disturbances. Economic Journal, 99(397):785–805.
World Bank (2010). Imports, Exports and Mirror Data with UN COMTRADE. World Integrated Trade Solution
 Online Help.




                                                        57
A       ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION
A.1     Macro Data
Here we provide further details on the Comtrade, WDI, and FRED data.

A.1.1    Data Construction
Comtrade. UN Comtrade provides detailed annual customs data for a large set of countries at HS 6-digit
product level with information about the destination country, USD value, quantity, and weight of imports and
exports. This dataset makes it possible to compute volume changes over time for each product, and use the value
data to infer unit values. Once unit values are calculated, we compute chained Fisher price indices to aggregate up
from the product level to the bilateral country level.26 We focus entirely on data for non-commodity goods, except
noted otherwise. Given the inherent difficulty in drawing a line between commodities and non-commodities,
we define commodities fairly broadly as HS chapters 1–27 and 72–83, which comprise animal, vegetable, food,
mineral, and metal products.
    Coverage of Comtrade at annual frequency over time and across countries is good. The longest time span of
the data is 1989–2015, although the coverage varies by dyad. Appendix A.1.2 lists the coverage by country. In
2015, the 55 countries in our sample were responsible for 91.2% and 91.5% of the value of world goods imports
and exports, respectively, as recorded in Comtrade. We exclusively use Comtrade data reported by the importing
country, as importer-reported data is regarded as being more reliable since imports generate tariff revenues
(Feenstra et al., 2005; World Bank, 2010).
    The biggest challenge for constructing price and volume indices using customs data is the so-called unit
value bias, as argued by Silver (2007). Unit values, calculated simply by dividing observed values by quantities,
are not actual prices. Even at the narrowly defined product categories at 6-digit product level, there is likely to
be a wide range of products whose prices may not be moving proportionately. The implication is that if there are
shifts in quantities traded within the narrowly defined product categories, unit values would be influenced even
when there is no price movement. This creates a bias that the employed methodology takes a stab at correcting
for by eliminating products whose unit values have a variance higher than a threshold and are more likely to be
biased.
    Another challenge that arises from using Comtrade data is related to the use of different HS vintages over
time. HS classification is updated about every five years to ensure that the available codings accurately reflect
the variety of products being traded. This involves introducing codes for new products, eliminating the old ones,
and often regrouping existing products. While concordances are readily available to facilitate the matching of
HS codes across different HS vintages, this process inevitably leads to a loss of information, especially in the
case of data on quantities, because the mapping of products across vintages is rarely one-to-one. To get around
this problem, for the years in which there is a transition to a new HS vintage, we compute the indices twice,
once under the old vintage (using concordances) and once under the new one. This way, only these transition
years would be effected by the loss of information due to matching across vintages. After that year, we switch
to working with the new vintage. This method not only minimizes the loss of information but also allows us to
include new products in the construction of the indices. Boz and Cerutti (2017) provide further details of this
method, including the strategy for dealing with outliers and missing values, and a comparison with a similar
dataset constructed by Gaulier et al. (2008).
    In the final stage, we compare our unit value indices to those provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) for the U.S., the only country, to our knowledge, that collects import price indices based on price surveys
by origin. As shown in Appendix A.1.3, this comparison for the U.S. suggests that working with unit values
is acceptable, as the growth rates of the two series are broadly aligned for most trading partners. Further, the
results on pass-through into U.S. import and export prices using our constructed unit value indices are wholly
consistent with the estimates in Casas et al. (2016) and Gopinath and Rigobon (2008) that are based on BLS data.
Lastly, Boz and Cerutti (2017) find favorable results when comparing country-level indices with those from the
WTO and IMF World Economic Outlook.
  26
    The Fisher price index satisfies a number of tests laid out in index number theory and is flexible enough to provide a
good proxy for a large set of functional forms (Gaulier et al., 2008; IMF, 2009).


                                                           58
Currency invoicing share. For currency invoicing shares we use the data set constructed by Gopinath
(2015). The invoicing shares tend to be fairly stable over time so we take their simple averages over the years
in which they are reported during 1999–2014. Appendix A.1.2 lists the USD and euro import invoicing share for
the 39 countries in our sample with available invoicing data.

World Development Indicator data. The exchange rate is the World Bank’s “alternative conversion fac-
tor” series (PA.NUS.ATLS), which corrects for redenominations and currency substitution, and is measured as an
annual average of daily rates. Producer prices are given by the wholesale price index (FP.WPI.TOTL). Real GDP
is measured at market prices in constant U.S. dollars (NY.GDP.MKTP.KD). The GDP deflator is given by the ratio
of nominal GDP (NY.GDP.MKTP.CD) and real GDP. Consumer prices are constructed from CPI inflation rates
(FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG), or if inflation is not available, CPI levels (FP.CPI.TOTL). We use data for 1989–2015 only. The
data was downloaded in September 2016.

FRED data. We obtain the WTI oil price (POILWTIUSDA), VIX (VIXCLS), and 1-year Treasury bill rate
(DTB1YR) from the St. Louis Fed’s FRED database. Annual series are averages of daily indices.

Country groups. For some exercises below, we look at heterogeneity across advanced and emerging economies.
We use the October 2017 IMF World Economic Outlook grouping of advanced economies, and label all other
countries as emerging. This yields 31 advanced and 24 emerging economies, as listed in Appendix A.1.2.

A.1.2    Comtrade Country Summary Statistics
Table 10 lists summary statistics on the number of observations for the 55 countries in our merged Com-
trade/WDI dataset. The table also lists the advanced or emerging economy classification of each country. Finally,
we list the share of imports invoiced in U.S. dollars and euros for the 39 countries for which we observe these
measures (cf. Gopinath, 2015).

A.1.3    Comparison of Comtrade and BLS Price Series for the U.S.
Here we compare our unit value indices to survey price indices from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The BLS
provides U.S. import price indices by locality of origin for Canada, E.U., France, Germany, U.K, Latin America,
Mexico, Pacific Rim, China, Japan, ASEAN, Asia Near East, and Asian Newly Industrialized countries. As these
price indices are constructed from surveys, their comparison with our unit value based indices can help gauge
the effectiveness of our techniques to deal with the unit value bias and other potential mismeasurement inherent
in customs data.
    To arrive at comparable series, in this subsection we follow BLS in using Laspeyres indices of total (com-
modities and non-commodities) goods prices from our Comtrade data set. For regions with multiple countries,
we aggregate country level growth rates using Comtrade import values with a two year lag. Still, the series are
not fully comparable because BLS’ preferred price basis is f.o.b. (free on board) while import values recorded at
customs are c.i.f. (cost, insurance and freight), and not all countries included in BLS regions are in our database.
    Our indices constructed from Comtrade unit values track the BLS import price indices fairly well, as shown
in Figures 14 and 15. These figures compare the linearly detrended logged indices, since our regressions use
log growth rates and absorb any disparity in average growth rates in the intercept. The growth rates of our
indices for Canada, Japan, Mexico, and the aggregated Latin America and Asia Near East match those of BLS
remarkably well. The comparison with some Asian countries suggests that a unit value bias may still be present,
causing the unit value series to be somewhat more volatile than the BLS price series. Nevertheless, for every
country group and individual country except Germany, the correlation coefficient between the Comtrade and
BLS growth rates is high. Finally, the match for European countries seems acceptable, with the year 2008 being
an exception. A closer inspection of the case of Germany reveals that a couple of products (transport vehicles)
with large import shares experienced substantial unit value decreases that year according to Comtrade, leading
our indices to decline while the BLS index shows an increase.




                                                        59
                      Country summary statistics

                        As exporter                  As importer
Country         Adv   #dyads avg T      #dyads     avg T    InvS$   InvSe

Africa
Algeria                20       12.9      46       20.9             0.49
Egypt                  53       20.2      50       18.0
South Africa           51       14.8      53       14.7
Americas
Argentina              54       21.0      50       20.6     0.88    0.08
Brazil                 54       21.7      50       23.2     0.84    0.11
Canada          X      54       22.0      53       24.2     0.75    0.05
Chile                  52       20.2      48       17.7
Colombia               52       17.9      49       15.6     0.99    0.00
Mexico                 54       21.7      51       23.0
United States   X      54       22.0      53       22.8     0.93    0.02
Venezuela               8       17.6      46       17.0
Asia
China                  54       21.9      53       21.7
Hong Kong       X      53       22.1      51       20.7
India                  54       21.9      53       24.0     0.86    0.10
Indonesia              53       21.6      51       21.8     0.81    0.04
Israel          X      49       22.1      50       15.0     0.73    0.21
Japan           X      54       22.1      52       25.4     0.71    0.03
Kazakhstan             32       15.2      52       14.6
Malaysia               53       22.0      50       23.8
Philippines            54       21.6      47       18.0
Saudi Arabia           50       19.7      50       15.3
Singapore       X      54       22.0      50       23.6
South Korea     X      54       22.0      51       23.7     0.81    0.05
Thailand               54       21.8      51       24.7     0.79    0.04
Turkey                 54       22.0      52       24.0     0.59    0.31
Vietnam                50       19.6      46       12.1

                        (continued on next page)




                                  60
                               Country summary statistics (continued)

                                           As exporter                      As importer
        Country                Adv       #dyads avg T          #dyads     avg T    InvS$         InvSe

        Europe
        Austria                 X          54        22.2        52         20.7       0.06       0.70
        Belgium                 X          53        15.8        53         15.9       0.14       0.82
        Czech Republic          X          53        20.2        53         21.2       0.19       0.68
        Denmark                 X          54        22.0        52         24.2       0.25       0.32
        Estonia                 X          46        17.0        52         18.0       0.34       0.53
        Finland                 X          54        21.9        52         24.9       0.42       0.38
        France                  X          54        22.2        53         20.7       0.21       0.75
        Germany                 X          54        21.4        53         23.3       0.23       0.75
        Greece                  X          54        21.4        51         22.0       0.40       0.58
        Hungary                            54        22.0        52         21.5       0.27       0.57
        Ireland                 X          54        21.9        52         21.7       0.23       0.47
        Italy                   X          54        22.2        52         20.7       0.29       0.67
        Lithuania               X          51        16.8        48         19.0       0.51       0.39
        Luxembourg              X          49        15.6        51         13.6       0.16       0.78
        Netherlands             X          54        22.2        53         22.2       0.37       0.46
        Norway                  X          54        22.0        51         21.6       0.21       0.29
        Poland                             54        21.8        52         20.2       0.30       0.58
        Portugal                X          54        21.8        52         25.0       0.22       0.76
        Romania                            53        21.1        50         19.7       0.31       0.67
        Russia                             53        21.0        52         17.6
        Slovak Republic         X          50        18.9        51         20.0       0.12       0.79
        Slovenia                X          54        19.6        52         20.0       0.20       0.75
        Spain                   X          54        22.0        54         24.8       0.35       0.58
        Sweden                  X          54        22.0        54         21.9       0.25       0.36
        Switzerland             X          54        22.1        54         25.1       0.13       0.53
        Ukraine                            51        18.8        52         17.2       0.75       0.16
        United Kingdom          X          54        22.2        54         21.6       0.47       0.15
        Oceania
        Australia               X          54        21.8        51         25.4       0.53       0.08
        New Zealand             X          53        20.7        50         23.5

Table 10: Summary statistics for countries in the merged Comtrade/WDI sample. Adv: advanced economy (IMF
WEO). #dyads: number of non-missing dyads that the country appears in. avg T : average number of years per
dyad that the country appears in; a dyad-year observation is counted if at least one UVI or volume observation
is reported by the importer, and exchange rate data exists for both countries. InvS: share of imports invoiced in
USD/euro.




                                                       61
                    Comtrade and BLS import price indices for U.S.: country groups
                               ASEAN                                       Asia Near East
        .2




                                                          .4
                                                          .2
        .1




                                                          0
        0




                                                          −.2
        −.1




                                                          −.4
        −.2




                                                          −.6
               92   96    00    04     08     12     16          92   96   00    04    08     12     16
                         European Union                                    Latin America
                                                          .2
        .1




                                                          .1
        .05




                                                          0
        0




                                                          −.1
        −.05




                                                          −.2
        −.1




                                                          −.3




               92   96    00    04     08     12     16          92   96   00    04    08     12     16
                     Asian Newly Industralized                              Pacific Rim
        .2




                                                          .1
        .1




                                                          .05
        0




                                                          0
                                                          −.05
        −.1
        −.2




                                                          −.1




               92   96    00    04     08     12     16          92   96   00    04    08     12     16



Figure 14: Comparison of BLS Locality of Origin import price indices (thick lines, circles) with our constructed
Comtrade analogues (thin lines, crosses). Plotted indices are logged and linearly detrended. The Comtrade sample
does not cover all countries in the BLS country groups, cf. Table 11.




                                                      62
                        Comtrade and BLS import price indices for U.S.: individual countries
                                      Canada                                                  China
        .2




                                                              .2
        .1




                                                              .1
        0




                                                              0
        −.1




                                                              −.1
        −.2




                                                              −.2
                   92      96    00     04     08   12   16                   92   96   00     04      08   12   16
                                      France                                                 Germany
        .15




                                                              .1
        .1




                                                              .05
        .05




                                                              0
        0




                                                              −.15 −.1 −.05
        −.1 −.05




                   92      96    00     04     08   12   16                   92   96   00     04      08   12   16
                                      Japan                                                  Mexico
        .1




                                                              .2
        .05




                                                              .1
        0




                                                              0
        −.05




                                                              −.1
        −.1




                                                              −.2




                   92      96    00     04     08   12   16                   92   96   00     04      08   12   16
                                United Kingdom
        .2
        .1
        0
        −.1
        −.2




                   92      96    00     04     08   12   16



Figure 15: Comparison of BLS Locality of Origin import price indices (thick lines, circles) with our constructed
Comtrade analogues (thin lines, crosses). Plotted indices are logged and linearly detrended.


                                                          63
                                           BLS country groups

       BLS group            Country ISO codes

       ASEAN                BRN* IDN KHM* LAO* MMR* MYS PHL SGP THA VNM*
       Asia Near East       ARE* BHR* IRN* IRQ* ISR JOR* KWT* LBN* OMN* QAT* SAU SYR*
                            YEM*
       European Union       AUT BEL BGR* CYP* CZE DEU DNK ESP EST FIN FRA GBR GRC
                            HRV* HUN IRL ITA LTU LUX LVA* MLT* NLD POL PRT ROU SVK
                            SVN SWE
       Latin America        ARG BRA CHL COL MEX VEN (plus other unspecified Central Amer-
                            ican, South American, and Caribbean countries*)
       Asian New. Ind.      HKG KOR SGP TWN
       Pacific Rim          AUS BRN* CHN HKG IDN JPN KOR MAC* MYS NZL PHL PNG* SGP
                            TWN

Table 11: Definition of BLS country groups in Figure 14. Countries marked with an asterisk (*) are not available
in the Comtrade sample.




                                                      64
               Terms of trade and exchange rates: Country group heterogeneity

                                        unweighted                               trade-weighted
                                  (1)      (2)      (3)                      (4)        (5)      (6)
                                 E↔E      E↔A      A↔A                      E↔E       E↔A       A↔A
                                ∆totij,t ∆totij,t ∆totij,t                 ∆totij,t ∆totij,t ∆totij,t

              ∆eij,t            0.0189     0.0480*** 0.0182               0.0508***    0.111*** 0.0220
                               (0.0173)     (0.0110) (0.0256)              (0.0176)    (0.0310) (0.0473)

              PPI                 no           no           no               no           no            no
              R-squared          0.028       0.011         0.008            0.051       0.078          0.025
              Observations       3,527       11,857        8,886            3,527       11,857         8,886
              Dyads               217         670           460              217         670            460

Table 12: “E↔A”, say, denotes goods flows between Emerging and Advanced economies. The first (resp., last)
three columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions, as in specifications (1) and (3) of Table 2. All
regressions include two ∆ER lags and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


A.2     Macro Regressions: Supplementary Results
This section provides supplementary macro regression results, including robustness checks.

A.2.1    Country Group Heterogeneity
Tables 12 to 14 display the heterogeneity in estimates when we apply our terms of trade regressions, exchange
rate pass-through regressions and trade elasticity regressions from Sections 3.2 to 3.4 to separate subsamples of
advanced and emerging country trade flows. The results are discussed in the main text.

A.2.2    Spillovers From U.S. Dollar to Foreign Inflation
Our results imply that fluctuations in the strength of the dollar, for example those caused by U.S. monetary policy
actions, have spillover effects on foreign inflation. We have shown that the dollar exchange rate passes strongly
through to bilateral import prices measured in the importer’s currency, especially for countries whose imports
are heavily invoiced in dollars. Given a non-negligible import content in consumption, this implies that dollar
movements will directly affect foreign consumer price index (CPI) inflation, as discussed by Gopinath (2015).
If foreign firms behave in a monopolistically competitive way, foreign producer prices will react to changes in
foreign import prices, although perhaps with a lag. Hence, the direct effect of dollar movements on foreign CPI
inflation may be amplified by endogenous producer responses.
     We now provide direct country-level regression evidence on the effects of the U.S. dollar exchange rate
on foreign consumer and producer prices. Gopinath (2015) computes back-of-the-envelope estimates of these
spillovers based on estimated country-level import price pass-through and the import content of consumption.
We instead directly regress countries’ CPI or PPI on the dollar exchange rate. Additionally, we investigate the
interaction of the dollar exchange rate and the dollar import invoicing share.
     Specifically, we consider the country-level panel regression
                                             2
                                             X                      2
                                                                    X
                       ∆cpij,t = λj + δt +         βk$ ∆e$j,t−k +         ηk$ ∆e$j,t−k × Sj + εj,t ,           (A.1)
                                             k=0                    k=0




                                                          65
             Exchange rate pass-through into prices: Country group heterogeneity

                                   unweighted                                    trade-weighted
                       (1)         (2)      (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)            (8)
                      E→E         E→A     A→E            A→A         E→E         E→A      A→E             A→A
                      ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t  ∆pij,t         ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t   ∆pij,t          ∆pij,t

  ∆eij,t            0.0980***    0.0514**    0.265***   0.332***    0.150***    0.150***     0.433***    0.373***
                     (0.0329)    (0.0225)    (0.0379)   (0.0195)    (0.0391)    (0.0269)      (0.132)    (0.0504)
  ∆e$j,t             0.858***    0.766***    0.710***   0.409***    0.820***    0.498***     0.608***    0.287***
                     (0.0353)    (0.0364)    (0.0382)   (0.0284)    (0.0487)    (0.0533)      (0.122)    (0.0487)

  R-squared           0.470       0.152      0.530       0.142       0.572       0.252        0.467       0.264
  Observations        6,763       10,589     12,318      17,150      6,763      10,589       12,318      17,150
  Dyads                435         618        700         894         435         618          700         894

Table 13: “E→A”, say, denotes goods flows from Emerging to Advanced economies. The first (resp., last) four
columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions as in specifications (2) and (5) of Table 3. All regres-
sions include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of exporter ∆PPI, and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.



          Trade elasticity with respect to exchange rate: Country group heterogeneity

                                   unweighted                                      trade-weighted
                     (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)      (7)            (8)
                    E→E          E→A      A→E            A→A          E→E          E→A       A→E            A→A
                    ∆yij,t       ∆yij,t   ∆yij,t         ∆yij,t       ∆yij,t       ∆yij,t    ∆yij,t         ∆yij,t

 ∆eij,t            -0.0488      -0.0145     -0.182***   -0.0737      -0.0471     -0.0441**     -0.0377      0.0228
                   (0.0333)     (0.0212)     (0.0700)   (0.0481)     (0.0357)     (0.0225)     (0.117)     (0.0518)
 ∆e$j,t            -0.163***    -0.435***   0.00868     -0.340***   -0.208***    -0.251***     -0.0995    -0.302***
                    (0.0588)     (0.0749)   (0.0704)     (0.0607)    (0.0641)     (0.0622)     (0.118)     (0.0548)

 R-squared          0.093        0.049       0.100       0.082        0.237       0.301         0.218       0.214
 Observations       8,239        12,967      12,932      18,134       8,239       12,967        12,932      18,134
 Dyads               485          679         719         924          485         679           719         924

Table 14: “E→A”, say, denotes goods flows from Emerging to Advanced economies. The first (resp., last) four
columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions as in specifications (2) and (5) of Table 4. All re-
gressions include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of importer ∆GDP, and time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                                        66
                              Dollar pass-through into CPI and PPI, 2002–2015

                                           (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                          ∆cpij,t         ∆cpij,t          ∆ppij,t         ∆ppij,t

                     ∆e$j,t              0.106***          0.0221         0.284***        0.182***
                                        [0.04, 0.18]    [-0.05, 0.09]    [0.14, 0.43]    [0.05, 0.32]
                     ∆e$j,t × Sj                          0.181**                           0.237*
                                                        [0.04, 0.33]                     [-0.03, 0.51]

                     R-squared             0.283            0.453           0.532           0.675
                     Observations           766              544             697             525
                     Countries               55               39              52              38

Table 15: The first (resp., last) two columns use CPI (resp., PPI) growth as dependent variable. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags and time FE. 95% confidence intervals clustered by country and corrected for small number
of clusters using “LZ2-BM” method of Imbens and Kolesár (2016). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 (only 95% interval
shown).


where ∆cpij,t is the change in the log CPI in the currency of country j, and λj and δt are country and year fixed
effects, respectively. We also consider specifications with ∆ppij,t on the left-hand side, as well as specifications
restricting ψk = 0 for all k. We focus attention on the post-2002 (post-euro) sample, since full-sample regression
results are unduly influenced by a handful of countries’ high-inflation/high-depreciation episodes in the 1990s.27
     Table 15 displays the contemporaneous dollar pass-through into CPI and PPI. The first two columns shows
results for CPI pass-through, and the second two show those for PPI pass-through. Columns (1) and (3) do not
interact exchange rate changes with the dollar invoicing share, while columns (2) and (4) do. The table displays
95% confidence intervals rather than standard errors because the small number of countries (clusters) necessi-
tates the use of small-sample corrections (Imbens and Kolesár, 2016). The average pass-through of the dollar into
CPI (resp., PPI) is 11% (resp., 28%) within the year. The dollar pass-through is larger for countries that have a sub-
stantial fraction of imports invoiced in dollars. The contemporaneous interaction term is statistically significant
at the 10% level for both the CPI and PPI specifications, and also at the 5% level for the CPI specification. Hence,
it appears that countries which invoice more in dollars experience higher dollar pass-through into consumer
and producer prices. We caution, though, that the magnitude of the pass-through is imprecisely estimated when
controlling for country and time fixed effects.

A.2.3    The Dollar Versus the Euro
We now compare the explanatory power of the dollar exchange rate with that of the euro. We show that the
dollar dominates both the bilateral exchange rate and the euro in regression specifications that include all three
exchange rates.
     The panel regressions in Section 3 do not directly imply that the U.S. dollar is a uniquely important vehicle
currency. In our regression specifications without interactions, we would have obtained exactly the same coeffi-
cient estimates if we had used the euro exchange rate, say, in place of the dollar exchange rate, since we control
for time fixed effects.28 Nevertheless, our specifications with interactions indicated that the dollar plays a special
  27
      The results are very similar if we use the full 1992–2015 sample but drop country-year observations for which the
arithmetic CPI inflation rate exceeds 30% annually (0.26 log inflation rate).
   28
      To see this formally, note that one can rewrite the (log) change in the euro exchange rate as ∆eej,t = ∆ee$,t + ∆e$j,t
and the first term is absorbed by the time fixed effects.


                                                            67
role. Now we directly compare the explanatory power of the dollar against that of the euro in panel regressions
that do not control for time fixed effects but instead control for observed global real and financial variables.
    To measure bilateral price pass-through from the dollar and the euro, we run panel regressions of the form
                                2                     2                      2
                                                                                   βke ∆eej,t−k + θ0 Xij,t + εij,t ,
                                X                     X                      X
              ∆pij,t = λij +          βk ∆eij,t−k +         βk$ ∆e$j,t−k +                                                (A.2)
                                k=0                   k=0                    k=0

where eej,t denotes the log euro exchange rate in units of currency j per euro. Notice that we omit time fixed
effects, as is necessary to identify βk$ and βke separately. In addition to lags 0–2 of exporter PPI log growth, the
controls Xij,t consist of the contemporaneous values of global real GDP growth, global GDP deflator inflation,
global export volume growth, growth in the WTI oil price deflated by the global GDP deflator, and the log VIX.
The time sample for regressions in this subsection is 2002–2015 due to the introduction of the euro in 1999 and
our use of lagged exchange rate changes.
    Fig. 16 shows that the euro pass-through into prices is negligible on average, while the dollar pass-through
remains high when we control for the euro. The figure displays the regression results in the form of impulse
responses of the bilateral price level; corresponding regression tables are available in online appendix A.2.4.
    Similarly, the dollar exchange rate has the largest predictive power for trade volumes. We run panel regres-
sions similar to Eq. (A.2), except with volume growth ∆yij,t on the left-hand side, and we replace exporter PPI
with lags 0–2 of importer real GDP growth in the list of controls Xij,t . Fig. 17 shows impulse responses of the
level of bilateral trade volume to the bilateral, dollar, and euro exchange rates. The dollar exchange rate is the
only one of the three that has a quantitatively large negative association with trade volumes.29
    Tables 16 and 17 display the euro regression results in table form. Specifications (1) and (4) focus on the
bilateral and euro exchange rates, specifications (2) and (5) add the dollar exchange rate, and specifications (3)
and (6) include interactions with the dollar and euro import invoicing shares. Sje is the importing country’s share
of imports invoiced in euros from Gopinath (2015). The interactions are statistically and economically significant
and mostly have the expected signs in the price pass-through regressions: A higher share of euro (resp., dollar)
invoicing implies a higher pass-through from the euro (resp., dollar) exchange rate.

A.2.4     Regression Details and Robustness Checks
Post-2002 results. Exchange rate pass-through into prices has been stable over our sample period, while
trade elasticities may have become larger in absolute value in the latter part of the sample. We compute results
for the subsample 2002–2015, roughly corresponding to the second half of our data set, and also corresponding
to the sample used for the euro regressions in Section A.2.3. Figures 18 and 19 show price and volume impulse
responses for the 2002–2015 subsample that correspond to the full-sample results in Figures 4 and 6 in Section
3. The price pass-through impulse responses of bilateral and dollar exchange rates are similar to the full-sample
results. However, the post-2002 USD cumulative trade elasticity (unweighted) is substantially negative at lags of
1 and 2 years, whereas the level effect is close to zero at lags 1 and 2 on the full sample.

Pre-2007 results. Our headline results are not driven by the global financial crisis starting in 2008. Figures
20 and 21 show the average exchange rate pass-through and trade elasticity computed on the 1992–2007 sample.
The results are almost identical to our baseline Figures 4 and 6. Figure 22 shows the effect of rest-of-world trade
of a uniform USD appreciation, using only 2002–2007 data. Here the results are even stronger than in the baseline
Figure 8.

WeightedPaverage dollar invoicing share. Figure 23 depicts the weighted average dollar import invoic-
ing share j6=US wj Sj used in Section 3.6, where the ex-U.S. non-commodity import value weights wj have
been computed for each year in our sample. Notice that the weighted average fluctuates tightly around a mean
of 0.40.
  29
    The different long-run level effect of the dollar in Figs. 6 and 17 is due to the difference in time sample, as discussed in
online appendix A.2.4.


                                                               68
                                                              Price pass-through from dollar and euro exchange rates
                                                               unweighted, bilateral vs. EUR               unweighted, bilat. vs. EUR/USD



                                                    1
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    .5
                                                    0
                                                    −.5




                                                                                                                                                   Bilateral
                                                              trade−weighted, bilateral vs. EUR           trade−weighted, bilat. vs. EUR/USD       USD
                                                                                                                                                   Euro
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0
                                                    −.5




                                                          0                  1                    2   0                   1                    2
                                                                                        years after shock

Figure 16: Impulse responses of bilateral price level to bilateral eij,t , USD e$j,t , and euro eej,t exchange rates.
Based on regressions in Table 16, on-line appendix A.2.4. Top row: unweighted regression, bottom row: trade-
weighted. Left column: specifications with only bilateral and euro ER, right column: specifications adding USD.
Error bars: 95% confidence intervals, clustering by dyad.

                                                                Trade elasticity for dollar and euro exchange rates
                                                               unweighted, bilateral vs. EUR               unweighted, bilat. vs. EUR/USD
                                                    1
                                                    .5
             cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                    0
                                                    −.5
                                                    −1




                                                                                                                                                   Bilateral
                                                              trade−weighted, bilateral vs. EUR           trade−weighted, bilat. vs. EUR/USD       USD
                                                                                                                                                   Euro
                                                    1
                                                    .5
                                                    0
                                                    −.5
                                                    −1




                                                          0                  1                    2   0                   1                    2
                                                                                        years after shock

Figure 17: Impulse responses of bilateral volume to bilateral eij,t , USD e$j,t , and euro eej,t exchange rates. Based
on regressions in Table 17, on-line appendix A.2.4. Top row: unweighted regression, bottom row: trade-weighted.
Left column: specifications with bilateral and euro ER, right column: specifications adding USD. Error bars: 95%
confidence intervals, clustering by dyad.


                                                                                                           69
                       Euro vs. dollar exchange rate pass-through into prices

                                            unweighted                           trade-weighted
                                   (1)         (2)      (3)                (4)         (5)       (6)
                                  ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t   ∆pij,t             ∆pij,t     ∆pij,t     ∆pij,t

         ∆eij,t                  0.305***    0.181***         0.207***   0.438***   0.331***    0.551***
                                 (0.0159)    (0.0174)         (0.0695)   (0.0490)   (0.0567)     (0.156)
         ∆eij,t × (Sj + Sje )                                 -0.0357                           -0.361**
                                                              (0.0784)                           (0.174)
         ∆e$j,t                              0.754***         0.614***              0.561***    0.379***
                                             (0.0373)         (0.0405)              (0.0755)    (0.0672)
         ∆e$j,t × Sj                                          0.510***                          0.769***
                                                              (0.0439)                           (0.151)
         ∆eej,t                  0.467***    -0.0800**    -0.347***      0.207***   -0.184***   -0.384***
                                 (0.0175)     (0.0332)     (0.0430)      (0.0612)    (0.0601)    (0.0726)
         ∆eej,t × Sje                                         0.694***                          0.709***
                                                              (0.0821)                           (0.122)

         R-squared                0.131       0.143           0.210       0.102       0.112       0.293
         Observations             33,802      33,802          24,463     33,802      33,802      24,463
         Dyads                    2,647       2,647           1,900       2,647       2,647       1,900

Table 16: The first (resp., last) three columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of exporter ∆PPI, and global controls as described in the text. S.e. clustered by
dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         70
                                                             Average price pass-through, 2002–2015
                                                   unweighted, bilateral only              unweighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                       1
cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                       .5
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                                                                                                                  Bilateral
                                                 trade−weighted, bilateral only           trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                  USD
                                       1
                                       .5
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                             0                 1                  2   0                  1                    2
                                                                          years after shock

                                             Figure 18: Figure 4 computed on post-2002 data, but with same weights.

                                                               Average trade elasticity, 2002–2015
                                                   unweighted, bilateral only              unweighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                       .5
cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                                                                                                                  Bilateral
                                                 trade−weighted, bilateral only           trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                  USD
                                       .5
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                             0                 1                  2   0                  1                    2
                                                                          years after shock

                                             Figure 19: Figure 6 computed on post-2002 data, but with same weights.




                                                                                          71
                                                             Average price pass-through, 1992–2007
                                                   unweighted, bilateral only              unweighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                       1
cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                       .5
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                                                                                                                  Bilateral
                                                 trade−weighted, bilateral only           trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                  USD
                                       1
                                       .5
                                       0
                                       −.5




                                             0                 1                  2   0                  1                    2
                                                                          years after shock

                                             Figure 20: Figure 4 computed on pre-2007 data, but with same weights.

                                                               Average trade elasticity, 1992–2007
                                                   unweighted, bilateral only              unweighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                       .4
cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                       .2
                                       0
                                       −.2




                                                                                                                                  Bilateral
                                                 trade−weighted, bilateral only           trade−weighted, bilateral vs. USD
                                                                                                                                  USD
                                       .4
                                       .2
                                       0
                                       −.2




                                             0                 1                  2   0                  1                    2
                                                                          years after shock

                                             Figure 21: Figure 6 computed on pre-2007 data, but with same weights.




                                                                                          72
                                                                                Euro vs. dollar trade elasticity

                                                                                       unweighted                 trade-weighted
                                                                                      (1)       (2)                (3)       (4)
                                                                                     ∆yij,t   ∆yij,t              ∆yij,t    ∆yij,t

                        ∆eij,t                                                      -0.0631*       0.0229        -0.146***   -0.0560
                                                                                    (0.0371)      (0.0386)        (0.0493)   (0.0429)
                        ∆e$j,t                                                                   -0.695***                   -0.573***
                                                                                                  (0.0806)                    (0.124)
                        ∆eej,t                                                      -0.179***     0.320***       -0.00647    0.386***
                                                                                     (0.0413)     (0.0759)       (0.0494)     (0.105)

                        R-squared                                                     0.068         0.071          0.197       0.203
                        Observations                                                 37,437        37,437         37,437      37,437
                        Dyads                                                         2,807         2,807          2,807       2,807

Table 17: The first (resp., last) two columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of importer ∆GDP, and global controls as described in the text. S.e. clustered by
dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



          Response of rest-of-world aggregate trade to USD appreciation, 2002–2007
                                                                                                 unweighted
                                                               0
                                                               −.5
                        cumul. response to 1% shock, percent
                                                               −2 −1.5 −1




                                                                                                trade−weighted
                                                               0
                                                               −.5
                                                               −2 −1.5 −1




                                                                            0                          1                           2
                                                                                           years after shock

                   Figure 22: Figure 8 computed on pre-2007 data, but with same weights.



                                                                                                  73
                        Weighted average dollar invoicing share over time




                        .44
                        .42
                        .4
                        .38




                              1990    1995        2000        2005       2010        2015
                                                              P
Figure 23: Weighted average dollar import invoicing share j6=US wj Sj , using import value weights wj com-
puted in different reference years (along horizontal axis). Horizontal lines show the mean on the 1992–2015 and
2002–2015 samples.


Additional controls. Table 18 shows that our pass-through regressions results are qualitatively robust to
adding importer PPI growth and importer real GDP growth as additional controls. We use two lags of the log
changes of each of these indices. Although our baseline specification in Section 3.3 is common in the literature,
the addition of importer PPI and GDP controls can be justified by models with strategic complementarity in
pricing and country-specific demand shifts. While the overall level of both bilateral and USD pass-through is
somewhat lower when the controls are added, our qualitative conclusions regarding the dominance of the USD
exchange rate and the relationship with dollar invoicing are as pronounced in Table 18 as in Table 3.




                                                         74
                  Exchange rate pass-through into prices: Additional controls

                                          unweighted                          trade-weighted
                                 (1)         (2)      (3)             (4)           (5)      (6)
                                ∆pij,t      ∆pij,t   ∆pij,t          ∆pij,t       ∆pij,t    ∆pij,t

             ∆eij,t            0.519***   0.163***     0.214***    0.550***      0.328***   0.456***
                               (0.0117)   (0.0133)     (0.0177)    (0.0471)      (0.0480)   (0.0352)
             ∆eij,t × Sj                              -0.0869***                            -0.272***
                                                       (0.0252)                              (0.0495)
             ∆e$j,t                       0.706***     0.524***                  0.464***    0.103
                                          (0.0183)     (0.0298)                  (0.0347)   (0.0639)
             ∆e$j,t × Sj                               0.303***                             0.643***
                                                       (0.0360)                             (0.0951)

             R-squared          0.388      0.411         0.528       0.361        0.382       0.650
             Observations       42,243     42,243       32,916      42,243       42,243      32,916
             Dyads              2,502      2,502         1,853       2,502        2,502       1,853

Table 18: The first (resp., last) three columns use unweighted (resp. trade-weighted) regressions. All regressions
include two ∆ER lags, lags 0–2 of exporter ∆PPI, lags 0–2 of importer ∆PPI, lags 0–2 of importer ∆GDP, and
time FE. S.e. clustered by dyad. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       75
A.3     Firm level data for Colombia
The data are from the customs agency (DIAN), and the department of statistics (DANE), and include information
on the universe of Colombian importers and exporters. We have access to the data through the Banco de la
República. The data include the trading firm’s tax identification number, the 10-digit product code (according to
the Nandina classification system, based on the Harmonized System), the FOB value (in U.S. dollars) and volume
(net kilograms) of exports (imports), and the country of destination (origin), among other details.30 The data are
available on a monthly basis, and for our analysis we aggregate exports and imports at the annual or quarterly
level. As in Section 3, macroeconomic country controls are from the World Development Indicators. Our esti-
mations cover the period between 2005 and 2015. We define prices and quantities at the firm,10-digit product,
country (origin or destination), year (or quarter) level. Prices are given by the FOB value per net kilogram, and
quantities are given by total net kilograms. Exchange rates are the annual or quarterly average.
    Further, starting in 2007, our exports data include information on the invoicing currency of each transaction.
In Table 19 we present the distribution of currencies, broken down by destination groups. It is evident that the
vast majority of Colombian exports are priced in dollars. Even for exports to the euro zone, the overwhelm-
ing invoicing currency is the dollar. Although some transactions are negotiated in euros, Colombian pesos, or
Venezuelan bolı́vares among other currencies, the U.S. dollar accounts for over 98% of all exports. Moreover, the
distribution is very similar if we look at the value of exports negotiated in each currency instead of the number
of transactions. In this regard the Colombian economy is representative of a large number of economies that
rely extensively on dollar invoicing.




  30
     In the case of imports, there are cases where the imported good was produced in one country but actually arrived to
Colombia from a third country. This case is most commonly seen for goods produced in China arriving to Colombia from
either the United States or Panama. To avoid introducing unnecessary noise in our empirical work, we only use for our
regressions those observations where the country of origin and purchase are the same.


                                                          76
                                Currency distribution by destination

                      Destination            Currency          All Exports   Manufactures
                                         US Dollar               99.71%         99.93%
                      US                 Euro                     0.02%          0.03%
                                         Colombian Peso           0.27%          0.03%
                                         US Dollar               99.73%         99.91%
                      Dollar economies   Euro                     0.03%          0.04%
                                         Colombian Peso           0.23%          0.03%
                                         US Dollar               99.75%         99.90%
                      CAN                Euro                     0.07%          0.07%
                                         Colombian Peso           0.18%          0.03%
                                         US Dollar               99.18%         99.34%
                                         Euro                     0.13%          0.13%
                                         Colombian Peso           0.22%          0.03%
                      Latin America
                                         Bolı́var (Ven)           0.44%          0.45%
                                         Mexican Peso             0.02%          0.02%
                                         Colón (CR)              0.01%          0.01%
                                         US Dollar               90.73%         86.19%
                                         Euro                     8.64%         13.28%
                      European Union
                                         Colombian Peso           0.31%          0.21%
                                         Sterling Pound           0.28%          0.26%
                                         US Dollar               88.78%         84.48%
                                         Euro                    10.80%         15.22%
                      Euro zone
                                         Colombian Peso           0.39%          0.25%
                                         Sterling Pound           0.01%          0.01%
                                         US Dollar               98.28%         98.39%
                                         Euro                     0.72%          0.70%
                      All destinations
                                         Colombian Peso           0.67%          0.52%
                                         Venezuelan Bolı́var      0.27%          0.33%
                                         Sterling Pound           0.02%          0.01%

Table 19: Data from DIAN/DANE. Exports of coke, refined petroleum products, and nuclear fuel (ISIC 23), and
basic metals (ISIC 27) excluded from “Manufactures”. Distribution calculated as number of invoices in each
currency.




                                                      77
          Exchange rate pass-through into prices, annual data (dollarized economies)

                                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
                                    ∆pH,t       ∆pH,t        ∆pH,t       ∆pH,t        ∆pH,t       ∆pH,t
                                                        Exports

                ∆e$H,t             0.696***    0.828***     0.859***    0.823***    0.798***     0.819***
                                   (0.0331)    (0.0355)     (0.0414)    (0.0373)    (0.0450)     (0.0606)

                PPI                  no          yes          yes         yes          yes          yes
                Euro ER              no          no           yes         no           no           yes
                ∆ER lags             no          no           no          yes          no           no
                Sample                M           M            M           M            D            D
                R-squared           0.288       0.290        0.290       0.290        0.303        0.303
                Observations       169,792     159,041      159,041     159,041      98,831       98,831
                                                        Imports

                ∆e$H,t             0.977***    1.007***     1.035***    1.016***    0.969***     0.971***
                                   (0.0177)    (0.0309)     (0.0430)    (0.0192)    (0.0352)     (0.0357)

                PPI                  no          yes          yes         yes          yes         yes
                Euro ER              no          no           yes         no           no          yes
                ∆ER lags             no          no           no          yes          no          no
                Sample                M           M            M           M            D           D
                R-squared           0.225       0.225        0.225       0.225        0.250       0.250
                Observations       529,584     529,260      529,260     529,260      275,968     275,968

Table 20: All regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e. clustered at the year level. The
sample includes all manufactured (M) products excluding petrochemicals and metal industries in columns (1)-(4)
and only differentiated (D) products in columns (5)-(6). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


A.4     Micro Regressions: Supplementary Results
This section provides supplementary regression results using the Colombian firm-level data, including robustness
checks.
    Tables 20-23 display the results of the price pass-through and trade elasticity regressions presented in Sec-
tion 4.1, including PPI, the peso/euro exchange rate, and two ∆ER annual lags as additional controls. All re-
gressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. Our pass-through regressions results are robust to the
inclusion of these controls, and qualitative results are unchanged when we use the subsample of differentiated
products only (instead of the full set of manufactures) constructed using the classification of goods by Rauch
(1999).31



  31
     In our reported estimates, we follow Rauch’s conservative classification, although the results are virtually unchanged
if we use the liberal definition instead.


                                                            78
      Exchange rate pass-through into prices, annual data (non-dollarized economies)

                      (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                     ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t       ∆pH,t      ∆pH,t
                                                   Exports

   ∆eiH,t           0.673***    0.0616 0.523***       0.0726     0.0737     0.0576     0.0634      0.0510
                    (0.0937)   (0.0474) (0.120)      (0.0452)   (0.0510)   (0.0370)   (0.0832)     (0.115)
   ∆e$H,t                      0.667***              0.633***   0.672***   0.652***   0.644***    0.655***
                               (0.0507)              (0.0602)   (0.0667)   (0.0603)   (0.0860)     (0.104)

   PPI                no         no         yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes
   Euro ER            no         no         no         no          yes        no         no         yes
   ∆ER lags           no         no         no         no          no         yes        no         no
   Sample              M          M          M          M           M          M          D          D
   R-squared         0.303      0.305      0.308      0.310       0.300      0.310      0.324      0.315
   Observations     206,226    206,226    139,318    139,318     120,316    139,318    85,659     74,090
                                                   Imports

   ∆eiH,t           0.750***   0.315*** 0.506***     0.275***    0.238** 0.255***      0.293**     0.248**
                     (0.116)   (0.0777) (0.127)      (0.0837)   (0.0889) (0.0777)      (0.103)    (0.0954)
   ∆e$H,t                      0.528***              0.534***   0.607*** 0.572***     0.535***    0.601***
                               (0.0650)              (0.0510)   (0.0707) (0.0365)     (0.0647)    (0.0822)

   PPI                no         no         yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes
   Euro ER            no         no         no         no          yes        no         no         yes
   ∆ER lags           no         no         no         no          no         yes        no         no
   Sample              M          M          M          M           M          M          D          D
   R-squared         0.287      0.290      0.291      0.293       0.320      0.293      0.312      0.337
   Observations     931,993    931,993    808,304    808,304     518,898    808,304    419,717    272,060

Table 21: All regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e. clustered at the year level. The
sample includes all manufactured (M) products excluding petrochemicals and metal industries in columns (1)-(6)
and only differentiated (D) products in columns (7)-(8). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     79
    Trade elasticity with respect to exchange rate, annual data (dollarized economies)

                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)
                                       ∆yH,t       ∆yH,t       ∆yH,t      ∆yH,t        ∆yH,t
                                                     Exports

                   ∆e$H,t             -0.580*     -0.425       -0.559     -0.406     -0.00635
                                      (0.294)     (0.370)      (0.368)    (0.353)     (0.404)

                   Euro ER              no          yes          no         no         yes
                   ∆ER lags             no          no           yes        no          no
                   Sample                M           M            M          D          D
                   R-squared           0.225       0.225        0.225      0.232      0.232
                   Observations       159,041     159,041      159,041    98,831      98,831
                                                     Imports

                   ∆e$H,t            -1.206***    -0.959**   -1.205**    -1.235***    -0.973*
                                      (0.282)      (0.407)    (0.466)     (0.325)     (0.468)

                   Euro ER              no          yes          no        no           yes
                   ∆ER lags             no          no           yes       no           no
                   Sample                M           M            M         D            D
                   R-squared           0.184       0.184        0.184     0.205        0.205
                   Observations       529,276     529,276      529,276   275,974      275,974

Table 22: All regressions control for PPI, importer GDP, and include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e.
clustered at the year level. The sample includes all manufactured (M) products excluding petrochemicals and
metal industries in columns (1)-(3) and only differentiated (D) products in columns (4)-(5). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                        80
 Trade elasticity with respect to exchange rate, annual data (non-dollarized economies)

                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
                         ∆yH,t        ∆yH,t       ∆yH,t        ∆yH,t       ∆yH,t        ∆yH,t       ∆yH,t
                                                     Exports

      ∆eiH,t           -0.763***     0.0193      -0.0553      -0.0330 -0.992***        -0.136       -0.200
                        (0.212)      (0.260)      (0.314)     (0.271)  (0.261)         (0.333)      (0.390)
      ∆e$H,t                        -1.077***    -1.007**    -1.032***                -1.152***    -0.977**
                                     (0.265)      (0.322)     (0.265)                  (0.282)      (0.342)

      Euro ER             no           no          yes           no          no          no           yes
      ∆ER lags            no           no          no            yes         no          no           no
      Sample               M            M           M             M           D           D            D
      R-squared          0.250        0.252       0.245         0.252       0.258       0.260        0.252
      Observations      139,318      139,318     120,316       139,318     85,659      85,659       74,090
                                                     Imports

      ∆eiH,t           -0.703***     -0.212*     -0.319       -0.204   -0.763***       -0.223       -0.314
                        (0.217)      (0.110)     (0.246)      (0.114)   (0.241)        (0.129)      (0.251)
      ∆e$H,t                        -0.962***   -0.922***    -0.941***                -1.023***    -0.957***
                                     (0.224)     (0.245)      (0.250)                  (0.281)      (0.277)

      Euro ER             no           no          yes           no         no           no          yes
      ∆ER lags            no           no          no            yes        no           no          no
      Sample               M            M           M             M          D            D           D
      R-squared          0.236        0.237       0.254         0.237      0.263        0.264       0.286
      Observations      808,409      808,409     519,002       808,409    419,784      419,784     272,126

Table 23: All regressions control for PPI, importer GDP, and include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects. S.e.
clustered at the year level. The sample includes all manufactured (M) products excluding petrochemicals and
metal industries in columns (1)-(4) and only differentiated (D) products in columns (5)-(7). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                                        81
                                                Parameter values

                                                           Parameter            Value
                            Measured
                            Export Invoicing Shares
                                                                $
                              to U.S.                          θH$                1.00
                                                             $     R
                              to R                          θHR , θHR          0.93,0.07
                            Shocks
                              commodity prices                 σζ , ρζ         0.09, 0.74
                            Estimated
                            Home bias                          γHH               0.88
                              from U.S.                        γ$H               0.06
                              from R                           γRH               0.06
                            Exports
                              to U.S.                           D$               -2.38
                              to R                              DR               -0.87
                            Oil endowment                        ζ̄               0.27
                            Import Invoicing Shares
                                                                 $
                              from U.S.                         θ$H               1.00
                                                             $       R
                              from R                       θRH   , θRH         0.93, 0.07
                            eRH process                     η, ρR , σR      0.74, 0.82,0.016
                            a process                      σa , ρa , ρa,ζ   0.13,0.49,-0.18

                             Table 24: Other parameter values as reported in the text.



A.5     Structural Estimation On Colombian Data
We use a combination of calibration and estimation to parameterize the model, reported in Table 24 while other
parameter values are as reported in Table 1. The export invoicing shares are measured in the data directly. We
calibrate the process for commodity price shocks in equation (24) to match the autocorrelation and standard
deviation of HP-filtered commodity prices.32 The values for ζ̄, D$ , DR , γHH , are chosen such that in steady
state the model matches the Colombian data for the share of oil exports in total exports of 58%, a 10% share of
oil exports over GDP, and the share of manufacturing exports going to the U.S. of 18%. We also match a steady
state debt to GDP of 31% for Colombia. We set the interest elasticity to real dollar debt to equal 0.001.
     We estimate the remaining parameters using a minimum distance estimator that minimizes the sum of
squared deviations from moments in the data. Specifically, we minimize,

                                                  m(~τ )Ω−1 mT (~τ )
              $    $     R
where ~τ = {θ$H , θRH , θRH , η, σr , ρR , σa , ρa , ρa,ζ } is a vector of nine parameters. To estimate these parameters
we use the following eleven moments m(~τ ) that theory suggests are informative. We estimate all parameters
jointly and consequently all moments matter for all parameter values. The most informative moment for each
parameter is described next.
  32
    Specifically, we use the IMF’s price index for all primary commodities, at the quarterly frequency, from 2000Q1 to
2016Q2. We HP filter the log of the index and compute the autocorrelation and the standard deviation of the cyclical
component.



                                                          82
                                                    Moment matching

                        $        $         H                                                          $        $
                      β̂0,$H   β̂0,RH    β̂0,RH     η̂      σ̂R       ρ̂R    ρ̂a,ζ    σ̂a    ρ̂a    β̂0,HR   β̂0,RH
            Data      0.97      0.89      0.18     0.54   0.018       0.78   0.84    0.023   0.64   0.85     0.87
           Model      0.97      0.80      0.13     0.54   0.017       0.78   0.87    0.026   0.64   0.81     0.90

Table 25: Moments in the data and in the estimated model. The difference between the second and last column is
that the former estimate is from a regression that controls for the bilateral ER alongside the dollar ER. The latter
is from a regression with only the dollar ER.



       • Import Invoicing Shares: To estimate the import invoicing shares,
                 $
             – θ$H : We use the contemporaneous estimate β0 from the pass-through regression for import prices
               from dollar countries.
                R        $
             – θRH  and θRH : We use the coefficients from regressing the quarterly change in import prices from
               non-dollar destinations on the peso/dollar and peso/origin country exchange rates.33 ∆pRH,t =
               β$ · ∆e$H,t + βR · ∆eRH,t + t
       • Relation between eRH and e$H : To estimate η and σR we construct the real exchange rate for Colombia
         relative to the U.S. and the (export share weighted) real exchange rate for Colombia relative to its other
         trading partners. We use these series to estimate the two equations (23) and (26) which we rewrite here:
                                                                                  
                                  eRH,t + pR,t − pH,t = η e$H,t + p$,t − pH,t + εR,t
                                                  εR,t = ρR εR,t−1 + R,t

         We use the empirical estimate for η̂, ρ̂R and the standard deviation of R,t to obtain η, ρR , σR .

       • Process for a and ζ: We match moments for the standard deviation (0.023) and autocorrelation (0.62) of
         manufacturing value added. We also match the contemporaneous correlation (0.84) of value added and
         commodity prices. Note that a refers to productivity, so we infer the process for a from matching moments
         of value added in the model and data.

       • Additional Moments: We match the time zero coefficient on pass-through from E$H into export and import
         prices for R goods.

The weighting matrix Ω−1 is a diagonal matrix where the entries are the inverse of the variance of the data
moments. The estimated values from this minimization are reported in Table 24 and the moment match between
the model and data are reported in Table 25. As Table 24 reports the data strongly points towards DCP with
almost all of the import invoicing share in dollars.




  33
       In the data we also control for the peso/euro exchange rate.


                                                              83
              Exchange rate pass-through into prices: Data and estimated model

                                         (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
                                        ∆pHR,t    ∆pHR,t     ∆pRH,t     ∆pRH,t
                                                    Data

                             ∆eRH,t     0.67***      0.06    0.750***   0.32***
                                         (0.09)     (0.05)    (0.12)     (0.08)
                             ∆e$H,t                0.68***              0.53***
                                                    (0.05)               (0.07)

                                             Estimated model

                             ∆eRH,t       0.72      0.28       0.68       0.22
                             ∆e$H,t                 0.66                  0.70

                                                    DCP

                             ∆eRH,t       0.71      0.23       0.67       0.17
                             ∆e$H,t                 0.71                  0.75

                                                    PCP

                             ∆eRH,t       0.49      0.26       0.92       0.88
                             ∆e$H,t                 0.36                  0.06

                                                    LCP

                             ∆eRH,t       0.98      0.93       0.44       0.19
                             ∆e$H,t                 0.08                  0.39

Table 26: Exchange rate pass-through into export and import prices to/from non-dollarized economies, in the
data and the model. Both regressions have only the bilateral exchange rate and the dollar exchange rate as
controls. Data regressions include Firm-Industry-Country fixed effects, with s.e. clustered at the year level.
The last three sets of results show the model-implied pass-through coefficients for the three extreme pricing
assumptions, keeping all other parameters fixed at the values in Table 25.




                                                     84
