                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       A BEHAVIORAL NEW KEYNESIAN MODEL

                                        Xavier Gabaix

                                     Working Paper 22954
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22954


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2016, Revised June 2019




I thank Igor Cesarec, Vu Chau, Antonio Coppola, Wu Di, James Graham and Lingxuan Wu for
excellent research assistance. For useful comments I thank the editor and referees, Marios
Angeletos, Adrien Auclert, Larry Ball, Olivier Blanchard, Jeff Campbell, Larry Christiano, John
Cochrane, Tim Cogley, Gauti Eggertsson, Emmanuel Farhi, Roger Farmer, Jordi Galí, Mark
Gertler, Narayana Kocherlakota, Greg Mankiw, Knut Mork, Ricardo Reis, Dongho Song, Jim
Stock, Michael Woodford, and participants at various seminars and conferences. I am grateful to
the CGEB, the Institute for New Economic Thinking, the NSF (SES-1325181) and the Sloan
Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Xavier Gabaix. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Behavioral New Keynesian Model
Xavier Gabaix
NBER Working Paper No. 22954
December 2016, Revised June 2019
JEL No. D03,E03,E5,E6,G02

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a framework for analyzing how bounded rationality affects monetary and
fiscal policy. The model is a tractable and parsimonious enrichment of the widely-used New
Keynesian model – with one main new “cognitive discounting” parameter, which quantifies how
poorly agents understand future economic disturbances. That myopia parameter, in turn, affects
the power of monetary and fiscal policy in a microfounded general equilibrium. A number of
consequences emerge. (i) Fiscal stimulus or “helicopter drops of money” are powerful and,
indeed, pull the economy out of the zero lower bound. More generally, the model allows for the
joint analysis of optimal monetary and fiscal policy. (ii) The Taylor principle is strongly
modified: even with passive monetary policy, equilibrium is determinate, whereas the traditional
rational model yields multiple equilibria, which reduces its predictive power, and generates
indeterminate economies at the zero lower bound (ZLB). (iii) The ZLB is much less costly than in
the traditional model. (iv) The model brings a natural solution to the “forward guidance puzzle”:
the fact that in the rational model, shocks to very distant rates have a very powerful impact on
today's consumption and inflation; because agents are partially myopic, this effect is muted. (v)
Optimal policy changes qualitatively: the optimal commitment policy with rational agents
demands “nominal GDP targeting”; this is not the case with behavioral firms, as the benefits of
commitment are less strong with myopic firms. (vi) The model is “neo-Fisherian” in the long run,
but Keynesian in the short run: a permanent rise in the interest rate decreases inflation in the short
run but increases it in the long run. The non-standard behavioral features of the model seem
warranted by extant empirical evidence.


Xavier Gabaix
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge St
¸˛Cambridge, MA 02138
  and NBER
  xgabaix@fas.harvard.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22954
1     Introduction
This paper proposes a way to analyze monetary and fiscal policy when agents are not fully rational. To
do so, it enriches the basic model of monetary policy, the New Keynesian (NK) model, by incorporating
behavioral factors. In the baseline NK model the agent is fully rational (though prices are sticky). Here,
in contrast, the agent is partially myopic to unusual events and does not anticipate the future perfectly.
The formulation takes the form of a parsimonious generalization of the traditional model that allows
for the analysis of monetary and fiscal policy. This has a number of strong consequences for aggregate
outcomes.

    1. Fiscal policy is much more powerful than in the traditional model.1 In the traditional model,
       rational agents are Ricardian and do not react to tax cuts. In the present behavioral model,
       agents are partly myopic, and consume more when they receive tax cuts or “helicopter drops of
       money” from the central bank. As a result, we can study the interaction between monetary and
       fiscal policy.

    2. The Taylor principle is strongly modified. Equilibrium selection issues vanish in many cases: for
       instance, even with a constant nominal interest rate there is just one (bounded) equilibrium.

    3. Relatedly, the model can explain the stability of economies stuck at the zero lower bound (ZLB),
       something that is difficult to achieve in traditional models.

    4. The ZLB is much less costly.

    5. Forward guidance is much less powerful than in the traditional model, offering a natural behavioral
       resolution of the “forward guidance puzzle”.

    6. Optimal policy changes qualitatively: for instance, the optimal commitment policy with rational
       firms demands “price level targeting”. This is not the case with behavioral firms.

    7. A number of neo-Fisherian paradoxes are resolved. A permanent rise in the nominal interest rate
       causes inflation to fall in the short run (a Keynesian effect) and rise in the long run (so that
       long-run Fisher neutrality holds with respect to inflation).

In addition, I will argue that there is reasonable empirical evidence for the main non-standard features
of the model. Let me expand on the above points.
    Behavioral mechanism: Cognitive discounting. The main non-standard feature of the model is a form
of cognitive discounting. The phenomenon I want to analyze is that the world is not fully understood
by agents, especially events that are far into the future. To capture this mathematically, I make the
following key assumption: agents, as they simulate the future, shrink their simulations toward a simple
benchmark — namely, the steady state of the economy.2 This follows from a microfoundation in which
agents receive noisy signals about the economy. As a result, an innovation happening in k periods has
a direct impact on agents’ expectations that is shrunk by a factor m̄k relative to the rational response,
where m̄ ∈ [0, 1] is a parameter capturing cognitive discounting. Hence, innovations that are deep in
   1
     By “fiscal policy” I mean government transfers, i.e. changes in (lump-sum) taxes. In the traditional Ricardian model,
they have no effect (Barro (1974)). This is in contrast to government consumption, which does have an effect even in the
traditional model.
   2
     The paper also explores a variant in which the simulations are biased toward the contemporaneous values. The
conclusions are similar: future impacts are heavily discounted.

                                                            2
the future get heavily discounted relatively to a rational benchmark, which corresponds to the case
m̄ = 1. The agent is globally patient with respect to steady-state variables, but is myopic with respect
to deviations around the steady state, especially if they are in the distant future.
    This one premise leads to a behavioral version of the agents’ Euler equation and of the firms’ price-
setting policy. In general equilibrium, this yields the following tractable behavioral amendment of
the canonical two-equation New Keynesian model (which is fully rational and is distilled in Woodford
(2003b) and Galı́ (2015)), in which the future output gap and inflation enter in a discounted way:

                             xt = M Et [xt+1 ] − σ (it − Et πt+1 − rtn ) (IS curve),                         (1)
                             πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] + κxt (Phillips curve),                                    (2)

where xt is the output gap (the deviation of GDP from its efficient level, so that positive xt corresponds
to a boom, negative xt to a recession), πt is inflation, it is the nominal interest rate, rtn is the natural real
interest rate, σ is the sensitivity of the output gap to the interest rate, κ is the sensitivity of inflation
to the output gap, and β is the pure rate of time preference. The equilibrium behavioral parameters
M, M f ∈ [0, 1] are the aggregate-level attention parameters of consumers and firms, respectively, and
increase with the micro cognitive discounting parameter m̄. The traditional, rational model corresponds
to M = M f = 1, but the behavioral model generates M and M f strictly less than 1. This has a large
number of consequences for macroeconomic dynamics.
    Fiscal policy and helicopter drops of money. In the traditional NK model, agents are fully rational. So
Ricardian equivalence holds, and fiscal policy (meaning lump-sum tax changes, as opposed to government
expenditure) has no impact. Here, in contrast, the agent is not Ricardian because he fails to perfectly
anticipate future taxes. As a result, tax cuts and transfers are unusually stimulative (technically, they
increase the natural rate rtn ), particularly if they happen in the present. As the agent is partially myopic,
taxes are best enacted in the present.
    At the ZLB, only forward guidance (or, in more general models, quantitative easing) is available,
and in the rational model optimal policy only leads to a complicated second best. However, in this
model, the central bank (and more generally the government) has a new instrument: it can restore the
first best by doing “helicopter drops of money”, i.e. by sending checks to people – via fiscal policy.
    Zero lower bound (ZLB). Depressions due to the ZLB are unboundedly large in the rational model,
probably counterfactually so (see for example Werning (2012)). This is because agents unflinchingly
respect their Euler equations. In contrast, depressions are moderate and bounded in this behavioral
model – closer to reality and common sense. This is because aggregate discounting (M, M f < 1) induces
exponential attenuation of the impact of future output gaps on current macroeconomic conditions.
    The Taylor principle reconsidered and equilibrium determinacy. When monetary policy is passive
(e.g. via a constant interest rate rule, or when it violates the Taylor principle that monetary policy
should strongly lean against economic conditions), the traditional model has a continuum of (bounded)
equilibria, so that the response to a simple question like “What happens when interest rates are kept
constant?” is ill-defined: it is mired in the morass of equilibrium selection. In contrast, in this behavioral
model there is just one (bounded) equilibrium: things are clean and theoretically definite. A partial
intuition is that the discounting parameters M and M f make the present less sensitive to the future
and hence stabilize the economy (in the technical sense of making its equilibrium “Blanchard and Kahn
(1980) determinate”).
    Economic stability. Determinacy is not just a purely theoretical question. In the rational model, if


                                                       3
the economy is stuck at the ZLB forever the Taylor principle is violated (as the nominal interest rate
is stuck at 0%). The equilibrium is therefore indeterminate: we could expect the economy to jump
randomly from one period to the next (we shall see that a similar phenomenon happens if the ZLB
lasts for a large but finite duration). However, we do not see that in Japan since the late 1980s or in
Western economies in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis (Cochrane (2017)). This can be explained with
this behavioral model if agents are myopic enough and if firms rely enough on “inflation guidance” by
the central bank.
    Forward guidance. With rational agents, “forward guidance” by the central bank is predicted to
work very powerfully, most likely too much so, as emphasized by Del Negro et al. (2015) and McKay
et al. (2016). The reason is again that the traditional consumer rigidly respects his Euler equation and
expects other agents to do the same, so that a movement of the interest rate far in the future has a
strong impact today. However, in the behavioral model this impact is muted by the agent’s myopia
(M, M f < 1), which makes forward guidance less powerful.
    Optimal policy changes qualitatively. With rational firms, the optimal commitment policy entails
“price level targeting” (which gives, when GDP is trend-stationary, “nominal GDP targeting”): after
a cost-push shock, monetary policy should partially let inflation rise, but then create deflation, so that
eventually the price level and nominal GDP come back to their pre-shock trend. This is because with
rational firms, there are strong benefits from commitment to being very tough in the future (Clarida et
al. (1999)). With behavioral firms, in contrast, the benefits from commitment are lower, and after the
cost-push shock the central bank does not find it useful to engineer a deflation and come back to the
initial price level (this is in part because forward guidance does not work as well). Hence, price level
targeting and nominal GDP targeting are not desirable when firms are behavioral.
    A number of neo-Fisherian paradoxes vanish. A number of authors, especially Cochrane (2017),
highlight that in the rational New Keynesian model, a permanent rise in interest rates leads to an
immediate rise in inflation, which is paradoxical. This is called the “neo-Fisherian” property. In the
present behavioral model (augmented to allow for non-zero trend inflation), the property holds in the
long run: the long-run real rate is independent of monetary policy (Fisher neutrality holds). However,
in the short run, raising rates does lower inflation and output, as in the Keynesian model.

Links with the literature This is a behavioral paper, and there are of course many ways to model
bounded rationality. This includes limited information updating (Gabaix and Laibson (2002), Mankiw
and Reis (2002)), related differential salience (Bordalo et al. (2013)), and noisy signals (Sims (2003),
Maćkowiak and Wiederholt (2015), Caplin et al. (2017), Hébert and Woodford (2018)).3 The modeling
style and microfoundations of the present paper use the “sparsity” approach developed progressively
since Gabaix (2014), because it seems to capture a good deal of the psychology of attention (Gabaix
(2019)) while remaining highly tractable because it uses deterministic models (unlike models with noisy
signals) and continuous parameters. As a result, it applies to microeconomic problems like basic con-
sumer theory and Arrow-Debreu style general equilibrium (something as of yet not done by other
modelling techniques), dynamic macroeconomics (Gabaix (2016)), and public economics (Farhi and
Gabaix (2017)).
    On the macro theory front, this paper relates to the literature on “macroeconomics without the
rational-expectations hypothesis” reviewed in Woodford (2013). In previous literature, a popular way
   3
     My notion of “behavioral” here is bounded rationality or cognitive myopia. I abstract from other interesting forces,
like fairness (Eyster et al. (2017)) – they create an additional source of price stickiness.


                                                           4
to discipline beliefs under deviation from rational expectations is via learning, as reviewed in Eusepi
and Preston (2018), and Evans and Honkapohja (2001).4 This is also related to more recent work, such
as that on level-k thinking by Farhi and Werning (2017), Woodford (2018), and Garcı́a-Schmidt and
Woodford (2019). There, agents are rational with respect to partial equilibrium effects, but don’t quite
understand general equilibrium effects. In both cases, the future is dampened. In the present framework
agents’ cognitive myopia applies to both partial and general equilibrium effect.
    The paper also relates to the literature on incomplete information and higher-order beliefs that
has followed Morris and Shin (1998); see Angeletos and Lian (2016) for a review. This literature has
emphasized how lack of common knowledge and higher-order uncertainty can anchor expectations of
endogenous outcomes, such as past inflation. Examples of such anchoring include Woodford (2003a),
Morris et al. (2006), Nimark (2008), and Angeletos and La’O (2010). Building on this literature, Angele-
tos and Lian (2018) have explored a version of the NK model that maintains the rational hypothesis but
allows for higher-order uncertainty. In a general-equilibrium setting, higher-order uncertainty anchors
forward-looking expectations in a way that resembles cognitive discounting and under some assumptions
can rationalize it. Angeletos and Lian (2017) provide an abstract framework that embeds rational mod-
els (with incomplete information) and behavioral models (without rational expectations).5 A recent
paper by Angeletos and Huo (2019) also shows that incomplete information offers a plausible ratio-
nalization of partly backward-looking behavior in the New Keynesian model, in addition to partially
myopic features.6 One can hope that a healthy interplay between incomplete information models and
behavioral models will continue, as both are useful tools to investigate the complexities of economic life.
    Rational models with financially constrained consumers can also generate something akin to M < 1
(but keep M f = 1). McKay et al. (2016) provide a microfoundation for an approximate version of
the IS curve with M < 1, based on heterogeneous rational agents with limited risk sharing (see also
Campbell et al. (2017)), without an analysis of deficits. The analysis of Werning (2015) yields a modified
Euler equation with rational heterogeneous agents, which often yields M > 1. Del Negro et al. (2015)
and Eggertsson et al. (2019) work out models with finitely-lived agents that give an M slightly below
1. Finite lives severely limit how myopic agents can be (e.g., the models predict an M very close
to 1), given that life expectancies are quite high. Galı́ (2017) shows that the NK model with finite
lives without any assets in positive net supply (government debt, capital, or bubbles) cannot generate
discounting in the IS curve.7 Bilbiie (2018), analyzing a class of heterogeneous-agent rational models
with financial constraints, finds that they can generate M < 1 (with some assumptions about the
cyclicality of inequality), but they also generate a government spending multiplier less than 1 in the
absence of counteracting channels. In contrast, the present behavioral model generates M < 1 as
well as a failure of Ricardian equivalence that induces a government spending multiplier greater than
   4
      Agents in these models act as econometricians who update their forecast models as new data arrive. This literature
focuses greatly on the local stability of the learning dynamics, which links tightly to whether the learning equilibrium
converges to the rational expectations equilibrium. Behavioral agents in the present work, on the other hand, are behavioral
in the sense that their mental model never converges to the rational expectations solution.
    5
      In earlier work, Angeletos and La’O (2009) and Angeletos et al. (2018) explore how dropping the common-prior
assumption can help mimic the dynamics of higher-order beliefs introduced by incomplete information, which generates
a departure from traditional rational expectations.
    6
      The Mankiw and Reis (2002) model changes the Phillips curve, which helps with some paradoxes (Kiley (2016)), but
it keeps the same IS curve as the traditional model. A synthesis of Mankiw-Reis and the present model would be useful.
    7
      A related direction is via safe asset premia. Fisher (2015) derives a discounted Euler equation with a safe asset
premium: but the effect is very small; for example the coefficient 1 − M is very close to 0 – close to the empirical “safety
premium”, so at most M = 0.99. Caballero and Farhi (2017) offer a different explanation of the forward guidance puzzle
in a model with a shortage of safe assets and endogenous risk premia.


                                                             5
1. Hence, this behavioral model offers a resolution to the paradoxes with rational, credit-constrained
agents highlighted by Bilbiie (2018).

Paper outline Section 2 presents basic model assumptions and derives its main building blocks,
summarized in Proposition 2.5. Section 3 derives the positive implications of the model. Section 4
studies optimal monetary policy with behavioral agents. Section 5 analyzes fiscal policy and studies its
optimal implementation. Section 6 introduces a number of model enrichments that extend the model in
empirically plausible directions. These include variants of the model that allow agents to be inattentive
to contemporaneous variables, which further lessens the impact of monetary policy and flattens the
Phillips curve. In the baseline model, trend inflation is normalized to zero. The more empirically
realistic case where inflation has a non-zero or even time-varying trend is also examined in Section 6;
this also allows me to analyze neo-Fisherian paradoxes. Section 7 discusses the behavioral assumptions
of the model at greater depth, and Section 8 concludes. Section 9 presents detailed microfoundations
for the behavioral model. Section 10 presents an elementary 2-period model with behavioral agents. I
recommend it to entrants to this literature. The rest of the appendix contains additional proofs and
details.
    Notations. I distinguish between E [X], the objective expectation of X, and EBR [X], the expectation
under the agent’s boundedly r ational (BR) model of the world.
    Though the exposition is largely self-contained, this paper is in part a behavioral version of Chapters
2-5 of the Galı́ (2015) textbook, itself in part a summary of Woodford (2003b). My notations are typically
those of Galı́, except that γ is risk aversion, something that Galı́ denotes with σ. In concordance with
the broader literature, I use σ for the (“effective”) intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
    Throughout the paper, I use the notation r̄ for the steady state value of the real interest rate, or
alternatively r where it is unambiguous to do so. I call the economy “determinate” (in the sense of
Blanchard and Kahn (1980)) if, given initial conditions, there is only one non-explosive equilibrium
path.


2     A Behavioral Model
2.1    Basic Setup and the Household’s Problem
    Setup: Objective reality I consider an agent with standard utility
                               ∞
                               X                                         c1−γ − 1 N 1+φ
                        U =E         β t u (ct , Nt ) with u (c, N ) =           −      ,              (3)
                               t=0
                                                                           1−γ     1+φ

where ct is consumption, and Nt is labor supply (as in N umber of hours supplied).
   There is a Dixit-Stiglitz continuum [0, 1] of firms producing intermediate goods. If the agent con-
                                                             R ε−1  ε−1ε
                                                                1
sumes cit of good i, his aggregated consumption is ct =           c di
                                                               0 it
                                                                   ε
                                                                           . Firm i produces output
according to Yit = Nit eζt , where Nit is its labor input, and ζt an aggregate TFP level, which for con-
creteness follows an AR(1) process with mean 0. The final good is produced competitively in quantity
                    ε
     R     ε−1   ε−1
        1                                                                      R1
Yt = 0 Yit di ε
                       . In equilibrium the labor market clears, so that Nt = 0 Nit di. So, if there is no
pricing friction, the aggregate production of the economy is ct = eζt Nt . There is no capital, as in the
baseline New Keynesian model.

                                                         6
   The real wage is ωt . The real interest rate is rt and the agent’s real income is yt = ωt Nt + ytf : the
sum of labor income ωt Nt and profit income ytf (as in income coming from f irms); later we will add
taxes. His real financial wealth kt evolves as:

                                             kt+1 = (1 + rt ) (kt − ct + yt ) .                                           (4)

     The agent’s problem is max(ct ,Nt )t≥0 U subject to (4), and the usual transversality condition
(limt→∞ β t c−γ
              t kt = 0), which I will omit mentioning from now on.
     Consider first the case where the economy is deterministic at the steady state (ζt ≡ 0), so that the
interest rate, income, real wage, consumption, and labor supply are at their steady-state values r̄, ȳ,
ω̄, c̄, N̄ . We have a simple deterministic problem. Defining R := 1 + r̄, we have R = 1/β. To correct
monopolistic distortions, I assume that the government has put in place the usual corrective production
subsidies, financed by a lump-sum tax on firms (so that profits are 0 on average). Hence, at the steady
state the economy operates efficiently and c̄ = N̄ = ω̄ = ȳ = 1.8
     Let us now go back to the general case, outside of the steady state. There is a state vector Xt
(comprising productivity ζt , as well as announced actions in monetary and fiscal policy), that will
evolve in equilibrium as:
                                           Xt+1 = GX (Xt , t+1 )                                     (5)
for some equilibrium transition function GX and mean-0 innovations t+1 (which depend on the equi-
librium policies of the agent and the government).
    I decompose the values as deviations from the above steady state, for example:

                                              rt = r̄ + r̂t ,       yt = ȳ + ŷt ,

and those deviations are functions of the state:

                          r̂t = r̂ (Xt ) ,     ŷt = ŷ (Nt , Xt ) := ω (Xt ) Nt + y f (Xt ) − ȳ,

where the functions of Xt are determined in equilibrium. The law of motion for private financial wealth
kt is9

                    kt+1 = Gk (ct , Nt , kt , Xt ) := (1 + r̄ + r̂ (Xt )) (kt + ȳ + ŷ (Nt , Xt ) − ct ) ,               (6)
so the agent’s problem can be rewritten as max(ct ,Nt )t≥0 U subject to (5) and (6).
    I assume that Xt has mean 0, i.e. has been de-meaned. Linearizing, the law of motion becomes:

                                                   Xt+1 = ΓXt + t+1                                                      (7)

for some matrix Γ, after perhaps a renormalization of t+1 . Likewise, linearizing we will have r̂ (X) =
brX X, for some factor brX .
   8
      Indeed, when ζ = 0, ω̄ = 1, and labor supply satisfies ω̄uc + uN = 0, i.e. N̄ φ = ω̄c̄−γ , with the resource constraint:
c̄ = N̄ .
    9
      As there is no aggregate capital, financial wealth is kt = 0 in equilibrium in the basic model without government
debt. But we need to consider potential deviations from kt = 0 when studying the agent’s consumption problem. When
later we add government debt Bt , we will have kt = Bt in equilibrium.




                                                                7
   Setup: Reality perceived by the behavioral agent I can now describe the behavioral agent.
The main phenomenon I want to capture is that the world is not fully understood by the agent, es-
pecially events that are far into the future. To capture this mathematically, I make the following key
assumption:10

Assumption 2.1 (Cognitive discounting of the state vector) The agent perceives that the state vector
evolves as:
                                  Xt+1 = m̄GX (Xt , t+1 ) ,                                     (8)
where m̄ ∈ [0, 1] is a “cognitive discounting” parameter measuring attention to the future.
       Then, given this perception, the agent solves max(ct ,Nt )t≥0 U subject to (6) and (8).11
       To better interpret m̄, let us linearize (8):

                                                   Xt+1 = m̄ (ΓXt + t+1 ) .                                                     (9)

    Hence the expectation of the behavioral agent is EBRt [Xt+1 ] = m̄ΓXt and, iterating, EBR
                                                                                           t  [Xt+k ] =
  k k                                                     k
m̄ Γ Xt , while the rational expectation is Et [Xt+k ] = Γ Xt (the rational policy always obtains from
setting the attention parameters to 1).12 Hence:

                                                 EBR
                                                  t  [Xt+k ] = m̄k Et [Xt+k ] ,                                                 (10)

where EBR t  [Xt+k ] is the subjective expectation by the behavioral agent, and Et [Xt+k ] is the rational
expectation. The more distant the events in the future, the more the behavioral agent “sees them dimly”,
i.e. sees them with a dampened cognitive discount factor m̄k at horizon k (recall that m̄ ∈ [0, 1]). The
parameter m̄ models a form of “global cognitive discounting” – discounting future disturbances more
(relative to a rational agent) when the forecasting horizon is more distant. Importantly, this implies
that all perceived variables will embed some cognitive discounting:13

Lemma 2.2 (Cognitive discounting of all variables) For any variable z (Xt ) with z (0) = 0, the beliefs
of the behavioral agent satisfy, for all k ≥ 0, and linearizing:

                                             EBR
                                              t  [z (Xt+k )] = m̄k Et [z (Xt+k )] ,                                             (11)

where EBR
        t  is the subjective (behavioral) expectation operator, which uses the misperceived law of motion
(8), and Et is the rational one, which uses the rational law of motion (5).
  10
     Section 9 offers a microfoundation for this cognitive discounting assumption.
  11
     I particularize the formalism in Gabaix (2016), which is a tractable way to model dynamic programming with limited
attention. “Cognitive discounting” was laid out as a possibility in that paper (as a misperception of autocorrelations),
but its concrete impact was not studied in any detail there.
  12
     When the mean of Xt is not 0, but rather X∗ such that X∗ = G (X∗ , 0), then the process perceived by the behavioral
agent is: Xt+1 = (1 − m̄) X∗ + m̄G (Xt , t+1 ). Then, we have, linearizing, EBR t [Xt+k − X∗ ] = m̄k Et [Xt+k − X∗ ]. In
addition, there is no long term growth in this model, as in the basic New Keynesian model. It is easy to introduce it
(see Section 12.7 of the Online Appendix). The behavioral agent would be rational with respect to the values around the
balanced growth path, but myopic for the deviations from it.
  13
     Linearizing, we have z (X) = bzX X for some row vector bzX , and:

         EBR
          t  [z (Xt+k )] = EBR
                            t  [bzX Xt+k ] = bzX EBR
                                                  t  [Xt+k ] = bzX m̄k Et [Xt+k ] = m̄k Et [bzX Xt+k ] = m̄k Et [z (Xt+k )] .




                                                                  8
       For instance, the interest rate perceived in k periods is

                                     EBR
                                      t  [r̄ + r̂ (Xt+k )] = r̄ + m̄k Et [r̂ (Xt+k )] .

The agent perceives correctly the average interest rate r̄ and is globally patient with respect to it, like
the rational agent, but he perceives myopically future deviations from the average interest rate (i.e.,
Et [r̂ (Xt+k )] is dampened by m̄k ).14


2.2       The Firm’s Problem
Next, I explore what happens if firms do not fully pay attention to future macro variables either.ε Firm
                                                                                  R     ε−1   ε−1
                                                                                     1
i sets a price Pit . As the final good is produced competitively in quantity Yt = 0 Yit ε di        , the
aggregate price level is:
                                               Z 1           1
                                                            1−ε
                                                      1−ε
                                          Pt =      Pit di       .                                   (12)
                                                          0

Firms have the usual Calvo pricing friction: at each period, they can reset their price only with proba-
bility 1 − θ.

Setup: Objective reality and the rational firm’s problem Consider a firm i, and call qiτ :=
ln PPiττ = piτ − pτ its real log price at time τ . Its real profit is
                                                                          −ε
                                                     Piτ               Piτ
                                          vτ =           − M Cτ                    cτ .
                                                     Pτ                Pτ
       −ε
Here PPiττ       cτ is the total demand for the firm’s good, with cτ aggregate consumption; M Ct =
(1 − τf ) eωζtt = (1 − τf ) e−µt is the real marginal cost; µt := ζt − ln ωt is the labor wedge, which is
zero at efficiency. A corrective wage subsidy τf = 1ε ensures that there are no price distortions on
average. For simplicity I assume that this subsidy is financed by a lump-sum tax on firms, which affects
vτ by an additive value, so that it does not change the pricing decision: vτ is the firm’s profit before the
lump-sum tax. It is equal to:

                                  v 0 (qiτ , µτ , cτ ) := eqiτ − (1 − τf ) e−µτ e−εqiτ cτ .
                                                                               
                                                                                                                         (13)

    I fix a date t and consider the worldview of a firm simulating future dates τ ≥ t. Call Xτ the
extended macro state vector Xτ = XτM , Πτ where Πτ := pτ − pt = πt+1 + · · · + πτ is inflation
                                                    

between times t and τ , and XτM is the vector of macro variables, including TFP ζt as well as possible
announcements about future policy. Then, if the firm hasn’t changed its price between t and τ , its real
price is qiτ = qit − Πτ , so the flow profit at τ is:

                                  v (qit , Xτ ) := v 0 (qit − Π (Xτ ) , µ (Xτ ) , c (Xτ )) ,                             (14)

where Πτ := Π (Xτ ) is aggregate future inflation, and similarly for µ and c. A traditional Calvo firm
  14
    Here the agent anchors variables on their steady state values. One might imagine anchoring variables on their present
value, which leads to interesting variants (see Section 12.3), in particular leading to a high marginal propensity to consume.



                                                              9
which can reset its price at t wants to choose the optimal real price qit to maximize total profits, as in:
                                                ∞
                                                X                  c (Xτ )−γ
                                       max Et           (βθ)τ −t             v (qit , Xτ ) ,                             (15)
                                         qit
                                                 τ =t
                                                                   c (Xt )−γ

        c(Xτ )−γ
where   c(Xt )−γ
                   is the adjustment in the stochastic discount factor between t and τ .

Setup: Reality perceived by a behavioral firm The behavioral firm faces the same problem,
with a less accurate view of reality. Most importantly, I posit that the behavioral firm also perceives
the future via the cognitive discounting mechanism in (8). The behavioral firm wants to optimize its
initial real price level qit under the perceived law of motion given in (8), reflecting cognitive dampening.
That is, the behavioral firm solves:15
                                                  ∞
                                                  X          τ −t   c (Xτ )−γ
                                      max EBR
                                           t             (βθ)                 v (qit , Xτ ) .                            (16)
                                       qit
                                                  τ =t
                                                                    c (Xt )−γ

                                                                    c(Xτ )−γ
Linearizing around the deterministic steady state,                  c(Xt )−γ
                                                                               ' 1, so that term will not matter in the
linearizations.


2.3     Model Solution
We have laid out the model’s assumptions. We now proceed to solving it.

   Household optimization We can now study the household’s optimization problem under both
                                                                                              −γ
                                                                                          ct+1
the rational and the behavioral setup. The Euler equation of a rational agent is: Et βRt ct        = 1.
Linearizing, we get:16
                                                                          1
                                                  ĉt = Et [ĉt+1 ] −       r̂t .                                        (17)
                                                                         γR
This is the traditional derivation of the investment-savings (IS) curve, with rational agents.
    Now call c (Xt , kt ) the equilibrium consumption of the behavioral agent. Under the agent’s subjective
                                                −γ
                 17   BR          c(Xt+1 ,kt+1 )
model, we have: Et [βRt             c(Xt ,kt )
                                                     ] = 1. Now, in general equilibrium, income and consumption
are the same (so ct = ȳ + ŷ (Nt , Xt )) and private wealth is kt = 0. Hence, given (6), the agent correctly
  15
     Here I use the same m̄ for consumer and firms. If firms had their own rate of cognitive discounting m̄f , then one
would simply replace m̄ by m̄f in the expression for M f and in (26).
  16
     Indeed, using βR = 1 and Rt = R + r̂t ,
                       "           −γ #      "                       −γ #
                               ct+1                      r̂t    1 + ĉt+1            r̂t
                 1 = Et βRt               = Et βR 1 +                           ' 1 + − γEt [ĉt+1 − ĉt ],
                                ct                       R       1 + ĉt             R

which gives (17). Galı́ (2015) does not have the R1 term as he defines the interest rate as rtGalı́ := ln Rt , whereas in the
present paper it is defined as rt := Rt − 1, so that r̂tGalı́ ≡ r̂Rt . The predictions are the same, adjusting for the slightly
different convention.
  17
     At time t, the agent has an expectation about the distribution of his future consumption c (Xt+1 , kt+1 ), but does not
commit to that consumption. Indeed, he’ll pick his consumption ct+1 only at time t + 1, as more news (rationally) or a
better perception of the world (behaviorally) is revealed at time t + 1.



                                                                10
anticipates that her beginning of period t + 1 private wealth will be kt+1 = 0.18 It follows that aggregate
consumption c (Xt ) = c (Xt , 0) satisfies
                                           "                  −γ #
                                                   c (X  t+1 )
                                      EBR
                                        t    βRt                     = 1.
                                                     c (Xt )

       Linearizing, this gives:
                                                                              1
                                            ĉ (Xt ) = EBR
                                                        t  [ĉ (Xt+1 )] −       r̂t .
                                                                             γR
Now, by Lemma 2.2, EBR
                    t  [ĉt (Xt+1 )] = m̄Et [ĉt (Xt+1 )], so we obtain

                                                  ĉt = M Et [ĉt+1 ] − σr̂t ,                                            (18)

                          1
with M = m̄ and σ = γR      . Equation (18) is a “discounted aggregate Euler equation”. I call M the
macro parameter of attention. Here M = m̄, but in more general specifications coming later, M 6= m̄,
so, anticipating them, I keep the notation M for macro attention.

The behavioral IS curve We can now derive the IS curve for the behavioral household. Let us link
(18) to the output gap. First, the static first order condition for labor supply holds:

                                                        Ntφ = ωt c−γ
                                                                  t .                                                     (19)

    Next, call cnt and rtn the natural rate of output and interest, defined as the quantity of output and
interest that would prevail if we removed all pricing frictions, and use hats to denote them as deviations
from the steady state, ĉnt := cnt − c̄ and r̂tn := rtn − r̄. The natural rate of output is easy to derive;19 it is

                                                                 1+φ
                                                        ĉnt =       ζt .                                                 (20)
                                                                 γ+φ

    Next, note that equation (18) also holds in that “natural” economy that would have no pricing
frictions. So,
                                       ĉnt = M Et ĉnt+1 − σr̂tn ,
                                                        
                                                                                             (21)
which gives that the natural rate of interest rtn = rtn0 , where

                                                        1+φ
                                        rtn0 = r̄ +             (M Et [ζt+1 ] − ζt ) .                                    (22)
                                                      σ (γ + φ)

    I call this interest rate rtn0 the “pure” natural rate of interest—this is the interest rate that prevails
in an economy without pricing frictions, and undisturbed by government policy (in particular, budget
deficits). So when there are no budget deficits, as is the case here, we have that rtn = rtn0 — but in later
  18
     When the agent has non-zero private wealth (which is the case with taxes) or when she misperceives her income, the
derivation is more complex, as we shall see in Section 6.1.
  19
     With flexible prices, the aggregate resource constraint is ct = eζt Nt , and the wage is ωt = eζt . Together with (19),
                                                1+φ
we obtain the natural rate of output, ln cnt = γ+φ  ζt ; linearizing around c̄ = 1, so that ln cnt ' ĉnt , we get the announced
value.




                                                                 11
extensions the two concepts will differ. Behavioral forces don’t change the natural rate of output, but
they do change the pure natural rate of interest.20
   The output gap is xt := ĉt − ĉnt . Then, taking (18) minus (21), we obtain:

                                           xt = M Et [xt+1 ] − σ (r̂t − r̂tn ) ,                                      (23)

with M = m̄. Rearranging, r̂t − r̂tn = (rt − r̄) − (rtn − r̄) = it − Et [πt+1 ] − rtn , where it is the nominal
interest rate. We obtain the following result:21

Proposition 2.3 (Behavioral discounted Euler equation) In equilibrium, the output gap xt follows:

                                     xt = M Et [xt+1 ] − σ (it − Et [πt+1 ] − rtn ) ,                                 (24)

                                                                                1
where M = m̄ ∈ [0, 1] is the macro attention parameter, and σ :=               γR
                                                                                  .   In the rational model, M = 1.
       The behavioral NK IS curve (23) implies:
                                              X
                                                M k Et r̂t+k − r̂t+k
                                                                 n
                                                                    
                                     xt = −σ                           .                                              (25)
                                                    k≥0


In the rational case with M = 1, a one-period change in the real interest rate r̂t+k in 1000 periods has
the same impact on the output gap as a change occurring today. This is intuitively very odd, and is an
expression of the forward guidance puzzle. However, when M < 1, a change occurring in 1000 periods
has a much smaller impact than a change occurring today.22

Firm optimization Given the objective function (16), we can study the solution to the behavioral
firm’s problem. The nominal price that firm i will choose will be p∗t = qit + pt , and its value is as in the
following lemma (the derivation is in Section 11.2).

Lemma 2.4 (Optimal price for a behavioral firm resetting its price) A behavioral firm resetting its
price at time t will set it to a value p∗t equal to:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                          p∗t = pt + (1 − βθ)          (βθm̄)k Et [πt+1 + ... + πt+k − µt+k ] ,                       (26)
                                                 k=0

where m̄ is the overall cognitive discounting factor.
    The Appendix (Section 11.2) traces out the macroeconomic implications of the producer price-setting
policy (26), yielding the behavioral New Keynesian Phillips curve, which I present in Proposition 2.5.
  20
      In a model with physical capital, behavioral forces would change the natural rate of output.
  21
      Substantially, the agent anchors on the steady state. This implies that cognitive discounting is about the deviation
of output from the steady state (and not just the output gap).
   22
      To think about finance, the model would allow for a fringe of rational financial arbitrageurs (with vanishingly small
consumption share), so that then all assets would be priced rationally. The present model generates no risk premia since
all risks are small. I defer to future research the exploration of asset pricing implications of this sort of model, which
would require adding non-trivial risks, e.g. disaster risk.




                                                             12
2.4     A Behavioral New Keynesian Model
Combining the results of the household’s and the firm’s problems in general equilibrium, we obtain
the following two-equation synthesis. This two-equation model features behavioral versions of both the
dynamic IS curve and the New Keynesian Phillips curve:

Proposition 2.5 (Behavioral New Keynesian model – two equation version) We have the following
behavioral version of the New Keynesian model, for the behavior of the output gap xt and inflation πt :

                                xt = M Et [xt+1 ] − σ (it − Et πt+1 − rtn ) (IS curve),                                  (27)
                                πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] + κxt (Phillips curve),                                             (28)

where M, M f ∈ [0, 1] are the aggregate-level attention parameters of consumers and firms, respectively:

                                                          1
                                          M = m̄,    σ=     ,                                                            (29)
                                                         γR
                                                      1 − βθ
                                                                    
                                           f
                                          M = m̄ θ +          (1 − θ) .                                                  (30)
                                                     1 − βθm̄

    In this baseline specification, which abstracts from fiscal policy, rtn corresponds to the “pure” natural
interest rate rtn0 that prevails with zero deficits, derived in (22). In the traditional model, m̄ = 1, so
that M = M f = 1. In addition, the Phillips curve slope is κ = κ̄, where κ̄ = 1θ − 1 (1 − βθ) (γ + φ) is
                                                                                         

the slope obtained with fully rational firms.23
    Like consumers, firms can be fully attentive to all idiosyncratic terms (something that would be easy
to include), such as the idiosyncratic part of their productivity. For the purposes of this result, they
simply have to pay limited attention to macro outcomes. If we include idiosyncratic terms, and firms
are fully attentive to them, the aggregate NK Phillips curve does not change. Also, firms and consumers
are still fully rational for steady state variables (e.g., in the steady state firms discount future profits at
rate R = β1 ). It is only their sensitivity to deviations from the deterministic steady state that is partially
myopic. Under a realistic calibration, aggregate inflation is more forward-looking (M f is higher) when
prices are sticky for a longer period of time (θ is higher) and when firms are more attentive to future
macroeconomic outcomes (m̄ is higher).24 In the traditional model the coefficient on future inflation in
(28) is exactly β and, quite miraculously, does not depend on the adjustment rate of prices θ. In the
behavioral model, in contrast, the coefficient (βM f ) is higher when prices are stickier for longer (higher
θ).


2.5     Values Used in the Numerical Examples
Table 1 summarizes the main sufficient statistics for the output of the model, summarized in Figures
1–5. These values can in turn be rationalized in terms of “ancillary” parameters shown in Table 2.
I call these parameters “ancillary” because they matter only via their impact on the aforementioned
sufficient statistics listed in Table 1. For instance, the value of κ = 1θ − 1 (1 − βθ) (γ + φ) can come
                                                                              

  23
     While in this baseline formulation we have that κ = κ̄, this will not be true in the enriched model that will be presented
in Section 6.2. For consistency of presentation throughout the paper, I therefore keep these two notations separate.
  24
     Note that βR = 1 pins down the value of β. So, one could not accommodate an anomalous Phillips curve by just
changing β: that would automatically change the steady state interest rate.


                                                              13
from many combinations of θ, γ, φ etc. Table 2 shows one such combination. The values are broadly
consistent with those of the New Keynesian literature.25
    The inattention parameters are chosen to be close to the myopia found in Galı́ and Gertler (1999) and
Lindé (2005) for the Phillips curve, and Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004) for the IS curve.26 In particular,
Galı́ and Gertler (1999) find that we need βM f ' 0.8 at the quarterly frequency; given that β ' 1, that
leads to an attention parameter of M f ' 0.8. Fuhrer and Rudebusch (2004) estimate an IS curve and
find M ' 0.65, with a standard error of 0.15. Relatedly, the literature on the forward guidance puzzle
concludes, qualitatively, that M < 1. Since a value M ' 0.65 is quite extreme, here I adopt a more
conservative value of M = 0.85.
    For intuition, if the time period is taken to be a quarter, the calibrated macro attention parameter
M = 0.85 implies that the half-life of consumer attention is roughly over one year — in the sense that
the consumer pays just over half as much attention to an innovation that is to come a year into the
future relative to the attention she pays to an innovation today (since M 4 ' 0.5).27

                                        Table 1: Key Parameter Inputs


                   Cognitive discounting by consumers and firms               M = 0.85, M f = 0.80
                   Sensitivity to interest rates                              σ = 0.20
                   Slope of the Phillips curve                                κ = 0.11
                   Rate of time preference                                    β = 0.99
                   Relative welfare weight on output                          ϑ = 0.02
                   Notes. This table reports the coefficients used in the model. Units
                   are quarterly.
   25
      The value of θ is admittedly quite high, as in this baseline model it helps match a low value of the Phillips curve
slope κ. Other mechanisms that are consistent with lower levels of price stickiness θ can also generate a low slope of the
Phillips curve (using firms’ inattention to macro conditions). See the discussion in Section 6.2 and footnote 70.
   26
      In general, it is quite hard to identify M, M f in aggregate data separately from other model parameters. For
illustration, consider a simple model specification with fully rigid prices (πt = κ = 0) and in which it = rtn always. The
econometric version of the IS curve is xt = M E[xt+1 ] + ηt , where ηt is an exogenous shock that is not directly observed.
Suppose ηt follows an AR(1) process with innovation variance ση2 and persistence ρ. The IS curve dynamics then imply
                1                                                                                ση
that xt = 1−M     ρ ηt . A simple time-series regression of xt on xt−1 identifies ρ as well as 1−M ρ , which is the standard
deviation of the innovations to xt . Hence M and ση are not separately identified from the time series of xt . In general,
New Keynesian parameters are also hard to estimate (Mavroeidis et al. (2014)).
   27
      This literature provides evidence on the macro parameters of attention M, M f . The 2018 NBER working paper version
of the present paper provides a tentative Bayesian estimation of the entire model that finds estimated parameters consistent
with those in Table 1. The estimation in that draft should be taken as preliminary at best since further well-identified
empirical work will be necessary in order to reach definitive conclusions. Gathering evidence on micro parameters m̄
would be much more costly. However, using micro data, Ganong and Noel (2019) find evidence for micro-level cognitive
discounting, so that progress is being made in that direction too. This paper provides evidence that explanations for
the failure of the undiscounted Euler equation that are based on financial frictions (for example, credit constraints as in
Kaplan et al. (2018)) should be complemented by behavioral ones.




                                                            14
                                          Table 2: Ancillary parameters


                           Coefficient of risk aversion                              γ=5
                           Inverse of Frisch elasticity                              φ=1
                           Survival rates of prices                                  θ = 0.875
                           Demand elasticity                                         ε = 5.3
                           Cognitive discounting                                     m̄ = 0.85
                           Notes. This table reports the coefficients used in the model to
                           generate the parameters of Table 1. Units are quarterly.



3        Consequences
Here I explore the consequences of the model. They mostly depend on the reduced form of Proposition
2.5, rather than its detailed microfoundations. Hence, they would apply to other models when they
have a similar reduced form (for example, Woodford (2018) and Angeletos and Lian (2018)).


3.1        The Taylor Principle Reconsidered: Equilibria are Determinate Even
           with a Fixed Interest Rate
The traditional model suffers from the existence of a continuum of multiple equilibria when monetary
policy is passive. We will now see that if consumers are boundedly rational enough, there is just one
unique (bounded) equilibrium. As monetary policy is passive at the ZLB, this topic will have strong
impacts for the economy at the ZLB.
    I assume that the central bank sets the nominal interest it in a Taylor rule fashion:

                                                   i t = φ π π t + φ x x t + jt ,                                         (31)

where jt is typically just a constant.28 Calculations show that the system of Proposition 2.5 can be
represented as:29
                                         zt = AEt [zt+1 ] + bat ,                               (32)
where
                                                        zt := (xt , πt )0
will be called the state vector,30 at := jt − rtn (as in “action”) is the baseline tightness of monetary
  28
     The reader will want to keep in mind the case of a constant jt = j̄. Generally, jt is a function jt = j (Xt ) where Xt is
a vector of primitives that are not affected by (xt , πt ), e.g. the natural rate of interest coming from stochastic preferences
and technology.
  29
     It is easier (especially for higher-dimensional variants) to proceed with the matrix B := A−1 , write the system as
Et [zt+1 ] = Bzt + e bat , and to reason on the eigenvalues of B:
                                                   f
                                                    β (1 + σφx ) + κσ −σ 1 − β f φπ
                                                                                         
                                              1
                                       B=                                                    .
                                            M βf            −κM                  M

  30
       I call zt the “state vector” with some mild abuse of language. It is an outcome of the deeper state vector Xt .




                                                                15
policy (if the government pursues the first best, at = 0), b =                 −σ
                                                                           1+σ(φx +κφπ )
                                                                                           (1, κ)0 and
                                                                                  
                                                                    σ 1 − β f φπ
                                                          
                                          1                   M
                               A=                                                    ,                                   (33)
                                  1 + σ (φx + κφπ )           κM β f (1 + σφx ) + κσ

where I use the notation
                                                       β f := βM f .                                                     (34)
The next proposition generalizes the well-known Taylor determinacy criterion to behavioral agents. I
assume that φπ and φx are weakly positive (the proof indicates a more general criterion).

Proposition 3.1 (Equilibrium determinacy with behavioral agents) There is a determinate equilibrium
(i.e., all of A’s eigenvalues are less than 1 in modulus) if and only if:
                                                              
                                     1 − βM f        1 − βM f (1 − M )
                              φπ +              φx +                      > 1.                  (35)
                                         κ                   κσ
   In particular, when monetary policy is passive (i.e., when φπ = φx = 0), we have a determinate
equilibrium if and only if bounded rationality is strong enough, in the sense that
                                                                          
                                                                1 − βM f (1 − M )
                Strong enough bounded rationality condition:                       > 1.      (36)
                                                                        κσ
    Condition (36) does not hold in the traditional model, where M = 1. The condition means that
agents are boundedly rational enough (i.e., M is sufficiently less than 1) and the firm-level pricing or
cognitive frictions are large enough.31 Quantitatively, it is quite easy to satisfy this criterion.32
    Why does bounded rationality eliminate multiple equilibria? This is because boundedly rational
agents are less reactive to the future, hence less reactive to future agents’ decisions. Therefore, bounded
rationality lowers the complementarity between agents’ actions (their consumptions). That force damp-
ens the possibility of multiple equilibria.33,34
    Condition (36) implies that the two eigenvalues of A are less than 1. This implies that the equilibrium
is determinate.35 This is different from the traditional NK model, in which there is a continuum of non-
explosive monetary equilibria, given that one root is greater than 1 (as condition (36) is violated in the
traditional model).
    This absence of multiple equilibria is important, in particular when the central bank keeps an interest
peg (e.g. at 0% because of the ZLB).
  31
      Bilbiie (2018) independently derives a condition similar to equation (35) with M f = 1, φx = 0, and in the context of
a heterogenous-agents New Keynesian model .
   32
      Call g (M ) = (1−M )(1−βM
                          κσ
                                 )
                                   − 1 (to simplify this discussion, I take M = M f ). The behavioral Taylor criterion (35) is
that g (M ) > 0, i.e. M < M where g (M ∗ ) = 0. Using the calibration, this is the case if and only if M ∗ ' 0.86. If we
                                ∗

divide κσ by 10 (which is not difficult, given the small values of κ and σ often estimated) we get M ∗ ' 0.95.
   33
      This theme that bounded rationality reduces the scope for multiple equilibria is general, and also holds in simple
static models. I plan to develop it separately.
   34
      One could also introduce nominal illusion as consumers perceiving the inflation to be π BR (Xt ) = mcπ π (Xt ), where
   c
mπ ∈ [0, 1] parameterizes limited attention to inflation. In the IS curve (27), that will lead to replacing Et πt+1 by
mcπ Et πt+1 . More surprisingly, the Taylor criterion is modified by replacing, in the right-hand side of (35), the 1 by mcπ
(see Section 12.6). Again, bounded rationality makes the Taylor criterion easier to satisfy.
   35
      The condition does not prevent unbounded or explosive equilibria, the kind that Cochrane (2011) analyzes. My take
is that this issue is interesting (as are rational bubbles in general), but that the main practical problem is to eliminate
bounded equilibria. The present behavioral model does that well.

                                                              16
    Permanent interest rate peg. First, take the (admittedly extreme) case of a permanent peg. Then,
in the traditional model, there is always a continuum of bounded equilibria, technically, because the
matrix A has a root greater than 1 (in modulus) when M = 1. As a result, there is no definite answer
to the question “What happens if the central bank raises the interest rate?” – as one needs to select a
particular equilibrium. In this paper’s behavioral model, however, we do get a definite non-explosive
equilibrium. Indeed, as all roots are less than 1 in modulus, we can simply write:
                                                 "             #
                                                   X
                                         zt = Et      Aτ −t baτ .                                  (37)
                                                    τ ≥t


    Cochrane (2017) made the point that we’d expect an economy such as Japan’s to be quite volatile,
if the ZLB is expected to last forever: conceivably, the economy could jump from one equilibrium to the
next at each period. This is a problem for the rational model, which is solved if agents are behavioral
enough, so that (36) holds.
    Long-lasting interest rate peg. Second, the economy is still very volatile (in the rational model) in
the less extreme case of a peg lasting for a long but finite duration. To see this, suppose that the ZLB
is expected to last for T periods. Call AZLB the value of matrix A in (33) when φπ = φx = j = 0 in the
Taylor rule. Then, the system (32) is, at the ZLB (t ≤ T ): zt = Et AZLB zt+1 + b with b := (1, κ) σr,
where r < 0 is the real interest rate that prevails during the ZLB. Iterating forward, we have:

                                                        −1
                          z0 (T ) = I + AZLB + ... + ATZLB   b + ATZLB E0 [zT ] .
                                                           
                                                                                                         (38)

    Here I note z0 (T ), the value of the state at time 0, given the ZLB will last for T periods. Let us focus
on the last term, ATZLB E0 [zT ]. In the traditional case, one of the eigenvalues of AZLB is greater than 1
in modulus. This implies that very small changes to today’s expectations of economic conditions after
the ZLB (i.e., to E0 [zT ]), have an unboundedly large impact today (limT →∞ kATZLB k = ∞). Hence, we
would expect the economy to be very volatile today, provided the ZLB period is long though finite, and
a reasonable amount of fluctuating uncertainty about future policy.


3.2    The ZLB is Less Costly with Behavioral Agents
What happens when economies are at the ZLB? The rational model makes very stark predictions,
which this behavioral model overturns. To see this, I follow the thought experiment in Werning (2012)
(building on Eggertsson and Woodford (2003)), but with behavioral agents. I take rtn = r for t ≤ T ,
and rtn = r for t > T , with r < 0 ≤ r. I assume that for t > T , the central bank implements xt = πt = 0
by setting it = r̄ + φπ πt with φπ > 1, so that in equilibrium it = r̄. At time t < T , I suppose that the
economy is at the ZLB, so that it = 0.

Proposition 3.2 Call x0 (T ) the output gap at time 0, given the ZLB will lasts for T periods. In the
traditional rational case, we obtain an unboundedly intense recession as the length of the ZLB increases:
limT →∞ x0 (T ) = −∞. This also holds when myopia is mild, i.e. (36) fails. However, suppose cognitive
myopia is strong enough, i.e. (36) holds. Then, we obtain a boundedly intense recession:

                                                     σ(1 − βM f )
                               lim x0 (T ) =                            r < 0.                           (39)
                               T →∞            (1 − M )(1 − βM f ) − κσ


                                                     17
                                             Traditional case                                           Behavioral case
                            0                                                         0



                                                                                    -0.5
                          -50

                                                                                     -1


                         -100
                                                                                    -1.5



                                                                                     -2
                         -150


                                                                                    -2.5

                         -200
                                                                                     -3



                         -250                                                       -3.5
                                0   5   10      15   20   25    30   35   40               0   5   10     15   20   25    30   35   40




Figure 1: This figure shows the output gap x0 (T ) at time 0, given that the economy will be at the ZLB
for T more periods. The left panel is the traditional New Keynesian model, the right panel the present
behavioral model. Parameters are the same in both models, except for the attention parameters M ,
M f which are equal to 1 in the rational model. The natural rate at the ZLB is −1%. Output gap units
are percentage point. Time units are quarters.


    We see how impactful myopia can be.36 Myopia has to be stronger when agents are highly sensitive
to the interest rate (high σ) and price flexibility is high (high κ). High price flexibility makes the system
very reactive, and a high myopia is useful to counterbalance that.37 Figure 1 shows the result. The left
panel shows the traditional model, while the right one shows the behavioral model. The parameters are
the same in both models, except that attention is lower in the behavioral model. In the left panel, we
see how costly the ZLB is: mathematically it is unboundedly costly as it becomes more long-lasting,
displaying an exponentially bad recession as the ZLB is more long-lasting. In contrast, in this behavioral
model, in the right panel we see a finite, though prolonged cost. Reality looks more like the mild slump
of the behavioral model (right panel) – something like Japan since the 1990s – rather than the frightful
abyss of the rational model (left panel), which is something like Japan in 1946. This sort of effect could
be useful to empirically show that (36) likely holds.38


3.3     Forward Guidance is Much Less Powerful
Suppose that the central bank announces at time 0 that in T periods it will perform a one-period, 1
percent real interest rate cut. What is the impact on today’s inflation? This is the thought experiment
analyzed by McKay et al. (2016) with rational agents, which I pursue here with behavioral agents.
    Figure 2 illustrates the effect. In the left panel, the whole economy is rational. We see that the
further away the policy, the bigger the impact today – this is quite surprising, hence the term “forward
guidance puzzle”. In the middle panel, consumers are behavioral but firms are rational, while in the
right panel both consumers and firms are behavioral. We see that indeed, announcements about very
  36
     McKay et al. (2017) recognize the point that a discounted aggregate Euler equation leads to a shallower ZLB recession,
but they operate entirely within the “mild myopia” case in the terminology of Proposition 3.2 (in which the recession’s
intensity is reduced but remains unbounded), and do not detect the existence of the “strong myopia” case.
  37
     The “paradox of flexibility” still holds though in a dampened way: if prices are more flexible, κ is higher (Proposition
2.5), and the higher disinflation worsens the recession at the ZLB (Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), Werning (2012)).
However, bounded rationality moderates this, by lowering κ and M in (39).
  38
     In this case, the economy is better off if agents are not too rational. This quite radical change of behavior is likely
to hold in other contexts. For instance, in those studied by Kocherlakota (2016) where the very long run matters a great
deal, it is likely that a modicum of bounded rationality would change the behavior of the economy considerably.



                                                                               18
                                       Traditional case                                         Behavioral consumers                              Behavioral consumers and firms
                         60                                                            6                                                2.5


                                                                                      5.5

                         50
                                                                                       5                                                 2


                                                                                      4.5
                         40

                                                                                       4                                                1.5
             Inflation




                                                                          Inflation




                                                                                                                            Inflation
                         30                                                           3.5


                                                                                       3                                                 1

                         20
                                                                                      2.5


                                                                                       2                                                0.5
                         10

                                                                                      1.5


                          0                                                            1                                                 0
                              0   20          40          60         80                     0    20      40      60    80                     0        20       40      60         80
                                           Horizon                                                    Horizon                                                Horizon


Figure 2: This Figure shows the response of current inflation to forward guidance about a one-period
interest rate cut in T quarters, compared to an immediate rate change of the same magnitude. Left
panel: traditional New Keynesian model. Middle panel: model with behavioral consumers and rational
firms. Right panel: model with behavioral consumers and firms. Parameters are the same in both
models, except for the attention parameters M , M f which are equal to 1 in the rational model.


distant policy changes have vanishingly small effects with behavioral agents – but they have the biggest
effect with rational agents.39,40


4     Optimal Monetary Policy
4.1     Welfare with Behavioral Agents and the Central Bank’s Objective
Optimal policy needs a welfare criterion. The task is simplified by the fact that we have a rep-
resentative agent. Welfare here is taken to be the expected utility of the representative agent,
f = E0 P∞ β t u (ct , Nt ), under the objective expectation. This is as in much of behavioral eco-
W             t=0
nomics, which views behavioral agents as using heuristics, but experience utility from consumption and
leisure like rational agents.41 Hence, the welfare criterion in this model is the same as in the traditional
Woodford (2003b) formulation. I express W   f = W ∗ + W , where W ∗ is first best welfare, and W is the
deviation from the first best. The following lemma derives it.

  39
     Formally, we have xt = M xt+1 − σr̂t , with r̂T = −δ = −1% and r̂t = 0 if t 6= T . So xt = σM T −t δ for t ≤ T and
xt = 0 for t > T . This implies that the time-0 response of inflation to a one-period interest-rate cut T periods into the
future is:                                                                                  T +1
                                                        T
                                     X
                                           f t
                                                      X
                                                             f t
                                                                  T −t        M T +1 − β f
                         π0 (T ) = κ     β     xt = κσ     β     M      δ = κσ                    δ.
                                                       t=0
                                                                                    M − βf
                                                               t≥0
                                                                                                       κσ
  A rate cut in the very distant future has a powerful impact on today’s inflation (limT →∞ π0 (T ) = 1−β f δ) in the rational

model (M = 1), and no impact at all in the behavioral model (limT →∞ π0 (T ) = 0 if M < 1)
  40
     When attention is endogenous, the analysis could become more subtle. Indeed, if other agents are more attentive to
the forward announcement by the Fed, their impact will be bigger, and a consumer will want to be more attentive to it.
This positive complementarity in attention could create multiple equilibria in effective attention M . I do not pursue that
here.
  41
     In particular I use the objective (not subjective) expectations (so that in (40) the discount rate is β, not e.g. βM ).
Also, I do not include thinking costs in the welfare metric. One reason is that thinking costs are very hard to measure
(revealed preference arguments apply only if attention is exactly optimally set, something which is controversial). In the
terminology of Farhi and Gabaix (2017), we are in the “no attention in welfare” case. Angeletos and La’O (2008, 2018)
and Paciello and Wiederholt (2013) study policy when the planner “internalizes” the cognitive constraints of the agents.



                                                                                                      19
Lemma 4.1 (Welfare) The welfare loss from inflation and output gap is
                                                          ∞
                                                          X 1
                                                                    β t πt2 + ϑx2t + W− ,
                                                                                  
                                          W = −KE0                                                                              (40)
                                                          t=0
                                                                2

where ϑ = κ̄ε , K = uc c (γ + φ) κ̄ε , and W− is a constant (made explicit in (208)), κ̄ is the Phillips curve
coefficient with rational firms (derived in Proposition 2.5), and ε is the elasticity of demand.


4.2      Optimal Policy with no ZLB Constraints: Response to Changes in the
         Natural Interest Rate
Suppose that there are productivity or discount factor shocks (the latter are not explicitly in the basic
model, but can be introduced in a straightforward way). This changes the natural real interest rate,
rtn = rtn0 . To find the policy ensuring the first best (a zero output gap and inflation), we inspect the
two equations of this behavioral model, (27) and (28). This immediately reveals the familiar result that
the first best is achieved if and only if it = rtn0 . In the first best, the nominal rate perfectly track the
natural real rate. This is true with both rational and behavioral agents.42,43 It is possible as long as the
ZLB does not bind (rtn0 ≥ 0).
    The optimal monetary policy perfectly replicates the flexible-price equilibrium. This is true in the
model because monetary policy does not have to substitute for missing tax instruments (Correia et al.
(2008)). Hence we recover the traditional, optimistic message of optimal monetary policy in a New
Keynesian environment. I defer a discussion of optimal monetary policy with a binding ZLB constraint
to Section 5, since a full analysis of policy at the ZLB in the present model requires joint consideration
of monetary and fiscal instruments.


4.3      Optimal Policy with Complex Tradeoffs: Reaction to a Cost-Push
         Shock
The previous shocks (productivity and discount rate shocks) allowed monetary policy to attain the first
best. I now consider a shock that doesn’t allow the monetary policy to reach the first best, so that
trade-offs can be examined. Following the tradition, I consider a “cost-push shock”, i.e. a disturbance
νt to the Phillips curve, which becomes: πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] + κxt + νt , with νt following an AR(1):
νt = ρν νt−1 + ενt .44,45
    What is the optimal policy then? I examine the optimal policy first if the central bank can commit
to actions in the future (the “commitment” policy), and then if it cannot commit (the “discretionary”
policy).

  42
     If the inflation target were π̄, the nominal rate would be real rate plus inflation target it = rtn + π̄. Throughout I
assume π̄ = 0 for simplicity.
  43
     Sections 4.2-4.3 give optimal policy on the equilibrium path. To ensure determinacy, one simply adds a Taylor rule
around it: if the equilibrium path predict values i∗t , πt∗ , x∗t , the policy function is: it = i∗t + φx (xt − x∗t ) + φπ (πt − πt∗ )
with coefficients φ that satisfy the modified Taylor criterion (35).
  44
     For instance, if firms’ optimal markup increases (perhaps because the elasticity of demand changes), they will want
to increase prices and we obtain a positive νt (see Clarida et al. (1999) and Galı́ (2015, Section 5.2)).
  45
     Analyzing an early version of the present model, Bounader (2016) examined various constrained policies and derived
independently some results in Section 4.3, though not the key result on the non-optimality of price-level targeting.


                                                                    20
                        0                                                           0.6                                               0.6

                      -0.5                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                    0.4
                       -1
                                                                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                    0.3
                      -1.5
                                                                                    0.2                                               0.3
                       -2
                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                      0.2
                      -2.5
                                                                                      0

                       -3                                         Rational
                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                    -0.1
                                                                  Behavioral
                      -3.5                                                          -0.2                                               0
                             0   5            10             15                20          0     5          10         15      20           0       5         10          15   20
                                         Output Gap                                                      Inflation                                      Log price Level



                        8                                                           1.2

                        7
                                                                                      1
                        6
                                                                                    0.8
                        5

                        4                                                           0.6

                        3
                                                                                    0.4
                        2
                                                                                    0.2
                        1

                        0                                                             0
                             0   5            10             15                20          0     5          10         15      20
                                     Nominal Interest Rate                                           Cost-push Shock




Figure 3: This figure shows the optimal interest rate policy in response to a cost-push shock (νt ), when
the central bank follows the optimal commitment strategy. When firms are rational, the optimal strategy
entails “price level targeting”, i.e. the central bank will engineer a deflation later to come back to the
initial price level. This is not the optimal policy with behavioral firms. This illustrates Proposition
4.2. Units are percentage points. The cost-push shock follows an AR(1) process with autocorrelation
ρν = 0.2.


Proposition 4.2 (Optimal policy with commitment: suboptimality of price level targeting) The opti-
mal commitment policy entails
                                                −ϑ
                                                    xt − M f xt−1 ,
                                                                 
                                         πt =                                                             (41)
                                                 κ
so that the (log) price level (pt = tτ =0 πτ , normalizing the initial log price level to p−1 = 0) satisfies
                                   P

                                                                                                                               t−1
                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                       −ϑ                                                   f
                                                                                                                              X
                                                                  pt =                         xt + 1 − M                            xτ         .                                   (42)
                                                                        κ                                                     τ =0


    With rational firms (M f = 1), the optimal policy involves “price level targeting”: it ensures that the
price level mean-reverts to a fixed target (pt = −ϑ  x → 0 in the long run).46 However, with behavioral
                                                    κ t
firms, the price level is higher (even in the long run) after a positive cost-push shock: the optimal policy
does not seek to bring the price level back to baseline.
    “Price level targeting” and “nominal GDP targeting” are not optimal anymore when firms are behav-
ioral. Price level targeting is optimal with rational firms, but not with behavioral firms. Qualitatively,
the commitment to engineer a deflation later helps today, because firms are very forward looking (see
Figure 3). That force is dampened in the present behavioral model. The recommendation of price level
targeting, one robust prediction of optimal policy model under the rational model, has been met with
skepticism in the policy world – in part, perhaps, because its justification isn’t very intuitive.47 This
  46
     Only M f , not M , enters in the equilibrium πt , as the planner maximizes over πt and xt welfare (40) subject to
πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] + κxt + νt , both of which do not depend on M . The value of M does impact the implementation of
the policy, namely it .
  47
     This is not an intuitive result even in the rational model: in the derivation, this is because the coefficient β in the
Phillips curve and the rate of time preference for policy in (40) are the same – something that is not intuitive. That
identity is broken in the behavioral model (if the planner instead had a discount factor βM f , then price level targeting
would again be optimal). This is analogous to the Slutsky symmetry in the rational model: there is no great intuition


                                                                                                        21
lack of intuitive justification may be caused by the fact that it is not robust to behavioral deviations,
as Proposition 4.2 shows. Likewise, “nominal GDP targeting” is optimal in the traditional model, but
is suboptimal with behavioral agents.48 I next examine the optimal discretionary policy.

Proposition 4.3 (Optimal discretionary policy) The optimal discretionary policy entails:

                                                              −ϑ
                                                       πt =      xt ,                                                   (43)
                                                               κ
                                                                        κσ −1 (1−M ρν )+ϑρν
so that on the equilibrium path: it = Kνt + rtn with K =                 κ2 +ϑ(1−βM f ρν )
                                                                                            .
    For persistent shocks (ρν > 0), the optimal policy is less aggressive (K is lower) when firms are more
behavioral (when M f is lower, controlling the value of κ, σ, ϑ).49 This is because with more myopic
firms, future cost-push shocks do not affect much the firms’ pricing today, hence the central bank needs
to respond less to them.


5     Fiscal Policy
I now study fiscal policy with behavioral agents.

5.1     Cognitive Discounting Generates a Failure of Ricardian Equivalence
For now, fiscal policy means cash transfers from the government to agents and lump-sum taxes (govern-
ment consumption is zero). Hence, it would be completely ineffective in the traditional model, which
features rational, Ricardian consumers. I call Bt the real value of government debt in period t, before
period-t taxes. Linearizing, it evolves as Bt+1 = R (Bt + Tt ), where Tt is the lump-sum transfer given
by the government to the agent (so that −Tt is a tax).50 I also define dt , the budget deficit (after the
payment of the interest rate on debt) in period t, dt := Tt + Rr Bt , so that public debt evolves as:51

                                                    Bt+1 = Bt + Rdt .                                                   (44)

    Section 11.1 details the specific assumption I use to capture the agent’s worldview. Summarizing, the
situation is as follows. Suppose that the government runs a deficit and gives a rebate Tt to the agents.
Agents see the increase in their income, but, because of cognitive discounting, they see only partially
the associated future taxes. Hence, they spend some of that transfer, and increase their consumption.
The macroeconomic impact of that is as follows.
for its justification in the rational model; this is in part because it fails with behavioral agents (Gabaix (2014)). Our
intuitions are often (unwittingly) calibrated on our experience as living behavioral agents.
  48
     Figure 3 gives some more intuition. Consider the behavior of the interest rate. The interest rate response is milder
with rational firms than with behavioral firms. The reason is that monetary policy (especially forward guidance) is more
potent with rational firms (they discount the future at β, not at the lower rate βM f < β), so the central bank can act
more mildly to obtain the same effect. In addition, the gains from commitment are lower, as firms don’t react much to
the future. The optimal policy still features “history dependence” (in the terminology of Woodford (2003b)), even when
the cost-push shock has no persistence: see equation (41).
  49
     The analogue of Figure 3 for this no-commitment case is in Figure 7 of the Online Appendix.
  50                                   1+it                      1+it
     Without linearization, Bt+1 = 1+π   t+1
                                             (Bt + Tt ), where 1+π t+1
                                                                       is the realized gross return on bonds. Linearizing,
Bt+1 = R (Bt + Tt ). Formally I considerthe case of small debts and  deficits, which allows us to neglect the variations of
                                             1+it
the real rate (i.e. second-order terms O 1+πt+1 − R (|Bt | + |dt |) ).
     Indeed, Bt+1 = R Bt − Rr Bt + dt = Bt + Rdt .
  51
                                       


                                                              22
Proposition 5.1 (Discounted Euler equation with sensitivity to budget deficits) Because agents are
not Ricardian, budget deficits temporarily increase economic activity. The IS curve (23) becomes:

                                  xt = M Et [xt+1 ] + bd dt − σ it − Et [πt+1 ] − rtn0 ,
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                             (45)

where rtn0 is the “pure” natural rate with zero deficits (derived in (22)), dt is the budget deficit and
       φrR(1−m̄)
bd = (φ+γ)(R− m̄)
                  is the sensitivity to deficits. When agents are rational, bd = 0, but with behavioral
agents, bd > 0. In the sequel, we will write this equation by saying that the behavioral IS curve (24)
holds, but with the following modified natural rate, which captures the stimulative action of deficits:

                                                                      bd
                                                       rtn = rtn0 +      dt .                                                (46)
                                                                      σ
          Hence, bounded rationality gives both a discounted IS curve and an impact of fiscal policy: bd >
     52,53
0.
   Here I assume a representative agent.54 This analysis complements analyses that assume hetero-
geneous agents to model non-Ricardian agents, in particular rule-of-thumb agents à la Campbell and
Mankiw (1989), Galı́ et al. (2007), Mankiw (2000), Bilbiie (2008), Mankiw and Weinzierl (2011) and
Woodford (2013).55,56 Models with hand-to-mouth consumers do generate an impact of deficits (bd > 0),
but they also yield M = M f = 1.57 In addition, when dealing with complex situations a representative
agent is often simpler. In particular, it allows us to evaluate welfare unambiguously.


5.2          Consequences for Fiscal Policy
Substitutability of monetary and fiscal policy When both monetary and fiscal policy instruments
are available, the present model features a generic form of substitutability of the two. In order to see
this, I go back to the environment discussed in Section 4.2, in which we have productivity or discount
factor shocks (but no cost-push shocks) that alter the natural rate of interest rtn0 . In this case, we can
characterize the first-best policy as follows.

     52
     The Online Appendix (Section 12.8) works out a slight variant, where debt mean-reverts to a fixed constant. The
economics is quite similar.
  53
     The sensitivity bd decreases with m̄. In the limit r = β1 − 1 → 0 we have that bd → 0. This is because the MPC out
of income also goes to zero.
  54
     There is a lot of debate about Ricardian equivalence. The provisional median opinion is that it only partly holds.
For instance, the literature on tax rebates (see Johnson et al. (2006)) appears to support bd > 0.
  55
     The model in Galı́ et al. (2007)
                                   hPis richer and more
                                                      i complex, as it features heterogeneous agents. Omitting the monetary
                                             τ −t                                                                               r
policy terms, instead of xt = Et      τ ≥t M      bd τ , as obtained by iterating (45) forward, they generate ĉt = Θn nt − Θt tt .
                                                    d
Here nt is the deviation of employment from its steady state, trt is the log-deviation from steady state of the taxes levied
on a fraction of agents who are hand-to-mouth, and Θn , Θt are positive constants. Hence, one key difference is that in
the present model, future deficits matter as well, whereas in their model, they do not.
  56
     Mankiw and Weinzierl (2011) have a form of the representative agent with a partial rule of thumb behavior. They
derive an instructive optimal policy in a 3-period model with capital (which is different from the standard New Keynesian
model), but do not analyze an infinite horizon economy.
  57
     Consider the case without fiscal policy. Suppose that a fraction f h (resp. f r = 1 − f h ) consists of hand-to-mouth
(resp. rational) agents who just consume their income cht = yt . Aggregate consumption is ct = f r crt + f h cht and the
resource constraint is yt = ct . But as cht = yt , this implies yt = cht = crt . The hand-to-mouth consume exactly like rational
agents. Hence, having hand-to-mouth agents changes nothing in the IS equation, and M = 1. With fiscal policy, however,
those agents do make a difference, i.e. create something akin to bd > 0, but still with M = 1.



                                                                23
Lemma 5.2 (First best) When there are shocks to the natural rate of interest, the first best is achieved
if and only if at all dates:
                                                                bd
                                               it = rtn ≡ rtn0 + dt ,                                (47)
                                                                σ
where rtn0 is the “pure” natural rate of interest given in (22) and is independent of fiscal and monetary
policy. This condition pins down the optimal sum of monetary and fiscal policy (i.e. the value of
it − bσd dt ), but not their precise values, as the two policies are perfect substitutes.
   So, if the economy has a lower pure natural interest rate rtn0 (hence “needs loosening”), the gov-
ernment can either decrease interest rates, or increase deficits. Monetary and fiscal policy are perfect
substitutes in this model. Their mix is precisely pinned down (i.e. (47) should hold), but the share
done via monetary versus (lump-sum) fiscal policy is indeterminate, strictly speaking.58

The benchmark of frictionless prices To clarify ideas, consider the case of fully flexible prices.
Suppose that the government changes lump-sum taxes, keeping government consumption to 0. Then,
optimality is still determined by a static condition, Ntφ = eζt c−γ
                                                                 t  and ct = eζt Nt , so consumption and
labor are independent of fiscal policy. Only the natural rate of interest rtn changes. Note that here
the assumption of zero capital is key: with capital, a lump-sum tax cut would lead to extra savings,
investment, and output. In this sense, a weaker form of Ricardian equivalence holds in this behavioral
model without capital: one needs the combination of sticky prices and cognitive discounting in order
for deficits to have an output effect.

When the ZLB binds: “Helicopter drops of money” / Fiscal transfers as an optimal cure
When the natural rate becomes negative (and with low inflation), the optimal nominal interest rate is
negative, which is by and large not possible. That is the ZLB. The first best is not achievable in the
traditional model and the second best policy is quite complex.59 However, with behavioral agents, there
is an easy first best policy:60
                                                                                          −σ n0
                               First best at the ZLB: it = 0 and deficit: dt =              r ,                              (48)
                                                                                          bd t

i.e. fiscal policy runs deficits to stimulate demand.61 By “fiscal policy” I mean transfers (from the
government to the agents) or equivalently “helicopter drops of money”, i.e. checks that the central bank
might send (this gives some fiscal authority to the central bank).62 This is again possible because agents
are not Ricardian. In conclusion, behavioral considerations considerably change policy at the ZLB, and
allow the achievement of the first best.63
  58
     If there are budget deficits, the central bank must “lean against behavioral biases interacting with fiscal policy”. For
instance, suppose that (for some reason) the government is sending cash transfers to the agents, dt > 0. That creates a
boom. Then, the optimal policy is to still enforce zero inflation and output gap by raising interest rates.
  59
     The first best is not achievable, and second best policies are complex, as has been analyzed by a large number of
authors, e.g. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), Werning (2012) and Galı́ (2015, Section 5.4).
  60
     A variant is: it =  and dt = −σ     n
                                     bd (rt − ), for some small  > 0, to ensure the determinacy of the Taylor rule on the
policy (see footnote 43), which requires the possibility of lowering rates out of the equilibrium path.
  61
     Another way of seeing this is that fiscal stimulus raises the natural rate of interest rtn = rtn0 + bσd dt , and can set it to
zero.
  62
     The central bank could also rebate the “seigniorage check” to the taxpayers rather than the government, and write
bigger checks at the ZLB, and smaller checks outside the ZLB.
  63
     In Section 12.9 I analyze a richer situation, and show that the possibility of future fiscal policy can have ex-ante
benefits – it makes agents confident about the future, as they know that the government will not run out of tools.

                                                                24
Government spending multiplier greater than one with behavioral agents Finally, let us
consider what happens when the government purchases an amount Gt of the aggregate good, and
consumes it. I assume that this enters additively in the utility function so that this does not distort the
                                                    1−γ        1+φ
agent’s decision. We therefore have u (c, N, G) = c 1−γ−1 − N1+φ + U (G) for some function U .
   The analytics are fully developed in Section 12.10. One result is easy to state. Suppose that the
government purchases at time 0 an amount G0 , financed by a deficit d0 = G0 , and the central bank does
not change the nominal rate at time 0. Then the fiscal multiplier is

                                                    dY0
                                                        = 1 + bd ,                                                   (49)
                                                    dG0

reflecting the fact that government spending has a “direct” effect of increasing GDP one-for-one, and
then an “indirect” effect of making people feel richer (as their income increases by G0 and they don’t
fully see the increase in future taxes because of cognitive discounting).64 Hence, this behavioral model
generates both M < 1 and a fiscal multiplier greater than 1, something that is very hard to generate in
models with rational, credit constrained agents (Bilbiie (2018)).


6      Behavioral Enrichments of the Model
In this section I present a number of enrichments of the baseline model laid out so far that are of
conceptual and empirical interest. Cognitive discounting captures inattention to the future, but of course
people can also be inattentive to contemporaneous variables. Therefore, I first enrich the assumptions
of the basic model by allowing for other forms of inattention that induce a “term structure” pattern in
the behavioral biases of consumers and producers: I discuss these in Sections 6.1 and 6.2, respectively.
These enrichments induce further lessening of the effects of monetary policy as well as a flatter Phillips
curve. Second, I present an extension of the model that allows for non-zero or even time-varying trends
in inflation. This is empirically realistic and also allows me to address recent paradoxes pointed out by
the neo-Fisherian literature.


6.1     Term Structure of Consumer Attention
For conceptual and empirical reasons, I wish to explore the possibility that consumers may perceive
certain macro variables more imperfectly than others: for example, consumers may pay overall less
attention to the interest rate than they do to income. Theoretically, I found it instructive to see
where the intercept, rather than the slope of attention, matters. Also given these various “intercepts of
attention” are conceptually natural, they are likely to be empirically relevant as well when future studies
measure attention. To capture this, I assume that the agent perceives the law of motion of wealth as:

            kt+1 = Gk,BR (ct , Nt , kt , Xt ) := 1 + r̄ + r̂BR (Xt ) kt + ȳ + ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) − ct ,
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     (50)
  64
     The decomposition is as follows. The government’s action is the sum of (i) a purchase of G0 , financed by a contem-
poraneous taxes of G0 and (ii) a tax cut of G0 . The impact of (i) is to increase GDP by G0 (as is also true in a rational
New Keynesian model), and the impact of (ii) is to increase GDP by bd G0 (as in the present behavioral model). The total
effect is to increase GDP by (1 + bd ) G0 .




                                                           25
where r̂BR (Xt ) and ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) are the perceived interest rate and income, given by:

              r̂BR (Xt ) = mr r̂ (Xt ) ,     ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) = my ŷ (Xt ) + ω (Xt ) (Nt − N (Xt )) ,           (51)

and where mr , my are attention parameters in [0, 1], and r̂ (Xt ), ŷ (Nt , Xt ) are the true values of interest
rate and personal income, while ŷ (Xt ) = ŷ (N (Xt ) , Xt ) is the true value aggregate income (given
aggregate labor supply N (Xt )) – all expressed as deviations from the steady state. When mr , my and
m̄ are equal to 1, the agent is the traditional, rational agent. Here mr , my capture attention to the
interest rate and income. For instance, if mr = 0, the agent “doesn’t pay attention” to the interest rate
– formally, he replaces it by r̄ in his perceived law of motion. When mr ∈ [0, 1), he partially takes into
account the interest rate – really, the deviations of the interest rate from its mean. A microfoundation
for the attention parameters mr and my is discussed in Gabaix (2014), Appendix B.65
    Here ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) is his perceived income, and perceived aggregate income is ŷ BR (Xt ) =
  BR
ŷ (N (Xt ) , Xt ) = my ŷ (Xt ): the agent perceives only a fraction of income. However, he correctly per-
                                       ∂ BR
ceives that the marginal income is ∂N    ŷ (Nt , Xt ) = wt . This captures that the agent is smart enough
to appreciate fully today’s marginal impact of working more, though anticipating his total income is
harder, especially in the future. Given these perceptions, the agent solves max(ct ,Nt )t≥0 U subject to (8)
and (50).

   Term structure of attention to interest rate and income This formulation, together with
Lemma 2.2, implies:66

Lemma 6.1 (Term structure of attention) We have:

          EBR
               BR
                             = mr m̄k Et [r̂ (Xt+k )] ,        EBR
                                                                    BR
                                                                                  = my m̄k Et [ŷ (Xt+k )] .
                                                                               
           t   r̂  (Xt+k )                                      t   ŷ  (X t+k )                                 (52)

In words, for the interest rate (the same holds for income):

                Perceived deviation in k periods = mr m̄k × (True deviation in k periods).

    Hence, we obtain a “term structure of attention”. The factor mr is the “level” or “intercept” of
attention, while the factor m̄ is the “slope” of attention as a function of the horizon. The same holds
for aggregate income.
    Cognitive discounting, which was captured in the main model with the parameter m̄, is a form of inat-
tention to future variables. In contrast, the contemporaneous attention parameters my and mr capture
limited attention to contemporaneous variables. We see that they typically interact multiplicatively.
    If the reader seeks a model with just one free parameter, I recommend setting mr = my = 1 (the
rational values) and keeping m̄ as the main parameter governing inattention, thus recovering the basic
formulation of Section 2.
  65
      Greenwood and Hanson (2015) present a model of industry dynamics in which firms imperfectly perceive the equi-
librium responses of their competitors. This competition neglect is a form of inattention to contemporaneous variables
similar to the one modeled here and in Section 6.2.
   66
      We have:
                   EBR
                        BR
                         r̂ (Xt+k ) = EBR    [mr r̂ (Xt+k )] = mr EBR [r̂ (Xt+k )] = mr m̄k Et [r̂ (Xt+k )] .
                                    
                    t                    t                         t




                                                          26
   Consumption and labor supply I now detail the consequences of these enrichments, for a
behavioral agent with small initial wealth (Section 11.2 gives the derivation).67

Proposition 6.2 (Behavioral consumption function) In this behavioral model, consumption is: ct =
                                               φ
cdt + ĉt , with cdt = ȳ + bk kt , bk := Rr̄ φ+γ , and, up to second order terms:
                                            "                                                 #
                                                X m̄τ −t                          r̄       
                               ĉt = Et                         br mr r̂ (Xτ ) + mY ŷ (Xτ ) ,                         (53)
                                                 τ ≥t
                                                        Rτ −t                      R

with br :=    −1
              γR2
                  ,    and mY :=      φmy +γ
                                       φ+γ
                                             .    Labor supply satisfies the usual condition Ntφ = ωt c−γ
                                                                                                       t , i.e., in
deviations from the steady state, N̂t = φ1 ω̂t − φγ ĉt . The policy of the rational agent is a particular case,
setting m̄, mr , my to 1.
   In (53), consumption reacts to future interest rates and income deviations, dampening future values
by a factor m̄τ −t at horizon τ − t, as in (52). Note that this agent is “globally patient” for steady-state
                                                                            φ
variables. For instance, her marginal propensity to consume wealth is Rr̄ φ+γ , like for the rational agent.68
However, she is myopic to small macroeconomic disturbances in the economy.

The behavioral IS curve with imperfect attention to income and interest rate I next solve
for the general equilibrium consequences of policy (53). The resulting IS curve is next (the derivation,
in Section 11.2, is instructive, and quite simple).

Proposition 6.3 (Discounted Euler equation, with term structure of attention) In the enriched model
with partial attention to income and interest rate, we obtain a variant of the behavioral IS
                                                                                           h curve
                                                                                                 i (23)
                  m̄                                                              mr           1
in which M = R−rm    Y
                       ∈ [0, 1] for the macro parameter of attention and σ := γR(R−rm Y)
                                                                                         ∈ 0, γR  , with
                         φmy +γ
mY given by mY =          φ+γ
                                .   In the rational model, M = 1.

Understanding discounting in rational and behavioral models It is now worth pondering
where the discounting by M comes from in the behavioral IS curve, via the enriched specification in
Proposition 6.3. What is the impact at time 0 of a one-period fall of the real interest rate r̂τ , in partial
and general equilibrium, in both the rational and the behavioral model (as in Angeletos and Lian (2017)
and Farhi and Werning (2017))? For simplicity, I take r̂τn = 0 here.
   Let us start with the rational model. In partial equilibrium (i.e., taking future income as given),
a change in the future real interest rate r̂τ changes time-0 consumption by the direct (i.e. partial
equilibrium) impact (see (53)):

                                                                 ∂ĉ0                                    1
                            Rational agent: ∆direct :=                   (yt )t≥0 held constant   = −α      ,
                                                                 ∂r̂τ                                    Rτ
                1                                                  1
where α :=     γR2
                   .   Hence, there is discounting by             Rτ
                                                                     .   However, in general equilibrium (i.e., when the
  67
    I allow for kt different from 0, as private wealth is non-zero when there is an active fiscal policy.
                                                                                                  φ
  68
    There is a subtlety here, which Section 12.2 details. The MPC out of wealth is only Rr̄ φ+γ      , because higher wealth
translates into not just more consumption of goods, but also more leisure. However, future booms have an impact of
consumption that is Rr̄ when my = 1. This is because they affect the agent’s decisions both through higher income, and
through higher wages.



                                                                  27
impact of r̂τ on income flows (yt )t≥0 is taken into account), the impact is (see (25) with M = 1),

                                                                  dĉ0
                                  Rational agent: ∆GE :=               = −αR,
                                                                  dr̂τ

so that there is no discounting by Rτ1+1 . The reason is the following: the rational agent sees the “first
round of impact”, that is −α Rr̂ττ ; a future interest rate cut will raise consumption. But he also sees how
this increase in consumption will increase other agents’ future consumptions, hence increase his future
income, hence his own consumption: this is the second-round effect. Iterating all other rounds (as in the
Keynesian cross), the initial impulse is greatly magnified via this aggregate demand channel: though
the first round (direct) impact is −α Rr̂ττ , the full impact (including indirect channels) is −αRr̂τ . This
means that the total impact is larger than the direct effect by a factor

                                                 ∆GE
                                                         = Rτ +1 .                                      (54)
                                                 ∆direct
   At large horizons τ , this is a large multiplier. Note that this large general equilibrium effect relies
upon common knowledge of rationality: the agent needs to assume that other agents are fully rational.
This is a very strong assumption, typically rejected in most experimental setups (see the literature on
the p−beauty contest, e.g. Nagel (1995)).
   In contrast, in the behavioral model, the agent is not fully attentive to future innovations. So first,
the direct impact of a change in interest rates is smaller:

                                                    ∂ĉ0                                         1
                   Behavioral agent: ∆direct :=            (yt )t≥0 held constant   = −αmr m̄τ      ,
                                                    ∂r̂τ                                         Rτ

which comes from (53). Next, the agent is not fully attentive to indirect effects (including general
equilibrium) of future polices. This results in the total effect in (25):

                                                           dĉ0               R
                          Behavioral agent: ∆GE :=              = −αmr M τ         ,
                                                           dr̂τ            R − rmY
                                                                           m̄
so the multiplier for the general equilibrium effect is (as M =          R−rmY
                                                                                    )
                                                             τ +1
                                 ∆GE
                                             
                                                    R
                                                                     ∈ 1, Rτ +1 ,
                                                                              
                                         =                                                              (55)
                                 ∆direct         R − rmY

and is smaller than the multiplier Rτ +1 in economies with common knowledge of rationality. As mY
becomes smaller, the multiplier weakens: distant changes in interest rates will be very ineffective if
agents are extremely myopic. Importantly, when mY = 1 (i.e., with only cognitive discounting but no
attenuation of attention to present income) direct and GE effects are identically dampened, so that we
recover the result (54) obtained in the rational model. This is different from the results in Angeletos
and Lian (2017) and Farhi and Werning (2017), whose models find an extra dampening of GE compared
to direct effects.




                                                        28
6.2     Imperfect Producer Attention to Inflation and Marginal Costs
The behavioral Phillips curve with imperfect attention to inflation and marginal costs
We can similarly consider a symmetric model enrichment on the producer side, allowing firms to have
varying degrees of attention to inflation and marginal costs. At time t, the firm perceives the future
profit at date τ ≥ t as:

                             v BR (qit , Xτ ) := v 0 qit − mfπ Π (Xτ ) , mfx µ (Xτ ) , c (Xτ ) ,
                                                                                              
                                                                                                                     (56)

where v 0 is as in (13). This boundedly rational perceived profit function replaces (14) in the baseline
model of Section 2. This means that the firm, when simulating the future, sees only a fraction mfπ of
future inflation Π (Xτ ), and a fraction mfx of the future marginal cost −µ (Xτ ) (recall that those two
quantities have been normalized to have mean 0 at the steady state). When all the m’s are equal to 1,
we recover the traditional rational firm from the New Keynesian model. The firm’s decision problem is
now                                       ∞                    −γ
                                                  τ −t c (Xτ )
                                         X
                                      BR                            BR
                               max Et         (βθ)             −γ v    (qit , Xτ ) .                (57)
                                qit
                                         τ =t
                                                       c (Xt )
This yields the following optimal price-setting behavior:
                                             ∞
                                             X
                     p∗t                           (βθm̄)k Et mfπ (πt+1 + ... + πt+k ) − mfx µt+k ,
                                                                                                
                           = pt + (1 − βθ)                                                                           (58)
                                             k=0

which is analogous to the solution obtained in (26) but now contains the additional scalars mfπ and mfx
parameterizing attention to inflation and macro disturbances, respectively, in addition to the overall
cognitive discounting factor m̄.69 The general-equilibrium consequences of this model enrichment are
as follows:

Proposition 6.4 (Phillips curve with behavioral firms, allowing for imperfect attention to inflation and
costs) In the enriched model with partial attention to inflation
                                                                and marginal costs,
                                                                                we obtain a variant
                                                   f             1−βθ  f
of the behavioral Phillips curve (28) in which M = m̄ θ + 1−βθm̄ mπ (1 − θ) ∈ [0, 1] for the macro
parameter governing producer attention and

                                                          κ = mfx κ̄                                                 (59)

for the slope of the Phillips curve, where κ̄ is the slope in the traditional model with full attention, mfπ
is the firm’s attention to contemporaneous inflation, and mfx is the firm’s attention to contemporaneous
macro output conditions. Hence, in the rational model we obtain M f = 1 and κ = κ̄.
    The introduction of the new behavioral parameters mfx and mfπ is helpful in several respects. First, a
value mfx < 1 will be helpful in matching the empirical slope κ of the Phillips curve in periods in which
it is quite small without resorting to extreme price stickiness.70,71 Second, going back to the welfare
criterion discussion of Section 4, note that holding the measured Phillips curve slope κ = mfx κ̄ constant,
  69
     A proof of equation (58) is in Section 13 in the Online Appendix.
  70
     For instance, to generate exactly the same value of κ used in the calibration in Table 1, one could use the parameter
configuration θ = 0.7 and mfx = 0.15.
  71
     In a recent paper, Châu (2019) develops a model in which coefficients in the Phillips curve are state-dependent,
because of endogenous attention by firms, and find empirical support for the model’s predictions.


                                                             29
the relative weight on the output gap (ϑ = κ̄ε = mκf ε ) is now higher when firms are more behavioral
                                                      x
(when mfx is lower). The traditional model gives a very small relative weight ϑ on the output gap when
it is calibrated from the Phillips curve – this is often considered a puzzle, which this extension helps
alleviate.72


6.3     The Model with Non-Constant Trend Inflation
The model so far assumed a constant trend inflation, normalized to 0. Empirical trend inflation present
“regimes” that vary from time to time. Here I present an extension of the model that allows for non-
zero trend inflation, and, most importantly, allows to think about the Phillips curve and neo-Fisherian
paradoxes in that context.

Assumptions and basic model The analytics will be very simple, but they require a bit of overhead.
     Default inflation. When asked to forecast inflation, firms may look at past inflation, as a number of
papers have found, in particular Galı́ and Gertler (1999).73 To capture this, I call “default inflation”,
πtd , a signal about future inflation that firms form effortlessly.
                                                          h         Conceptually,   it might be an optimal
                                                                           i
simple forecast based on past variables, such as πt = Ẽt πt+1 | πτ , πτ τ ≤t , as in Fuster et al. (2012).74
                                                   d                   CB


Here Ẽt indicates that this need not be a completely optimal forecast. Here the variable πtCB is the
target inflation announced by the central bank (e.g., 2%).
   The specifics of default inflation will not matter much – all we need is some default inflation. For
concreteness I will use the following functional form:75

                                                πtd = (1 − ζ) π̄t + ζ π̄tCB ,                                           (60)

where π̄t and π̄tCB are moving averages of past inflation and inflation guidance (i.e., π̄t = (1 − η) π̄t−1 +
                               CB
ηπt−1 and π̄tCB = (1 − ηCB ) π̄t−1        CB
                                   + ηCB πt−1 ), though that detailed specification does not matter. What
is important is that default inflation puts a weight ζ ∈ [0, 1] on the past central bank guidance, πtCB ,
and a weight 1 − ζ on past inflation.76
    Indexation. A number of authors have found that a form of automatic indexation is useful to fit the
aggregate data, and not coincidentally, to hit conceptual targets such as long-run Fisher neutrality.77
  72
      Also, going back to the stability criterion (36), note that greater bounded rationality by firms (lower mfx ) helps
achieving determinacy, as the frequency of price changes becomes infinite, κ → ∞ (see equation (118)). So to maintain
determinacy (and more generally, insensitivity to the very long run), we need both enough bounded rationality and
enough price stickiness, in concordance with the finding of Kocherlakota (2016) that we need enough price stickiness to
have sensible predictions in long-horizon models.
   73
      Galı́ and Gertler (1999) also present a model with partially backward looking firms, which this section extends. In
the notations of this section, their model has η = 1, M = 1, and ζ = 0, which prevents the determinacy analysis below,
where ζ > 0 is crucial.
   74
                                                                          P∞        k
      The forecasted variable might be average future inflation, (1 − βθ) k=0 (βθ) πt+k .
   75
      Form (60) could come from optimal signal extraction – for instance, when inflation has low volatility, ζ will naturally
be bigger; but when inflation is variable and the central bank is not trusted, then ζ will be low. That microfoundation
could be formalized, but I won’t pursue that here.
   76
      In support of adaptive expectations, Malmendier and Nagel (2015) estimate empirically an adaptive learning model
and find that agents put a weight of 0.6 on experienced inflation in the past. There is not much systematic evidence on
the effect of central bank inflation guidance so far. However, Cavallo et al. (2017) find that upon being presented with
official statistics about inflation, US consumers put a weight of 0.8 on the new information when forming their posterior.
   77
      The traditional New Keynesian model is partially Fisher non-neutral: if inflation is permanently higher, then output
is permanently higher: (28) with M f = 1 gives x = 1−β  κ π. Indexation restores full Fisher neutrality.



                                                             30
I will follow their lead, and assume here full indexation for firms not reoptimizing their prices (like
Christiano et al. (2005), and Smets and Wouters (2007)). If a firm does not “actively” adjust its price
in a forward-looking manner like in the Calvo model, it just raises it by πtd .
    Let us now call π̂t := πt − πtd the deviation of inflation from the default. As the next proposition
spells out, then, we are in a world isomorphic to that of the basic model, except we replace πt by π̂t .

Proposition 6.5 (Behavioral New Keynesian model – augmented by a non-zero trend inflation) In
the extended model with non-zero trend inflation, we obtain the following behavioral version of the New
Keynesian model. Decompose inflation as: πt = πtd + π̂t , where πtd is default inflation, and π̂t is the
deviation from default inflation. Then, we have

                                     xt = M Et [xt+1 ] − σ (it − Et πt+1 − rtn ) ,                                (61)
                                     π̂t = βM f Et [π̂t+1 ] + κxt .                                               (62)

   We recover the same formulation as in the core model (Proposition 2.5); simply, in the Phillips curve
(28), we replace inflation πt by “deviation from default inflation”, π̂t , which gives (62).
    This encompasses the basic behavioral model of Proposition 2.5, when default inflation is just 0,
i.e. πtd ≡ 0, and ζ = 1. Galı́ and Gertler (1999) microfound backward-looking behavior in the Phillips
curve via indexation; Angeletos and Huo (2019) have shown that something related (with πtd = πt−1 )
this can be obtained as a consequence of incomplete information. We will now explore consequences of
Proposition 6.5, which also give insight into the implications of these related models.

Consequences of the augmented model I complete this study with some observations on the
behavior of this model augmented with time-varying trend inflation.
    Fisher neutrality holds. Fisher neutrality holds in the extended model of Proposition 6.5. Indeed,
suppose indeed that long run inflation (and inflation guidance) is π̄, then the long run nominal rate
is i = rn + π̄, and the economy is long-run Fisher neutral. Note that this is not the case in the basic
model (which assumes that long run inflation is 0, see in (9)), and that the traditional NK model is
only partially Fisher neutral (see footnote 77).
    Equilibrium determinacy revisited. Is the equilibrium determinate? The next proposition generalizes
the earlier criterion (35).78

Proposition 6.6 (Equilibrium determinacy with behavioral agents – with backward looking terms) In
the extended model, the equilibrium is determinate only if:
                                                            
                                   1 − βM f          1 − βM f (1 − M )
                          φπ + ζ              φx + ζ                   > 1.                  (63)
                                       κ                    κσ
    Hence, we have a very similar criterion, except for the appearance of ζ, the weight on the central
bank guidance.
    When monetary policy is passive (φπ = φx = 0), the economy can be determinate in this behav-
ioral model if agents are behavioral enough (low M , low κ perhaps coming from low mfx ) and if their
expectations are anchored enough, e.g. on central bank guidance (high ζ). However, when monetary
  78
     This proposition states a necessary condition. The necessary and sufficient condition is (63) and a “Routh-Hurwitz
auxiliary condition” stated in the Online Appendix (Proposition 13.1). This auxiliary condition is much more minor, and
almost automatically valid in practice (see the discussion around Proposition 13.1).

                                                           31
policy is passive traditional models generate non-determinacy, as they violate the criterion (63). This
is the case in the traditional New Keynesian model (which has M = M f = 1), in the indexation model
of Galı́ and Gertler (1999) (which has ζ = 0, M = 1, M f ∈ [0, 1], πtd = πt−1 ),79 and in the typical old
Keynesian model (which has M f = 0, ζ = 0).80
    Speculating somewhat more, this usefulness of “inflation guidance” may explain why central bankers
in recent years did not wish to deviate from an inflation target of 2% (and go to a higher target, say 4%,
which would leave more room to avoid the ZLB). They fear that “inflation expectations will become
unanchored”, i.e. that ζ will be lower: agents will believe the central bank less (as it “broke its word”),
which in turn can make the economy equilibrium indeterminate, by (63). This reasoning relies on agents’
bounded rationality.

    The 1970s The stagflation of the 1970s has been attributed by Clarida et al. (2000) to a violation
of the Taylor criterion – in essence, φπ < 1. But we have seen that Japan has arguably φπ = 0, and
that this can still be consistent with a determinate equilibrium. How to reconcile these prima facie
contradictory facts? In the present model, the 1970s can be interpreted as a moment where agents did
not believe the central bank enough, i.e. ζ was too low (in part because inflation was volatile, central
bank credibility was eroded) – while in Japan, ζ is high enough. Together with the failure of the Taylor
criterion documented in Clarida et al. (2000), this leads to criterion (63) being violated. This again
suggests that studying empirically the parameter ζ (i.e. the weight of long run inflation guidance by
the central bank), and its deeper information-theoretic foundation, would be quite interesting.

    Neo-Fisherian experiment: A permanent shock to target inflation I now use the model to
analyze neo-Fisherian effects with behavioral agents. I assume that the central bank announces at time
0 an immediate, permanent, unexpected rise of 1% in the nominal rate and in its corresponding target
inflation (it = 1% at all dates t ≥ 0, and the central bank guidance is the corresponding long term
target, πtCB = 1%).81 Figure 4 shows the result.82 On impact, there is a recession: output and inflation
are below trend. However, over time default inflation increases: as the central bank gives “guidance”,
inflation expectations are raised. In the long run, for this calibration, we obtain Fisher sign neutrality.
    This effect is hard to obtain in a conventional New Keynesian model.83 Cochrane (2017, p.3)
summarizes the situation:84

       “The natural starting place in this quest [for a negative short-run impact of interest rates
       on inflation] is the simple frictionless Fisherian model, it = r + Et πt+1 . A rise in interest
       rates i produces an immediate and permanent rise in expected inflation. In the search for
  79
      With those values, the Phillips curve (61) is actually the limit of their Phillips curve when their β is 1.
  80
      For instance, the old Keynesian model features a deflationary spiral, because it has ζ = 0. However, we see that in the
old Keynesian model, augmented with ζ > 0 (i.e., agents listen enough to the central bank when forming expectations),
we can verify the criterion.
   81
      To ensure determinacy, we can just add a Taylor rule around that the equilibrium path reported here, as in footnote
43.
   82
      In addition to the basic calibration of Table 1, I use also parameters for default inflation: η = 0.5, ηCB = 0.05,
ζ = 0.8.
   83
      For instance, in the traditional New Keynesian model a permanent change in the inflation target (i.e., of the intercept
jt of the Taylor rule) involves no transitional dynamics: it leads to an instantaneous jump of the whole economy to the
new steady state, and this rise in interest rates leads to a one-for-one rise in inflation. Slow transition dynamics emerge
only when departing from the basic model, e.g. by assuming imperfect information (Erceg and Levin (2003)) or sticky
wages and/or indexation (Ascari and Ropele (2012)).
   84
      This can depend on which equilibrium is selected, leading to some cacophony in the dialogue.

                                                             32
                         1




                        0.5




                         0




                       -0.5




                        -1




                       -1.5




                        -2
                                                                                           Nominal interest rate
                                                                                           Output
                                                                                           Inflation
                       -2.5
                              0   5       10   15   20         25          30   35    40           45              50
                                                             Horizon


Figure 4: Impact of a permanent rise in the nominal interest rate. At time 0, the nominal interest
rate is permanently increased by 1%. The Figure traces the impact on inflation and output. Units are
percentage points.




                         1




                        0.8




                        0.6




                        0.4




                        0.2




                         0




                       -0.2
                                                                                           Nominal interest rate
                                                                                           Output
                                                                                           Inflation
                       -0.4
                              0       2        4         6             8         10          12                    14
                                                             Horizon


Figure 5: Impact of a temporary rise in the nominal interest rate. At time 0, the nominal interest
rate is temporarily increased by 1%. The Figure traces the impact on inflation and output. Units are
percentage points.




                                                             33
      a temporary negative sign [one can add] to this basic frictionless model: 1) new Keyne-
      sian pricing frictions, 2) backwards-looking Phillips curves, 3) monetary frictions. These
      ingredients robustly fail to produce the short-run negative sign.”

This paper gives a way to overturn this result, coming from agents’ bounded rationality. In this behav-
ioral model, raising rates permanently first depresses output and inflation, then in the long run raises
inflation (as Fisher neutrality approximately holds), via the credible inflation guidance.
    This analysis, of course, is not an endorsement, as this policy is not first best, and leads to a
prolonged recession.

    A temporary shock to the interest rate. I now study a temporary increase of the nominal
interest rate, it = ρti i0 for t ≥ 0, following an immediate, unexpected rise of 1% in the nominal interest
rate at time 0. As the long run is not modified, I assume an inflation guidance of 0, πtCB = 0, and use
ρi = 0.5. Figure 5 shows the result. On impact, inflation and output fall, and then mean-revert. The
behavior is very close to what happens in the basic model of Section 2.


7     Discussion of the Behavioral Assumptions
Here I discuss at greater length the behavioral assumptions of the model, especially the key Assumption
2.1.

    Microeconomic evidence There is mounting microeconomic evidence for the existence of inat-
tention to small dimensions of reality (Gabaix and Laibson (2006), Brown et al. (2010), Caplin et al.
(2011), Gabaix (2019)) including taxes (Chetty et al. (2009), Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2017)), and
macroeconomic variables (Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015)). It is represented in a compact way by
the inattention parameters – that is, the m’s.85 This paper also highlights another potential effect that
has not specifically been investigated: a “slope” of inattention captured by m̄, whereby agents perceive
more dimly things that are further in the future. There is no direct evidence about cognitive discounting
per se, and one interesting research question would be to investigate this more directly, particularly the
“term structure of attention” of Lemma 6.1. The Online Appendix (Section 12.5) discusses extant evi-
dence. It finds that cognitive discounting can explain some of the evidence (aggregate forecast revisions
predict aggregate forecast errors on average), in particular from Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), if
viewed as a theory of the aggregate forecaster. However, the theory would need to be supplemented
by other modeling features to match other aspects of the evidence. For example, to match the slow
adjustment dynamics of forecast errors to shocks studied in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012), one
can explicitly model delayed reaction to news (Gabaix and Laibson (2002); Mankiw and Reis (2002)).
In order to explain potential over-reaction at the individual forecaster level (as in Bordalo et al. (2018))
one could incorporate overconfidence in the precision of signals. Gabaix and Laibson (2017) argue that
a large fraction of the literature on hyperbolic discounting reflects a closely related form of cognitive
discounting. One can hope that future research will investigate all this empirically, especially for actual
consumers: most data comes from professional forecasters, who are likely to be more rational than the
consumers in this model.
  85
     In this paper, the theme is that of underreaction. It is possible to generate overreaction: if people overestimate the
autocorrelation of productivity or income shocks (because it’s higher in their default model), they will overreact to them.
See Gabaix (2019), Section 2.3.13.

                                                            34
    Theoretical microfoundations Section 9 discusses in detail the microfoundations of the inat-
tention parameters, and proposes an endogenization for them. Here I give a summary of the situation.
First, pragmatically, my preferred interpretation is that the formulation (8) can be taken as a useful
idealization of the agent’s simulation process. This is in line with much behavioral economics, in which
a plausible description of the thought process is posited, and its consequences analyzed – but the re-
search on its deeper microfoundations is left for the future (for instance, loss aversion is observed and
modeled, but there is still no agreement about its “deep” microfoundations, so that loss aversion is
directly used, rather than its more remotely speculative microfoundations; and likewise for hyperbolic
discounting, fairness etc.). Adjusting for the different stakes, this is similar for, say, equilibrium. One
starts with a notion of equilibrium (supply equals demand, or Nash equilibrium), but the hypothetical
nanofoundations for how the market will reach equilibrium (e.g. tâtonnement) are typically done in sep-
arate studies, and not actively used when thinking about the consequences of equilibrium for concrete
economic analyses.
    Section 9.1 proposes such a potential nanofoundation: formulation (8) (and the extension (50))
can be viewed as the “representative agent” version of a model in which the agent performs a mental
simulation of the future, but receives only noisy signals about that simulation.86 Importantly, one can
allow agents to optimize their attention (Section 9.2). Then, the optimal level of attention reacts to the
incentives to pay attention that the agent faces.

    Lucas critique In most of this paper the attention parameters are taken to be constant. But
for completeness Section 9.2 discusses their endogenization. Attention will not change if, for instance,
the volatility of the environment increases by a small or moderate amount (the “sparsity” feature of
the theoretical microfoundation is useful for that, as it makes the agent locally non-reactive to things),
but it will rise if the volatility of the environment increases a lot (see in particular the discussion after
Proposition 9.1). Hence, the Lucas critique does not apply for small or moderate changes, but it does
apply to large changes.

    Long run learning Relatedly, the agent has forever a biased model of the world (biased by
cognitive discounting) – in that sense, she does not learn in the long run. This makes sense, as attention
is costly. We do sail through life without learning many things – for example, most people lead happy
lives without learning quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is difficult, and not crucial to leading a
good life. Likewise, in this model, fully understanding interest rates is difficult, and not crucial for life.
Learning and attention are effortful, and typically we do not learn all things within a human lifespan.

   New degrees of freedom This model is quite parsimonious: there is just one non-standard
parameter, the cognitive discounting parameter m̄. Section 6 presents enrichments that introduce other
behavioral parameters, but these are much less important, and can be disciplined via measurement.87
In other contexts such as tax salience (Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2017)), attention parameters are
  86
     For the welfare part of this paper, it is expedient to have a model in which the representative agent construct holds
exactly (it would be interesting to study welfare when agents differ because of the different noisy signals that they receive,
but I leave it to future research). Under the first interpretation, this is automatic. Under the second interpretation, we
can posit that the agent is really a continuous family of such agents, each of whom takes an infinitesimal decision on
consumption and labor supply, so that the representative agent perspective holds.
  87
     There is “meta” degree of freedom – where do the m’s go? I note that this “meta” problem is present in all of
economics. For example, in information economics, it’s normally assumed that the agent knows almost all the world
perfectly, and has imperfect information about just one or a few variables. Likewise, we introduce adjustment costs in

                                                             35
being progressively better measured (see Gabaix (2019) for a survey), and one can hope that the same
thing will happen for macro parameters of attention.

    Reasonable variants Like any model, the framework admits a large number of reasonable vari-
ants. I have explored a number of them, and the economics I present here reflects what is robust in those
variants.88 The model here presents one such set of assumptions – essentially, I chose them by aiming
at a happy balance between tractability, parsimony and psychological and macroeconomic realism.


8     Conclusion
This paper gives a simple way to think about the impact of bounded rationality on monetary and fiscal
policy. Furthermore, we have seen that there is empirical support for the main non-standard elements
of the model. As shown in the prior literature, the empirical Phillips curve is partially myopic, so is
the IS curve, and agents are partially non-Ricardian. This paper leads to a large number of natural
questions.
    Theory. I have studied only the most basic model. Doing a similar exploration for its richer variants
would be very interesting and relevant both empirically and conceptually: examples include capital
accumulation, a more frictional labor market, distortionary taxes, and agents that are heterogeneous
in wealth or rationality. The tractable approach laid out in this paper makes the exploration of those
questions quite accessible. Relatedly, it facilitates studying optimal central bank policy with behavioral
agents under varied situations.89 An obvious practically useful project would be to enrich currently-
used model such as Smets and Wouters (2007) with cognitive discounting and related limited attetion
parameters, and estimate such a model.
    Empirics. The present work suggests a host of questions for empirical work. One would like to
estimate the intercept and slope of attention (i.e. attention to current variables, and how the under-
standing of future variables decreases with the horizon) using individual-level dynamics for consumers
(equation (53)), for firms (equation (58)), and of the whole equilibrium economy (Proposition 2.5).
One side-payoff of this work is to provide a parametrized model where these forces can be empirically
assessed (by measuring the various m’s in the economy).90
    Surveys. This work also suggests new questions for survey design. One would like to measure
people’s subjective model of the world – which, like that of this model’s agents, may not be accurate. For
instance, one could design surveys about people’s understanding of impulse-responses in the economy.
They would ask questions such as: “Suppose that the central bank raises the interest rate now [or in
a year, etc.], what do you think will happen in the economy? How will you change your consumption
today?”. In contrast, most work assesses people’s predictions of individual variables (e.g. Greenwood
just one of a few variables, not to all. The modeler chooses which those are – guided by a sense of “what is relevant and
interesting”. I try to do the same here.
   88
      For instance, the agent might extrapolate too much from present income: this gives a high MPC out of current
income, but otherwise the macro behavior does not change much (see Section 12.3). She might also suffer from nominal
illusion in her perception of the interest rate (Section 12.6). Also, if we had growth, the agent would cognitively discount
the deviations Xt from the balanced growth path (see Section 12.7). One could also imagine a number of variants, e.g.
(8) and (10) might replace m̄ by a diagonal matrix diag (m̄i ) of component-specific cognitive discounting factors.
   89
      See Nakata et al. (2019) and Benchimol and Bounader (2018).
   90
      See Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), Afrouzi (2017) and Fuhrer (2017) for progress on those issues.




                                                            36
and Shleifer (2014)) rather than their whole causal model.91 The parameterization in the present work
allows for a way to explore potentially important deviations of the model from the rational benchmark,
and suggests particular research designs that focus on the key differential predictions of a rational versus
a behavioral model.92
    In conclusion, this paper offers a parsimonious way to think through the impact of bounded rational-
ity on monetary and fiscal policy, both positively and normatively. It suggests a number of theoretical
and empirical questions that would be fruitfully explored.


9     Appendix: Microfoundations for Cognitive Discounting
There are three questions when handling a behavioral model of the type presented here.
    1. How does the model generate in a coherent way the agent’s consumption and labor supply policies
       (given attention m)? How does this affect economic outcomes?

    2. Is there a story for why we would achieve that formulation?

    3. How does the parameter m vary with incentives?
In my view, question 1 is the most important “practical” question – as it is crucial to handle demand
functions. Accordingly, I detail it throughout the paper.
    Question 2 is addressed in Section 9.1. For practical purposes, it is probably the least crucial. One
perhaps useful example is the concept of “equilibrium prices”. The way over 99.9% of economics proceeds
is to “assume that the market clears at price p”, and solve for the price. There is a small and worthy
part of economics that thinks about microfoundations for the possibility of finding the equilibrium
price (e.g. tâtonnement) – that is a microfoundation that is useful to know, but it is not necessary to
repeat it in each paper. On top of that, it is not clear that we have found the true microfoundations
for market equilibrium.93 Rather, those generate only something close, but not exactly equal to, the
costless, instantaneous jump to market equilibrium. Hence, practicing economists are aware of those
candidate microfoundations for “equilibrium prices”, but seldom actively use them. Still, it is healthy
for concrete economics to have it as a benchmark in the background. It is in that spirit that I develop
a microfoundation in 9.1.
    Question 3 is useful in some applications, and I detail it in Section 9.2. The upshot is this: in the
“sparsity” framework, there is local rigidity and global flexibility. Local rigidity: when variances of
primitive shocks remain within a certain bound,94 then attention parameters remain exactly constant
(there, “sparsity” is particularly useful). Global flexibility: However, if variances become very high,
then attention does increase. The Lucas critique applies to large changes in the environment, but not
to small ones. Hence, this paper will work with constant attention – that corresponds to variances that
can vary moderately.
  91
     E.g. it asks questions like: “Are you optimistic about the economy today?” or “Where do you think the economy
will be in a year?”. See Carvalho and Nechio (2014) for people’s qualitative understanding of policy.
  92
     E.g. one could ask “Suppose the central bank lowers interest rates by 1% [or the government gives $1000 to all agents]
for one period in eight quarters, what will happen to the rest of the economy, and to your decisions?”, plot the impulse
response, vary the parameter “eight”, and compare that to the rational and behavioral models.
  93
     The same holds for related concepts, e.g. “Nash equilibrium” and “rational expectations equilibrium”. There are
“infinitely iterated rounds of reasoning” stories to microfound those, and they generate something like those equilibrium
concepts only under very strong
                                 and idealized conditions.
  94
     For instance, E ζt2 + jt2 ≤ K, for some bound K. Recall that jt denotes innovations to monetary policy.

                                                            37
9.1       A Possible “Noisy Simulations” Foundation for Cognitive Discounting
Here is a possible “noisy simulations” microfoundation for cognitive discounting (8), i.e. the fact that
the agent perceives:95
                                       Xt+1 = m̄GX (Xt , t+1 ) .                                   (64)

One period: basic idea To clarify ideas, let us consider a simpler scenario where at time t = 0
the agent simply simulates X1 . The true next-period value is X1 = GX (X0 , 1 ). However, the agent
receives a noisy signal Y1 about this:
                                                (
                                                 X1     with probability q,
                                         Y1 =                                                                           (65)
                                                 X10    with probability 1 − q.

    That is, with a probability q, he receives the correct value X1 , while with probability 1 − q, there
is a “random reset” in the agent’s simulation process: then the agent receives a random i.i.d. draw X10
from the unconditional distribution of X1 .96 This reset captures a form of disruption in the reasoning
process.
    Normalizing throughout the unconditional mean of X1 to be X̄ = 0, this implies that the conditional
mean given the signal Y1 is:97
                                    X1e (y1 ) := E [X1 |Y1 = y1 ] = qy1 ,                            (66)
and given
                          E [Y1 |X1 ] = qX1 + (1 − q) E [X10 ] = qX1 + (1 − q) X̄ = qX1
the average perceived value given the truth is:

                         X̄1e (X1 ) := E [X1e (Y1 ) |X1 ] = E [qY1 |X1 ] = qE [Y1 |X1 ] = q 2 X1 .

       Hence, defining
                                                         m̄ := q 2                                                      (67)
we have
                                         X̄1e (X1 ) = m̄X1 = m̄GX (X0 , 1 ) .                                          (68)
   This way, the agent will perceive m̄X1 on average. Then, the representative agent (who averages
over all agents) will behave according to (64).
  95
     Here I give a microfoundation for cognitive discounting, which involves iterated simulations of the future. There is
also a more static “noisy perceptions” microfoundation for the intercept parameters mr , my , mfx , mfπ : it is detailed in
Gabaix (2014), Appendix B.                                        p
  96
     One could use other formulations, e.g. Y1 = qX1 + 1 − q 2 X10 . It works the same way (i.e., E [X1 |Y1 ] = qY1 , so
m̄ = q 2 ), but then X1 needs to be Gaussian distributed.
  97
     Indeed, calling g (X1 ) the distribution of X1 , the Rjoint density of (X1 , Y1 ) is f (x1 , y1 ) = qg (y1 ) δy1 (x1 ) +
(1 − q) g (y1 ) g (x1 ), where δ is the Dirac function. So, as x1 g (x1 ) dx1 = 0,
                                        R                                                     R
                                           x1 f (x1 , y1 ) dx1   qg (y1 ) y1 + (1 − q) g (y1 ) x1 g (x1 ) dx1
                    E [X1 |Y1 = y1 ] =    R                    =                                              = qy1 .
                                            f (x1 , y1 ) dx1                        g (y1 )




                                                             38
How to get all agents to do exactly like the representative agent? For welfare, it is useful for
exact representative-agent aggregation to hold. I show two ways to do that: via the family metaphor,
and via an “integration within the mind” metaphor. The first yields the linearized version of cognitive
discounting, (9), while the second story yields the full non-linear version of cognitive discounting, (8). In
laying out foundations, it may be useful to have two potential ways to think about things, so I present
both.
    The “family metaphor”. Suppose each agent is really a “family”, made of a continuum of agents
j ∈ [0, 1]. Agent j takes the optimal action98 (expressed as a deviation â from the steady state optimal
action, ā) given his perception, so âj = aX E [X1 |Y1j ] = aX qY1j . The total action of the aggregate agent
              R1            R1
is then â = 0 âj dj = aX q 0 Y1j dj = aX q 2 X1 :

                                                       â (X1 ) = m̄aX X1 .                                              (69)

    This way, the aggregate agent is the representative agent, at least to the first order. His action is
a (X1 ) = ā + m̄aX X1 .
    The “integration within the mind ” metaphor. The agent runs a continuum of simulations j ∈ [0, 1],
i.e. obtains draws Y1j = Y1 (X1 , s1j ), where s1j indexes the simulation j. Each simulation j leads to a
posterior mean X1e (Y1j ) = qY1j . Then, the mind uses an average of those posteriors:
                                      Z    1
                           X1BR   =            X1e (Y1j ) dj = q 2 X1 = m̄X1 = m̄GX (X0 , 1 ) .
                                       0

This way, the perceived law of motion is exactly (64).
    This law of motion is perceived for a given 1 . If the agent just cares about the mean value of a
linearized system, she does this for one value, 1 = 0. If the agent cares about the whole non-linear
system, the procedure is done for all 1 .99,100
    This completes the microfoundation for a case where the agent simulates the next period.

Several periods Now that the one-period simulation is in place, it is easy to generalize to several
periods. We have seen how a value X0 leads to a value of X1 which follows (8). Now, the agent does
the same at all periods. She does this going from X1 to X2 , etc. By induction, the agent perceives (8)
for all dates t.


9.2     Endogenizing Attention
General formulation The traditional New Keynesian model takes pricing frictions as given, and
then studies their consequences. One can also endogenize the size of the pricing friction (of θ, see Kiley
(2000)), but most of the analysis is most cleanly done by taking the pricing friction as given. Likewise,
  98
      This action can be any action, e.g. consumption or labor supply.
  99
      Implicitly, we assume that the mind can only integrate by taking the sample mean of the signal. It could conceivably
take a more sophisticated procedure. When we model bounded rationality (as opposed to optimal information processing),
there is a point at which the sophistication of the algorithm must stop. For instance, take level-k models: suppose a
level-k agent with k = 1. Then, given her signal for the reaction at k = 1, she could optimize some more and find some
better estimate of the optimal action. Level k models assume that the agent just stops there.
  100
      I do not claim that agents do this exactly. I just delineate a Rstylized scenario that would generate (64). Understanding
exactly how people calculate expected values (e.g. approximate V (ε) f (ε) dε for some value V and distribution f ) would
be very interesting, but completely outside the scope of this study.


                                                               39
in this paper I take the degree of inattention as given, and study its consequences. In this section I
sketch how to endogenize it, drawing heavily on Gabaix (2014) and Gabaix (2016).
    I show how to endogenize a parameter I call m – this could be m̄, or the attention to the interest
rate, or to inflation (mr , mfπ ), and so forth. Call at the action at time t, and St the state vector. For
instance, in the consumer’s problem, at = (ct , Nt ) (consumption and labor supply) and St = (kt , Xt )
(kt is the agent’s personal wealth, which will be 0 in equilibrium in the model without taxes, and Xt is
vector of macro variables). The value at the default state is normalized to be S d = 0.
    The agent has a subjective value function V (S, m) that is the traditional, rational value function
under the subjective model parameterized by m. So, at time t, the agent wishes to maximize

                             v (at , St , m) = u (a) + βEV GS (St , at , m, εt+1 ) , m ,
                                                                                      
                                                                                                                   (70)

where V (S, m) is the subjective value function, i.e. the value function corresponding to the agent’s
subjective model of the world – parameterized by m, i.e. the one with the transition function
G (St , at , m, εt+1 ). She takes the action

                                         a (m, St ) = argmax v (a, St , m) .                                       (71)
                                                           a


    Conceptually, the agent would like to maximize true utility, given the imperfect action a (m, S), net
                     
of costs Kg m − md :
                              max Ev (a (m, St ) , St , 1) − Kg m − md ,
                                                                        
                                                                                                     (72)
                                     m

i.e. the inclusive utility is evaluated under the true model (indexed by m = 1), and the agent wants to
                                               
avoid paying the thinking costs Kg m − md , with K ≥ 0 (with K = 0 being the rational case). Here
md is a “default” attention, processed for free by the agent. Typically in this paper, md > 0: we have
“for free” some understanding of the future. The thinking cost g (·) can be traced back in turn to the
more primitive simulation technology used by the agent in Section 9.1. A typical functional form is the
                               
parametrization g m − md = m − md , which gives an attention function that is always continuous,
and constant in part of its domain (Gabaix (2014)).
     The problem in (72) is typically intractable (both for the researcher and, presumably, for the agent),
so some alternative formulation is needed. The sparse max model in Gabaix (2014) proposes a way to
address that difficulty. There, the agent solves a linear-quadratic approximation of this problem (72),
taking a Taylor expansion of the utility losses when evaluating optimal attention – but keeping the true
nonlinear utility when taking her action, as in (71).101 This means that (72) is replaced by:102

                                            1
                                       max − Λ (1 − m)2 − Kg m − md ,
                                                                   
                                                                                                                   (73)
                                        m   2
with Λ = λσS2 ,
                       λ = −E St◦ a0m,S md , 0 vaa a md , 0 , 0, md am,S md , 0 St◦ ,
                                                                            
                                                                                                                   (74)
where am,S is the second-order cross partial derivative, and I scale St − Std = σS St◦ : a higher σS
parameterizes the volatility of St . Here, 12 Λ (1 − m)2 is the leading term in the Taylor expansion of
 101
     The assumptions on GS (S, a, m) imply that a (m, 0) is independent of m: attention affects only the deviations from
the default state.
 102
     This is generalizes to Gabaix (2014), Definition 1 and Lemma 2. The derivation is in Section 12.11.



                                                          40
                              A(v, md )



                                   1




                                  md




                                                                                               v
                                       0   1       2    3         4        5   6   7   8   9




Figure 6: This Figure plots the attention function (75). When the volatility v of the environment
is small or moderate, attention is at its default value md . However, when volatility increases a lot,
attention increases, asymptotically toward 1.

                                                    2
                                                              
                                                   λσS
utility losses. The solution is m = A               K
                                                       , md       with:
                                                                           
                          d
                                          1       2          d
                                                                       1 d
                  A v, m          := argmin (1 − m) v + g m, m = max 1 − , m .                          (75)
                                        m  2                            v

   The following Proposition summarizes this.

Proposition 9.1 (Endogenizing attention) The agent’s attention m is given by:
                                  2
                                                            K
                                                                 
                                   λσS d                         d
                          m=A          , m = max 1 − 2 , m ,
                                    K                     λσS

where λ is in (74), K is the cost of cognition, and the attention function A is given by (75).
    Proposition 9.1, illustrated by Figure 6, has a number of implications. First, local rigidity from
                                                                         λσ 2
sparsity: when σS2 is low enough or K is large enough (so that v = KS is low and we are on the left,
constant part of Figure 6), we have m = md , without any reaction to incentives. Locally, m is constant,
at its default value md . Second, flexible reaction of attention to strong incentives: for large enough σS2
(so that v is high and we are on the right, increasing part of Figure 6), then attention m increases in
the variance, σS2 and in the stakes λ. That is, the Lucas critique applies to big changes in parameters,
but not to small ones.
    This predicts for instance that when economic volatility (coming from TFP or monetary policy
shocks) is increased, then: for a while, m does not move, and then, m increases as a function of volatility.
For instance, people react more to interest rates in a highly volatile interest rate environment. This
kind of comparative statics is sensible, and could be tested more systematically.

Concrete values for attention I now apply Proposition 9.1 to the consumer’s attention, then to
the firm’s attention. I consider the case where all fluctuations are driven by productivity ζt , with the
Taylor rule followed by monetary policy (I take it = φπ πt + φx xt + r̄, which is consistent with 0 inflation



                                                                      41
on average, and this economy is worked out in Section 12.12). The proofs suggest how other sources of
shocks could be handled.

Proposition 9.2 (Endogenizing the consumer’s attention) In the consumer problem, the attention is

                             λm̄ σζ2 d                          λmr σζ2 d                           λmy σζ2 d
                                                                                                          
                  c
           m̄ = m̄ = A              , m̄ ,       mr = A                , mr ,          my = A              , mr ,     (76)
                              Kc                                 Kc                                  Kc

with
                                                       γ (γ + φ)  2                       
                                (λm̄ , λmr , λmy ) =              cm̄,ζ , c2mr ,ζ , c2my ,ζ ,
                                                           φ
where Kc is the consumer’s cost of cognition, the attention function A is in (75), and the coefficients
cm̄,ζ , cmr ,ζ , cmy ,ζ on the right-hand side are given in equations (224), (226) and (227) in the Online
Appendix.
    The intuition for those expressions is as follows. In this expression, cmr ,ζ ζt represents how much
consumption changes (for a given ζt ) if the consumer pays more attention to the interest rate. Hence,
attention to the interest rate is higher if the interest rate matters more, i.e. c2mr ,ζ is high. So, when
interest rates have moderate volatility, attention doesn’t move (it stays at mdr ), but when volatility
increases much, then attention increases.

Proposition 9.3 (Endogenizing the firm’s attention) The firm’s attention is:
                         f
                                     !                          f         !                          f        !
                      λm̄ σζ2 d                            λmx σζ2 f,d                          λmπ σζ2 f,d
       m̄ = m̄f = A          , m̄        ,    mfx = A             , mx        ,      mfπ = A           , mπ       ,   (77)
                       Kf                                   Kf                                   Kf

with                                       f     f
                                                      ε−1  2                     
                                     λf , λmx , λmπ =                 2
                                                             qm̄,ζ , qm      2
                                                                        f ,q f       ,                                (78)
                                                      1 − βθ            x ,ζ mπ ,ζ

where Kf is the firms’ cost of cognition, and the coefficients qm̄,ζ , qmfx ,ζ , qmfπ ,ζ on the right-hand size are
given in equations (232), (235) and (236) in the Online Appendix.
   Note that this might enrich the policy analysis – e.g. attention to inflation depends on the Fed’s
aggressiveness in controlling inflation and vice-versa. I do not pursue this here.


10       Appendix: Behavioral New Keynesian Macro in a Two-
         Period Economy
Here I present a two-period model that captures some of the basic features of the behavioral New
Keynesian model. I recommend it for entrants to this literature, as everything is very clear with two
periods.
    It is similar to the model taught in undergraduate textbooks, but with rigorous microfoundations:
it makes explicit the behavioral economics foundations of that undergraduate model. It highlights the
complementarity between cognitive frictions and pricing frictions.
    It is a useful model in its own right: to consider extensions and variants, I found it easiest to start
with this two-period model.

                                                            42
       Basic setup. Utility is:
                                     1
                                     X                                             c1−γ − 1 N 1+φ
                                            β t u (ct , Nt ) with u (c, N ) =              −      .
                                      t=0
                                                                                     1−γ     1+φ

    As in Section 2.4, there is an economy consisting of a Dixit-Stiglitz continuum of firms with Calvo
pricing frictions. Calling GDP Yt , the aggregate production function is Yt = Nt and the aggregate
resource constraint is:
                                 Resource constraint: Yt = ct + Gt = Nt ,                          (79)
where Gt is real government consumption. The real wage is ωt . Labor supply is frictionless, so the agent
respects his first order condition: ωt uc + uN = 0, i.e.

                                                       Labor supply: Ntφ = ωt c−γ
                                                                               t .                                                   (80)

    The economy at time 1. Let us assume that the time-1 economy has flexible prices and no government
consumption, but for simplicity labor supply is rigid at N = 1 (this is a technological constraint). The
real wage must equal productivity, ωt = 1, and output is y1 = c1 = 1.
    The economy at time 0. Now, consider the consumption demand at time 0, for the rational consumer.
                                                                             c1−γ
Taking for now personal income yt as given, he solves max(ct )t=0,1 1t=0 β t 1−γ  subject to 1t=0 Rctt =
                                                                    P         t
                                                                                             P
                                                                                                     0
y0 + Ry10 . That gives
                                                                          
                                                                        y1
                                                           c0 = b y 0 +      ,                                                       (81)
                                                                        R0
                                                                  1
                                                            b :=      ,
                                                                 1+β

with log utility.103 Here b is the marginal propensity to consume (given the labor supply).104
   Let us assume for now that the government does not issue any debt nor consumes. Then, aggregate
income equals aggregate consumption: yt = ct . Hence,105
                                                           
                                                         c1
                                            c0 = b c0 +       ,                                (82)
                                                         R0

which yields the Euler equation βR0 cc10 = 1. I use the consumption function formulation (82) rather
than this Euler equation. Indeed, the consumption function is the formulation that generalizes well to
behavioral agents.

    Monetary policy is effective with sticky prices. At time t = 0, a fraction θ of firms have sticky
prices – their prices are pre-determined at a value we will call P0d (if prices are sticky, then P0d = P−1 ,
                                 d
but we could have P0d = P−1 eπ0 , where π0d is an “automatic” price increase pre-programmed at time
 103                                    1                        1
       In the general case, b :=   1+β ψ R0ψ−1
                                               ,   calling ψ =   γ   the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). In this section I
just use ψ = 1.
 104                                                                                                  φ  1
     This is different from the more subtle MPC inclusive of labor supply movements, which is γ+φ       1+β when evaluated
at c = N = 1.
 105
     The production subsidy by the government, designed to eliminate markup distortions, is paid for by lump-sum taxes.
The consumer receives it in profits, then pays it in taxes, so that his total income is just labor income.


                                                                         43
−1, not reactive to time-0 economic conditions, as in Mankiw and Reis (2002) or Section 6.3).106 As in
section 2.4, a corrective wage subsidy is assumed to be in place, so that there are no price distortions
on average. Other firms freely optimize their price, and hence optimally choose a price

                                                     P0∗ = ω0 P0 ,                                                  (83)

where ω0 is the real wage. Indeed, prices will be flexible at t = 1, so only current conditions matter for
the optimal price. By (12), the aggregate price level is:
                                                                           1
                                                                          1−ε
                                                1−ε
                                     P0 = θ P0d      + (1 − θ) (P0∗ )1−ε       ,                                    (84)

as a fraction θ of firms set the price P0d and a fraction 1 − θ set the price P0∗ .
    To solve the problem, there are 6 unknowns (c0 , N0 , ω0 , P0 , P0∗ , R0 ) and 5 equations ((79)–(80) and
(82)-(84)). What to do?
    In the model with flexible prices (θ = 0), this means that the price level P0 is indeterminate (as
in the basic Arrow-Debreu model). However, real variables are determinate: for instance, any solution
yields c0 = N0 = 1.
    In the model with sticky prices (θ > 0), there is a one-dimensional continuum of real equilibria. It is
the central bank that chooses the real equilibrium, by selecting the nominal interest rate, or equivalently
here, by choosing the real interest rate R0 .107 This is the great power of the central bank.

    The behavioral consumer and fiscal policy. We can now consider the case where the consumer
is behavioral. If his true income at time 1 is y1 = y1d + yb1 , he sees only y1s = y1d + m̄b
                                                                                           y1 for some m̄ ∈ [0, 1],
which is the attention to future income shocks (m̄ = 1 if the consumer is rational). Here the default is
the frictionless case, y1d = c1 = Y1 = 1.
    But now suppose that (81) becomes:

                                                        y d + m̄ŷ1
                                                                       
                                             c0 = b y0 + 1                  .                                       (85)
                                                            R0

   Suppose that the government consumes G0 at 0, nothing at time 1, and makes a transfer Tt to the
agents at times t = 0, 1. Call d0 = G0 + T0 the deficit at time 0. The government must pay its debt at
the end of time 1, which yields the fiscal balance equation:

                                                   R0 d0 + T1 = 0.                                                  (86)

       The real income of a consumer at time 0 is

                                           y0 = c0 + G0 + T0 = c0 + d0 .

   Indeed, labor and profit income equal the sales of the firms, c0 + G0 , plus the transfer from the
government, T0 . Income at time 1 is y1 = Y1 + T1 : GDP, plus the transfer from the government.108
 106
     This feature is not essential. The reader can imagine the case π0d = 0.
 107
     The central bank chooses the nominal rate. Given equilibrium inflation, that allows it to choose the real rate (when
there are pricing frictions).
 108
     As we assumed that period 1 has frictionless pricing and no government consumption, we have c1 = Y1 = 1. If d0 > 0,
then the transfer T1 is negative. Agents use the proceeds of the time-0 government bonds to pay their taxes at time 1.

                                                           44
Hence, (85) gives:                                                      
                                                               Y1 + m̄T1
                                              c0 = b c0 + d0 +             .
                                                                  R0
       Using the fiscal balance equation (86) we have:
                                                                   
                                                                 Y1
                                       c0 = b c0 + (1 − m̄) d0 +      ,
                                                                 R0

and solving for c0 :                                                        
                                                   b                      Y1
                                             c0 =           (1 − m̄) d0 +      .                                       (87)
                                                  1−b                     R0
                                              b
   We see how the “Keynesian multiplier” 1−b      arises.
   When consumers are fully attentive, m̄ = 1, and deficits do not matter in (87). However, take the
case of behavioral consumers, m̄ ∈ [0, 1). Consider a transfer by the government T0 , with no government
consumption, G0 = 0. Equation (87) means that a positive transfer d0 = T0 stimulates activity. If the
government gives the agent T0 > 0 dollars at time 0, he does not fully see that they will be taken back
(with interest) at time 1, so that this is awash. Hence, given RY10 , the consumer is tempted to consume
more.
   To see the full effect, when prices are not frictionless, we need to take a stance on monetary policy
to determine R0 . Here, assume that the central bank does not change the interest rate R0 .109 Then,
(87) implies that GDP (Y0 = c0 + G0 ) changes as:

                                                  dY0    b
                                                      =     (1 − m̄) .                                                 (88)
                                                  dT0   1−b

    With rational agents, m̄ = 1, and fiscal policy has no impact. With behavioral agents, m̄ < 1 and
                                                          b
fiscal policy has an impact: the Keynesian multiplier 1−b    , times (1 − m̄), a measure of deviation from
full rationality. I record these results in the next proposition.

Proposition 10.1 Suppose that we have (partially) sticky prices, and the central bank keeps the real
interest rate constant. Then, a lump-sum transfer T0 from the government at time 0 creates an increase
in GDP:
                                               dY0
                                                   = bd                                           (89)
                                               dT0
where
                                                            b
                                                   bd :=       (1 − m̄) ,                                              (90)
                                                           1−b
           1
where b = 1+β is the marginal propensity to consume, under log utility. Likewise, government spending
G0 has the multiplier:
                                             dY0
                                                 = 1 + bd .                                      (91)
                                            dG0
                     dY0             dY0
       We see that   dT0
                           > 0 and   dG0
                                           > 1 if and only if consumers are non-Ricardian, m̄ < 1.
       This proposition also announces a result on government spending, that I now derive. Consider an
 109
    With flexible prices (θ = 0), we still have ω0 = 1, hence we still have c0 = N0 = 1. Hence, the interest rate R0 has to
increase. Therefore, to obtain an effect of a government transfer, we need both monetary frictions (partially sticky prices)
and cognitive frictions (partial failure of Ricardian equivalence).


                                                              45
increase in G0 , assuming a constant monetary policy (i.e., a constant real interest rate R0 – alternatively,
                                                                              dc0
the central bank might choose to change rates).110 Equation (87) gives dG       0
                                                                                    = bd , so that GDP, Y0 =
                            dY0
c0 + G0 , has a multiplier dG0 = 1 + bd .
     When m̄ = 1 (Ricardian equivalence), a change in G0 creates no change in c0 . Only labor demand
N0 increases, hence, via (80), the real wage increases, and inflation increases. GDP is Y0 = c0 + G0 , so
                     dY0
that the multiplier dG 0
                         is equal to 1.
                                                                                    dY0
     However, when m̄ < 1 (so that Ricardian equivalence fails), the multiplier dG    0
                                                                                        is greater than 1. This
is due to the reason invoked in undergraduate textbooks: people feel richer, so they spend more, which
creates more demand. Here, we can assert that with good conscience – provided we allow for behavioral
                                                                              dY0                     b     1
consumers. In the fully non-Ricardian limit m̄ = 0, the fiscal multiplier is dG   0
                                                                                     = 1 + bd = 1 + 1−b  = 1−b ,
i.e.
                                          dY0    1            1
                                              =      =                                                     (92)
                                          dG0   1−b     1 − MP C
like in the undergraduate IS-LM model. Hence, we obtain a microfoundation for the undergraduate
model, which is the limit of fully behavioral agents (m̄ = 0).
    Without Ricardian equivalence, the government consumption multiplier is greater than 1.111 Again,
this relies on monetary policy being passive, in the sense of keeping a constant real rate R0 . If the real
interest rate rises (as it would with frictionless pricing), then the multiplier would fall to a value less
than 1.

    Old vs. New Keynesian model: a mixture via bounded rationality. The above derivations
show that the model is a mix of Old and New Keynesian models. Here, we do obtain a microfoundation
for the Old Keynesian story (somewhat modified). We see what is needed: some form of non-Ricardian
behavior (here via bounded rationality), and of sticky prices. This behavioral model allows for a simple
(and I think realistic) mixture of the two ideas.
    For completeness, I describe the behavior of realized inflation – the Phillips curve. I describe other
features in Section 12.13.

     The Phillips curve. Taking a log-linear approximation around Pt = 1, with pt = ln Pt , (84)
becomes: p0 = θpd0 + (1 − θ) p∗0 . Subtracting p0 on both sides gives 0 = θ pd0 − p0 + (1 − θ) (p∗0 − p0 ),
                                                                                      

i.e.
                                                      1−θ ∗
                                           p0 − pd0 =       (p0 − p0 ) .
                                                        θ
                             d                                                      
     Recall that P0d = P−1 eπ0 , so inflation is π0 = p0 − p−1 = p0 − pd0 + pd0 − p−1 , i.e.

                                                   1−θ ∗
                                            π0 =      (p0 − p0 ) + π0d .                                           (93)
                                                    θ
       Via (83),
                                                    p∗0 − p0 = ω̂0 ,                                               (94)
 110
    See Woodford (2011) for an analysis with rational agents.
 111
    This idea is known in the Old Keynesian literature. Mankiw and Weinzierl (2011) consider late in their paper non-
Ricardian agents, and find indeed a multiplier greater than 1. But to do that they use two types of agents, which makes
the analytics quite complicated when generalizing to a large number of periods. The methodology here generalizes well to
static and dynamic contexts.




                                                          46
               ω −ω ∗
where ω̂0 = 0ω∗ 0 is the percentage deviation of the real wage from productivity, ω0∗ = 1. Because
                0
c0 + G0 = N0 , the labor supply condition (80) implies:

                          ω̂0 = φN̂0 + γĉ0 = φ (ĉ0 + G0 ) + γĉ0 = (φ + γ) (ĉ0 + bg G0 ) ,
              φ
with bg := φ+γ  .
    Call “natural” an economy with frictionless pricing. In that economy, ω̂0n = 0, so that natural con-
sumption ĉn0 (measured as a deviation from baseline consumption c̄ = 1) satisfies 0 = (φ + γ) (ĉn0 + bg G0 ),
i.e. ĉn0 = −bg G0 . Therefore, defining the output gap x0 as the difference between actual and natural
output, i.e. between actual and natural consumption:

                                              x0 = ĉ0 − ĉn0 = ĉ0 + bg G0 ,                                        (95)

we have ω̂0 = (φ + γ) x0 . Hence (94) becomes p∗0 − p0 = (φ + γ) x0 , and (93) yields:

                                           Phillips curve: π0 = κx0 + π0d ,                                          (96)

with κ := 1−θθ
                (φ + γ). Hence, we obtain an elementary Phillips curve: increases in the output gap x0
lead to inflation, above the automatic adjustment π0d . Finally, GDP’s deviation from trend is:

                                         Ŷ0 = ĉ0 + G0 = x0 + (1 − bg ) G0 .

    To synthesize, we gather the results. Recall that Y0d = 1, while π0 is the inflation between time -1
(the pre-time 0 price level) and time 0.112 The deviations of (c0 , G0 ) from trend are from the baseline
of (1, 0).

Proposition 10.2 (Two-period behavioral Keynesian model) In this 2-period model, we have for time-0
output gap x0 and inflation π0 :

                                x0 = bg G0 + bd dˆ0 − σ (i0 − Eπ1 − r̄) (IS curve),                                  (97)
                                π0 = κx0 + π0d (Phillips curve),                                                     (98)

while GDP satisfies:
                                         Yˆ0 = (1 − bg ) G0 + x0 = ĉ0 + G0 ,                                        (99)
where G0 is government consumption as a share of baseline GDP, dˆ0 the budget deficit, bg = φ+γ  φ
                                                                                                   is the
                                                        b                                              1
output gap sensitivity to government spending, bd = 1−b (1 − m̄) is the sensitivity to deficits, b = 1+β
is the marginal propensity to consume (given labor income), i0 − Eπ1 is the expected real interest rate
between periods 0 and 1, σ = R1 = β with log utility, and κ = 1−θ
                                                               θ
                                                                  (φ + γ).
   This completes the derivation of the 2-period Keynesian model. The Online Appendix (Section
12.13) contains complements, including a discounted Euler equation.
 112
    If the agent perceived only part of the change in the real rate, replacing R0 with (1 − mr ) R0d + mr R0 in (87), then
the expression in (97) would be the same, replacing σ = R1 with σ = mRr .




                                                            47
11      Appendix: Complements
11.1     Details of the Perception of Future Taxes
Here I flesh out the assumptions and results useful for the fiscal part of Section 5. First, we observe
                                     P −1
that iterating (44) gives Bτ = Bt + R τu=t du , so that the transfer at time τ , Tτ = − Rr Bτ + dτ is:

                                                                    τ −1
                                                                            !
                                              r                     X
                                        Tτ = − Bt +        dτ − r          du .                                (100)
                                              R                     u=t


    Here I detail the formalism useful for the perception of future taxes. Call Zτ = (Bτ , dτ , dτ +1 , dτ +2 , ...)0
the state vector (more properly, the part of it that concerns deficits).
    Under the rational model, Zτ +1 = HZτ for a matrix H characterized by: (HZ) (1) = Z (1)+RZ (2)
and (HZ) (i) = Z (i + 1) for i > 1, where Z (i) is the i−th component of vector Z. The true transfer
at time τ is Tτ = − Rr Bτ + dτ = T (Zτ ) , where
                                                              r              0
                                 T (Z) := eT Z,         eT := − , 1, 0, 0, ... .                               (101)
                                                               R
   We take a behavioral agent at time t. He forms a mental model of events and values at future dates
τ ≥ t. Under his subjective model, the law of motion of vector Zτ is:

                                         Zτ +1 − Ztd = m̄H Zτ − Ztd .
                                                                   
                                                                                                               (102)

   This is, the agent “anchors” future debt on the current debt captured by Ztd = (Bt , 0, 0, . . . ), he does
only a partial adjustment for the future innovations – as captured by m̄. This cognitive discounting
implies, as in (10), that we have:
                                                             "     τ −1
                                                                          #
                                                                   X
                                      τ −t              τ −t
                 EBR            d                 d
                                                
                  t     T Zτ − Zt = m̄ Et T Zτ − Zt = m̄ Et dτ − r      du .                                   (103)
                                                                                          u=t

   This gives the future taxes, as perceived by the agent at time t:
                                                            "        τ −1
                                                                            #
                                              r                      X
                           EBR
                            t   [T (Zτ )] = − Bt + m̄τ −t Et dτ − r       du .                                 (104)
                                             R                       u=t

   This reflects a partially rational consumer. Suppose that there are no future deficits. Given initial
debt Bt , the consumer will see that it will have to be repaid: he accurately foresees the part − Rr Bt in
the perception of future deficits (104). However, he sees only dimly future deficits and their impact on
future taxes. This is captured by the term m̄τ −t .
   The perceived law of motion for wealth (6) is extended to

                     kτ +1 = 1 + r + r̂ XτZ         kτ + ȳ + ŷτ Nτ , XτZ + T XτZ − cτ ,
                                                                                   
                                                                                                               (105)

where the state vector XτZ := (Xτ , Zτ ) is the extended state vector, comprising both the traditional
Xτ of the main model and the debt-related part Zτ .



                                                         48
11.2        Additional Proofs
    Proof of Lemma 2.4 Notations. The proof of this lemma and that of Proposition 2.5 follow the
steps and notations of Galı́ (2015, Sections 3.2–3.3). I simplify matters by assuming constant returns
to scale (α = 0 in Galı́’s notations). So, the nominal marginal cost at t + k is simply ψt+k , not ψt+k|t .
When referring to, say, equation (11) of Chapter 3 in Galı́ (2015), I write “equation (G11)”. I replace
the coefficient of relative risk aversion (σ in his notations) by γ (as in u0 (c) = c−γ ).
    The high-level proof is as follows. If firms were rational, firms resetting their price would choose on
average price of:
                                                             ∞
                                                             X
                                 p∗t   = pt + (1 − βθ)             (βθ)k Et [πt+1 + ... + πt+k − µt+k ]
                                                             k=0

as in Galı́. Behavioral firms do this, but with cognitive discounting, so that
                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                               p∗t   = pt + (1 − βθ)           (βθm̄)k Et [πt+1 + ... + πt+k − µt+k ]
                                                         k=0


    But this is a bit loose, so let us now turn to a real proof. If the firm were free to choose its real (log)
price qit freely at all dates t, it would choose price qit∗ maximizing (14), i.e. qi∗ (Xτ ) := argmaxqi v (qi , Xτ ),
       ∗     1−τ
i.e. eqit = 1− 1f M Ct . The subsidy τf = 1ε was chosen to eliminate the monopoly distortion on average.
                ε
    As said before (15), we fix a date t and consider future dates τ ≥ t. For firms facing the Calvo
pricing friction, we have, much as in the traditional model, that the price is the weighted average of
future (perceived) optimal prices:113
                                                     X
                                      qit = (1 − βθ)     (βθ)τ −t EBR
                                                                   t  [qi∗ (Xτ )]
                                                                   τ ≥t


Given that Lemma 2.2 gives EBR
                            t    [qi∗ (Xτ )] = m̄τ −t Et [qi∗ (Xτ )], we have:
                                               X
                              qit = (1 − βθ)        (βθm̄)τ −t Et [qi∗ (Xτ )] ,                                                        (106)
                                                                   τ ≥t


which is a behavioral counterpart to Galı́’s (G11).
   Given (14), we have vq0 (qi∗ (Xτ ) − Π (Xτ ) , µ (Xτ ) , c (Xτ )) = 0, i.e., linearizing:

                            qi∗ (Xτ ) = Π (Xτ ) − µ (Xτ ) = Πτ − µτ = πt+1 + · · · + πτ − µτ .                                         (107)

So, we have the following counterpart to the equation right before (G16):
                                       X
                      qit = (1 − βθ)       (βθ)τ −t m̄τ −t Et [πt+1 + · · · + πτ − µτ ] .
                                                      τ ≥t
                                                                                                      τ −t
 113
      The proof is as in the traditional model: the FOC of problem (16) is EBR
                                                                                         P
                                                                                      t      τ ≥t (βθ)     vqi (qit , Xτ ) = 0 and linearizing
            ∗                       BR
                                        P           τ −t          ∗                        ∗
around qi (Xτ ), the FOC is Et            τ ≥t (βθ)      vqi qi (qi (Xτ ) , Xτ ) · (qit − qi (Xτ )) = 0. Taking the Taylor expansion
around 0 disturbances so qi∗ (Xτ ) close to 0, the terms vqi qi (qi∗ (Xτ ) , Xτ ) are approximatelyconstant and equal                     to
                                                                                                               τ −t            ∗,BR
vqi qi (0, 0) up to first order terms, and the FOC is (up to second order terms) EBR
                                                                                                   P
                                                                                               t     τ ≥t (βθ)        q it − q i    (X τ ) = 0,
                                  P          τ −t ∗
which gives qit = (1 − βθ) Et τ ≥t (βθ)          [qi (Xτ )].



                                                                          49
    Proof of Proposition 2.5 Here I present a proof for both the basic case (Proposition 2.5) and
the extended case (Proposition 6.4). In the proof I use the additional parameters mfx , mfπ that are
introduced in the extended model of Section 6.2 for fullness of exposition, although the reader who is
referring to the baseline model of Section 2 can simply set mfx = mfπ = 1 throughout.
    Let us define
                                               ρ := βθm̄,                                        (108)
and calculate
                X                                     X             X               X             ρi     1 X
        Ht :=         ρk (πt+1 + ... + πt+k ) =              πt+i         ρk =            πt+i       =           πt+i ρi 1i>0 .
                k≥1                                    i≥1          k≥i             i≥1
                                                                                                 1−ρ   1 − ρ i≥0

    Firms who can reset their price choose a price p∗t given in (26) in the basic case, and (58) in the
extended case:
                     ∞
                                                                               "         ∞
                                                                                                        #
                    X                                                                    X
p∗t − pt = (1 − βθ)     ρk Et mfπ (πt+1 + ... + πt+k ) − mfx µt+k = (1 − βθ) Et mfπ Ht −    ρk mfx µt+k
                                                                
                         k=0                                                                                           k=0
                                           mfπ
                         X                                                     
         = (1 − βθ)            ρk Et              πt+k 1k>0 − mfx µt+k
                         k≥0
                                           1−ρ
             X
                   ρk Et m0f π πt+k 1k>0 − µ0t+k ,
                                               
         =                                                                                                                        (109)
             k≥0


where m0f π := 1−βθ
                1−ρ
                    mfπ and µ0t := mfx (1 − βθ) µt .
  Inflation. As a fraction 1 − θ of firms reset their price, starting from pt−1 on average:

                         πt = pt − pt−1 = (1 − θ) (p∗t − pt−1 )
                               = (1 − θ) (p∗t − pt + pt − pt−1 ) = (1 − θ) (p∗t − pt + πt ) .
                                 1−θ ∗
                         πt    =       (pt − pt ) .                                                                               (110)
                                   θ
   Plugging this in (109) gives:

                                                 1−θ X k  0
                                                        ρ Et mf π πt+k 1k>0 − µ0t+k .
                                                                                   
                                       πt =                                                                                       (111)
                                                  θ k≥0

   Next, I use the forward operator F (F yt := yt+1 ), which allows me to evaluate infinite sums com-
pactly, as in:
                      ∞           ∞                  ∞
                                                              !
                     X            X                X
                        ρk yt+k =   ρk F k yt =         ρk F k yt = (1 − ρF )−1 yt .
                                             
                                                                                                 (112)
                         k=0                k=0                           k=0

Rewriting (111) using F gives

                                                  1−θ
                                                      Et (1 − ρF )−1 m0f π ρF πt − µ0t .
                                                                                      
                                   πt =
                                                   θ
   Hence, multiplying by 1 − ρF , we obtain the key equation (which is a behavioral version of (G17)):

                                                    πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] − λµt ,                                                  (113)

                                                                    50
with
                                   1−θ 0                 1 − βθ f
                                                                      
                  f        f
                 β := βM = ρ 1 +        mf π = β m̄ θ +         m (1 − θ) ,                           (114)
                                    θ                   1 − βθm̄ π
                                    1 − βθ f
                                                    
                        f
                       M = m̄ θ +           m (1 − θ) ,                                               (115)
                                   1 − βθm̄ π
                                1−θ
                        λ = mfx     (1 − βθ) .
                                 θ

   The rest of the proof is as in Galı́. The labor supply is still (19), Ntφ = ωt c−γ
                                                                                   t , and as the resource
constraint (up to second order terms coming from the price dispersion due to sticky prices) is ct = eζt Nt ,
ωt = e−φζt cγ+φ
            t   , i.e. ω̂t = −φζt + (γ + φ) ĉt , so that with µt := ζt − ω̂t ,

                                       µt = (1 + φ) ζt − (γ + φ) ĉt .

Next, as in the “natural” economy without pricing frictions, µnt = 0:

                                        0 = (1 + φ) ζt − (γ + φ) ĉnt .

Hence, subtracting the two equations, and using xt = ĉt − ĉnt ,

                                             µt = − (γ + φ) xt .                                      (116)

Plugging this into (113), we obtain the behavioral version of (G22):

                                         πt = βM f Et [πt+1 ] + κxt ,

with κ = λ (γ + φ), i.e.

                                      κ = κ̄mfx ,                                                     (117)
                                                 
                                             1
                                      κ̄ =     − 1 (1 − βθ) (γ + φ) .                                 (118)
                                             θ

   Proof of Proposition 3.1 We will use the following well-known fact (Bullard and Mitra (2002)):

Proposition 11.1 (Roots in unit circle) Consider the polynomial p (x) = x2 + ax + b. Its two roots
satisfy |x| < 1 if and only if: |a| − 1 < b < 1.
   We calculate p (x) := det (xI − A) = x2 + ax + b with

                                      M + β f + κσ + β f σφx              M βf
                               a=−                           ,      b=         ,
                                               D                           D
with D = 1 + σ (φx + κφπ ). Proposition 11.1 indicates that the equilibrium is determinate iff: |a| − 1 <
b < 1. Given that we assume nonnegative coefficients φ, b < 1 and a < 0. Hence the criterion is:
1 + b + a > 0, i.e. p (1) > 0. Calculations show that this is (35).




                                                      51
  Proof of Proposition 3.2 Go back to (38), assuming the first best after the ZLB, so zT = 0.
Then,
                           z0 (T ) = (AZLB − I)−1 (ATZLB − I)b.
   When condition (36) fails, one of the eigenvalues of AZLB is greater than 1 in modulus. Then,
limT →∞ kATZLB bk = ∞ (it is easy to verify that b is not exactly the eigenvector corresponding to
the root less than 1 in modulus). Hence, limT →∞ kz0 (T ) k = ∞. Furthermore, this explosion is a
recession: given that the entries of AZLB are positive, and those of b are negative, each of the terms
                         −1
in I + AZLB + ... + ATZLB
                            
                              b is negative, hence z0 (T ) has unboundedly negative inflation and output
gap.
   When condition (36) holds, all roots of AZLB are less than 1 in modulus. Hence, limT →∞ z0 (T ) =
−(AZLB − I)−1 b, a finite value.

   Proof of Proposition 4.2 The Lagrangian is
                              ∞                                                          
                              X
                                         t        1 2     2
                                                                  f
                                                                                        
                    L = E0           β           − πt + ϑxt + Ξt βM πt+1 + κxt − πt + νt ,
                               t=0
                                                  2

where Ξt are Lagrange multipliers. The first order conditions are: Lxt = 0 and Lπt = 0, which give
respectively −ϑxt + κΞt = 0 and −πt − Ξt + M f Ξt−1 = 0, i.e. Ξt = ϑκ xt and πt = −ϑ
                                                                                                  
                                                                                   κ
                                                                                     xt − M f xt−1 .

     Proof of Proposition 4.3 The central bank today takes its future actions as given, and chooses
xt , πt , it to minimize today’s loss − 21 (πt2 + ϑx2t ) subject to the behavioral IS equation and behavioral
NK Phillips curve. This is equivalent to

                              1 2
                                πt + ϑx2t                subject to πt = βM f Eπt+1 + κxt + νt ,
                                          
                    max −
                     πt ,xt   2

and it can be read off the IS equation. Hence, the Lagrangian is simply:

                                     1 2
                                       πt + ϑx2t + Ξ βM f Eπt+1 + κxt + νt − πt .
                                                                              
                              L=−
                                     2
   The first order conditions are: Lxt = 0 and Lπt = 0, i.e. −ϑxt + κΞ = 0 and −πt − Ξ = 0, which
together yields πt = − ϑκ xt . The explicit value of it is in Section 13.

   Proof of Proposition 6.2 First, we state a simple result.

Proposition 11.2 (Consumption given beliefs) Consider an agent maximizing over (cτ , Nτ ) utility
          P∞ τ −t
Ut = EBR
       t    τ =t β  u (cτ , Nτ ) subject to the law of motion for wealth (50). Up to second order terms
(and for small wealth k0 ), consumption is:
                                          "                                                  #
                         r                  X 1
                   ct = kt + ȳ + EBR                   br r̂BR (Xτ ) + by ŷ BR (Nτ , Xτ ) ,
                                                                                           
                                       t           τ −t
                                                                                                  (119)
                         R                  τ ≥t
                                                 R

                                                                                   −1          r̄
where expectations are taken under the agent’s subjective model of the world, br = γR 2 , by = R , and Nτ

labor supply at the perceived optimum. The chosen labor supply is given by Ntφ = ŷN
                                                                                   BR
                                                                                        (Nt , Xt ) c−γ
                                                                                                    t .



                                                               52
    It is stated as a function of an endogenous labor supply, because this is the form that is most useful
in some derivations (Section 12.2 develops the case that explicitly solves for labor supply). Versions of
this proposition were proven a number of times with minor variants (e.g. Eusepi and Preston (2011);
Woodford (2013); Gabaix (2016); Auclert (2018)), but for completeness let us derive it.114
    Proof of Proposition 11.2. For simplicity, we take the deterministic case (as we consider first order
Taylor expansions, the general case is the deterministic case where the path of variables are their
expected values). The agent wants to maximize, over ct and Nt :
                                                                                     !
                           X                           X
                                 t                                 BR
                                                                                   
                       L=      β u (ct , Nt ) + λ k0 +   qt ȳ + ŷ (Nt , Xt ) − ct ,               (120)
                               t≥0                            t≥0


where qt := 1/ t−1
                    Q                  BR
                                                
                      τ =0 1 + r̄ + r̂    (Xτ ) . Here we consider the decision at time 0, which is just a
normalization. Consider first the problem of optimizing L over ct (taking the value of yt := ȳ +
                                                                         t ψ
ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) as given), the FOC is β t c−γ t  = λq t , so c t = c 0
                                                                         β
                                                                         qt
                                                                               (with ψ := γ1 ), for some c0 = λ−ψ .
                   P                                                                                   P
With Ω := k0 + t≥0 qt yt the total perceived wealth, the perceived budget constraint is Ω = t≥0 qt ct =
c0 t≥0 β tψ qt1−ψ . This gives consumption at decision time:
    P

                                                              P
                                                       k0 +     t≥0 qt yt
                                                  c0 = P                  .                                       (121)
                                                                tψ 1−ψ
                                                           t≥0 β qt

    From there, let us see the impact of a small change in income. We have, at the default value of interest
rates, qt = β t , so t≥0 β tψ qt1−ψ = 1−β
                                       1
                                          , so c0 = (1 − β) k0 + t≥0 β t yt . This yields by = 1 − β = Rr in
                    P                                              P       

(119). The impact of the interest rate on current consumptions is similar, though a little tedious (it is
done in Section 13).
    Next, for labor supply at time 0, the behavioral agent optimizes (120) given his perceived model of
the world. This gives LN0 = 0, i.e. −N0φ + λŷN      BR
                                                        (N0 , X0 ) = 0. As we saw that c−γ
                                                                                         0   = λ, we obtain
  φ     −γ BR
N0 = c0 ŷN (N0 , X0 ). 

   Application to this paper’s behavioral agent When my = 1, and no initial wealth. This is the
simplest case. The behavioral agent perceives his dynamic budget constraint is (50) and (51). Hence,
we apply Proposition 11.2 to (51). At the optimum policy, we have Nt = N (Xt ) under the perceived
motion for Xt , so the planned labor supply also verifies Nτ = N (Xτ ), so ŷ BR (Nt , Xt ) = ŷ (Xt ). Now,
using cognitive discounting (10), we have (52). This gives the consumption:
                  "                                       #   "                                    #
                   X 1                        r               X m̄τ −t               r        
        ĉt = EBR
               t           τ −t
                                br r̂BR (Xt ) + ŷ (Xt ) = Et              br r̂ (Xt ) + ŷ (Xt ) .
                    τ ≥t
                         R                     R                τ ≥t
                                                                     Rτ −t              R

    With a general my or non-zero initial wealth. Here things are more complex, because the aggregate
wealth is 0, and the agent plans to have non-zero wealth next period (as he misperceives income),
so the agent doesn’t plan that her future labor supply will be equal to the aggregate labor supply,
Nτ = N (Xτ ). Section 12.2 gives the proof.
    Another method: Dynamic programming with Taylor expansion. The following method is a bit less
intuitive, but may be handy to automatize when considering medium-scale extensions of this model.
 114
       See also the proof of Lemma 4.2 in Gabaix (2016) for another style of derivation, using dynamic programming.


                                                            53
The subjective value function of the agent satisfies:

V (k, X) = max{u (c, N )
                 c,N

                 +βEV (1 + r + mr r̂ (X)) (k + ȳ + my ŷ (X) + w (X) (N − N (X)) − c) , m̄GX (X, ) }
                                                                                                    


and optimal consumption satisfies uc (c (k, X) , N ) = Vk (k, X) (independently of N because utility is
separable), so that cX = VukX
                            cc
                               = − VkX
                                     γ
                                       . In turn, ĉt = cX Xt . Hence, to derive consumption, we simply
need to calculate VkX . This is done in Section 12.15.

    Proof of Proposition 6.3 Proposition 6.2 gives:
                                     "                                   #
                                       X m̄τ −t  r                    
                            ĉt = Et          τ −t
                                                     mY ŷτ + br mr r̂τ .                                                                             (122)
                                       τ ≥t
                                            R      R

   Now, since there is no capital in the NK model, we have ŷτ = ĉτ : income is equal to aggregate
demand. Hence, using b̃y := Rr mY and b̃r := br mr = − γR
                                                       mr
                                                          2 , (122) becomes:


                                                        "                                        #
                                                            X m̄τ −t                           
                                           ĉt = Et                         b̃y ĉτ + b̃r r̂τ        .                                                (123)
                                                            τ ≥t
                                                                   Rτ −t

    Taking out the first term yields:
                                                                   "                                 #
                                                                     X m̄τ −t                     
                                 ĉt = b̃y ĉt + b̃r r̂t + Et                τ −t
                                                                                  b̃y ĉτ + b̃r r̂τ .
                                                                    τ ≥t+1
                                                                           R
                                                                                hP                                                 i
                                                                                             m̄τ −t−1
    Given that (123), applied to t + 1, yields ĉt+1 = Et+1                           τ ≥t+1 Rτ −t−1            b̃y ĉτ + b̃r r̂τ        , we have:

                                                      m̄              r                  m̄
                          ĉt = b̃y ĉt + b̃r r̂t +      Et [ĉt+1 ] = mY ĉt + b̃r r̂t + Et [ĉt+1 ] .
                                                      R               R                  R
                                                                                                m̄Et [ĉt+1 ]+Rb̃r r̂t
    Multiplying by R and gathering the ĉt terms, we have ĉt =                                      R−rmY
                                                                                                                       .   This suggests defining
         m̄                 −Rb̃r            mr
M :=   R−rmY
               and σ :=    R−rmY
                                     =   γR(R−rmY )
                                                    ,       and we get (18). This then translates into (24).115

     Proof of Proposition 6.5 Call qit := pit − pt the real log price of firm i at a date t. Consider
a firm that has not done a Calvo reset between t and τ > t, and instead has simply passively indexed
on default inflation. Then (using ∆zτ = zτ − zτ −1 ), ∆pi,τ = πτd , and ∆pτ = πτ = πτd + π̂τ . Hence,
∆qi,τ = −π̂τ , i.e. qiτ = qit − Π̂iτ where Π̂τ := π̂t+1 + · · · + π̂τ is the cumulative inflation between t and
τ , but only in “hat space”, i.e. considering the deviation of inflation from default inflation. Intuitively,
the firm knows that it will indexed on default inflation, so it’s important for it to forecast the deviation
from default inflation, π̂τ , not inflation itself.
 115
     Here, bounded rationality lowers σ, the effective sensitivity to the interest rate, in addition to lowering M . With
heterogeneous agents (along the lines of Auclert (2018)), one can imagine that bounded rationality might increase σ: some
high-MPC (marginal propensity to consume) agents will have to pay adjustable-rate mortgages, which will increase the
stimulative effects of a fall in the rate (increase σ).



                                                                       54
    Then, we are in a world isomorphic to that of Section 2.4, except that we put   hats on
                                                                                            π and Π – this
is, replace π and Π by π̂ and Π̂. For instance, the state space is now Xτ = Xτ , Π̂τ , where XτM is
                                                                                      M

the basic macro state vector. The firm’s profit is (14) with hats on Π, and so the natural generalization
of (56) is that the behavioral firm perceives the flow profit
                                                                                  
                         BR                         f           f
                        v (qit , Xτ ) := v qit − mπ Π̂ (Xτ ) , mx µ (Xτ ) , c (Xτ ) ,                (124)

and its objective is still (16), with that notation. This leads to the economy in Proposition 6.5.116


References
Afrouzi, Hassan, “Strategic Inattention, Inflation Dynamics and the Non-Neutrality of Money,” Work-
  ing Paper, 2017.
Angeletos, George-Marios and Chen Lian, “Incomplete Information in Macroeconomics: Accom-
  modating Frictions in Coordination,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2016, 2, 1065–1240.
   and , “Dampening General Equilibrium: From Micro to Macro,” NBER Working Paper No.
  22785, 2017.
   and , “Forward guidance without common knowledge,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108
  (9), 2477–2512.
   and Jennifer La’O, “Dispersed information over the business cycle: optimal fiscal and monetary
  policy,” Working Paper, 2008.
   and , “Incomplete Information, Higher-Order Beliefs and Price Inertia,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2009, 56, S19–S37.
   and , “Noisy Business Cycles,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2010, 24 (1), 319–378.
   and , “Optimal monetary policy with informational frictions,” Forthcoming at the Journal of
  Political Economy, 2018.
   and Zhen Huo, “Myopia and Anchoring,” Working Paper, 2019.
  , Fabrice Collard, and Harris Dellas, “Quantifying confidence,” Econometrica, 2018, 86 (5),
  1689–1726.
Ascari, Guido and Tiziano Ropele, “Sacrifice Ratio in a Medium-Scale New Keynesian Model,”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2012, 44 (2-3), 457–467.
Auclert, Adrien, “Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel,” Forthcoming at the American
  Economic Review, 2018.
Barro, Robert J, “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (6),
  1095–1117.
Benchimol, Jonathan and Lachen Bounader, “Optimal Monetary Policy Under Bounded Ratio-
  nality,” Working Paper, 2018.
Bilbiie, Florin O, “Limited Asset Markets Participation, Monetary Policy and (Inverted) Aggregate
  Demand Logic,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2008, 140 (1), 162–196.
Bilbiie, Florin Ovidiu, “Monetary Policy and Heterogeneity: An Analytical Framework,” Working
  Paper, 2018.
 116
    The derivation is very simple. Lemma 2.4 holds, putting hats on π, and as a result, the Phillips curve holds (28) also
putting hats on π, i.e. (61) holds.



                                                           55
Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M Kahn, “The Solution of Linear Difference Models Under
  Rational Expectations,” Econometrica, 1980, 48 (5), 1305–1311.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, “Salience and Consumer Choice,” Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (5), 803–843.
  , , Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, “Over-reaction in macroeconomic expectations,” NBER
  Working Paper No. 24932, 2018.
Bounader, Lahcen, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Behavioral New Keynesian Model,” Working Paper,
  2016.
Brown, Jennifer, Tanjim Hossain, and John Morgan, “Shrouded Attributes and Information
  Suppression: Evidence from the Field,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (2), 859–876.
Bullard, James and Kaushik Mitra, “Learning about monetary policy rules,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2002, 49 (6), 1105–1129.
Caballero, Ricardo J and Emmanuel Farhi, “The Safety Trap,” Review of Economic Studies, 2017,
  85 (1), 223–274.
Campbell, Jeffrey R, Jonas DM Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi, “For-
  ward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis,” NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, 2017, 31 (1), 283–357.
Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw, “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Rein-
  terpreting the Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, 4, 185–216.
Caplin, Andrew, Mark Dean, and Daniel Martin, “Search and Satisficing,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 2899–2922.
  , , and John Leahy, “Rationally inattentive behavior: Characterizing and generalizing Shannon
  entropy,” NBER Working Paper No. 23652, 2017.
Carvalho, Carlos and Fernanda Nechio, “Do People Understand Monetary Policy?,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 2014, 66, 108–123.
Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, “Inflation expectations, learn-
  ing, and supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2017, 9 (3), 1–35.
Châu, Vũ T, “Behavioral-attention Phillips curve: Theory and evidence from inflation surveys,”
  Working Paper, 2019.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence,”
  The American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–1177.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal rigidities and
  the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 1–45.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
  Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1999, 37 (4), 1661–1707.
  , , and , “Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability: evidence and some theory,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (1), 147–180.
Cochrane, John H, “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules,” Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 2011, 119 (3), 565–615.
  , “Michelson-Morley, Occam and Fisher: The Radical Implications of Stable Inflation at Near-Zero
  Interest Rates,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2017, 32 (1), 113–126.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “What can survey forecasts tell us about information
  rigidities?,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (1), 116–159.


                                                  56
   and , “Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A Simple Framework and
  New Facts,” The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2644–2678.
Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy:
  Equivalence results,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (1), 141–170.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, “What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates?,” NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, 2011, 25 (1), 59–112.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
  Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 34 (1), 139–235.
Eggertsson, Gauti B and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-
  Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–1513.
  , Neil R Mehrotra, and Jacob A Robbins, “A model of secular stagnation: Theory and quanti-
  tative evaluation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2019, 11 (1), 1–48.
Erceg, Christopher J and Andrew T Levin, “Imperfect credibility and inflation persistence,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003, 50 (4), 915–944.
Eusepi, Stefano and Bruce Preston, “Expectations, learning, and business cycle fluctuations,” The
  American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2844–2872.
   and , “The Science of Monetary Policy: An Imperfect Knowledge Perspective,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 2018, 56 (1), 3–59.
Evans, George W and Seppo Honkapohja, Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics, Prince-
  ton University Press, 2001.
Eyster, Erik, Kristof Madarasz, and Pascal Michaillat, “Pricing when Customers Care about
  Fairness but Misinfer Markups,” NBER Working Paper No. 23778, 2017.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete
  Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 23281, 2017.
    and Xavier Gabaix, “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents,” NBER Working Paper No.
  21524, 2017.
Fisher, Jonas DM, “On the Structural Interpretation of the Smets-Wouters ‘Risk Premium’ Shock,”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2015, 47 (2-3), 511–516.
Fuhrer, Jeff, “Expectations as a source of macroeconomic persistence: Evidence from survey expecta-
  tions in a dynamic macro model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2017, 86, 22–35.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C and Glenn D Rudebusch, “Estimating the Euler equation for output,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 2004, 51 (6), 1133–1153.
Fuster, Andreas, Benjamin Hebert, and David Laibson, “Natural Expectations, Macroeconomic
  Dynamics, and Asset Pricing,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2012, 26 (1), 1–48.
Gabaix, Xavier, “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2014, 129 (4), 1661–1710.
  , “Behavioral Macroeconomics via Sparse Dynamic Programming,” NBER Working Paper No. 21848,
  2016.
  , “Behavioral Inattention,” Handbook of Behavioral Economics, 2019, pp. 261–344.
    and David Laibson, “The 6D Bias and the Equity-Premium Puzzle,” NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual, 2002, 16, 257–312.
    and , “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information Suppression in Competitive
  Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 505–540.
   and , “Myopia and Discounting,” NBER Working Paper No. 23254, 2017.


                                                57
Galı́, Jordi, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
  Framework and its Applications, Princeton University Press, 2015.
  , “Monetary Policy and Bubbles in a New Keynesian Model with Overlapping Generations,” Working
  Paper, Mar 2017.
   and Mark Gertler, “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 1999, 44 (2), 195–222.
  , J David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the Effects of Government Spending
  on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (1), 227–270.
Ganong, Peter and Pascal J Noel, “Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and nor-
  mative implications,” Forthcoming at the American Economic Review, 2019.
Garcı́a-Schmidt, Mariana and Michael Woodford, “Are low interest rates deflationary? A para-
  dox of perfect-foresight analysis,” American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (1), 86–120.
Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer, “Expectations of returns and expected returns,” The
  Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (3), 714–746.
   and Samuel G. Hanson, “Waves in ship prices and investment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2015, 130 (1), 55–109.
Hébert, Benjamin and Michael Woodford, “Information costs and sequential information sam-
  pling,” NBER Working Paper No. 25316, 2018.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure
  and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” The American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5),
  1589–1610.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L Violante, “Monetary policy according to HANK,”
  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (3), 697–743.
Kiley, Michael T, “Endogenous price stickiness and business cycle persistence,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 2000, pp. 28–53.
  , “Policy Paradoxes in the New Keynesian Model,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2016, 21, 1–15.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, “Fragility of Purely Real Macroeconomic Models,” NBER Working Paper
  No. 21866, 2016.
Lindé, Jesper, “Estimating New-Keynesian Phillips curves: A full information maximum likelihood
  approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52 (6), 1135–1149.
Maćkowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, “Business Cycle Dynamics Under Rational Inatten-
  tion,” Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1502–1532.
Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, “Learning from inflation experiences,” The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 2015, 131 (1), 53–87.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy,” The American Economic
  Review Papers and Proceedings, 2000, 90 (2), 120–125.
   and Matthew Weinzierl, “An Exploration of Optimal Stabilization Policy,” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 2011, 42 (1 (Spring)), 209–272.
    and Ricardo Reis, “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New
  Keynesian Phillips curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1295–1328.
Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H Stock, “Empirical evidence on
  inflation expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2014,
  52 (1), 124–188.
McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson, “The Power of Forward Guidance Revis-


                                                 58
  ited,” The American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3133–3158.
  , , and , “The discounted Euler equation: A note,” Economica, 2017, 84 (336), 820–831.
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling Currency
  Attacks,” The American Economic Review, 1998, pp. 587–597.
  , Franklin Allen, and Hyun Song Shin, “Beauty Contests, Bubbles and Iterated Expectations
  in Asset Markets,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (4), 719–752.
Nagel, Rosemarie, “Unraveling in Guessing Games: An Experimental Study,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1995, 85 (5), 1313–1326.
Nakata, Taisuke, Ryota Ogaki, Sebastian Schmidt, and Paul Yoo, “Attenuating the forward
  guidance puzzle: implications for optimal monetary policy,” Forthcoming at the Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 2019.
Negro, Marco Del, Marc P Giannoni, and Christina Patterson, “The Forward Guidance Puz-
  zle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 574, 2015.
Nimark, Kristoffer, “Dynamic Pricing and Imperfect Common Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 2008, 55 (2), 365–382.
Paciello, Luigi and Mirko Wiederholt, “Exogenous information, endogenous information, and
  optimal monetary policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 81 (1), 356–388.
Sims, Christopher A., “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003,
  50 (3), 665–690.
Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, “Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
  approach,” The American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (3), 586–606.
Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones, “Attention variation and welfare: theory and evidence
  from a tax salience experiment,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2017, 85 (4), 2462–2496.
Taylor, John B, “The Robustness and Efficiency of Monetary Policy Rules as Guidelines for Interest
  Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1999, 43 (3), 655–679.
Werning, Iván, “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper
  17344, 2012.
  , “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” NBER Working Paper No. 21448, August 2015.
Woodford, Michael, “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy,” in Philippe
  Aghion, Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, eds., Knowledge, information, and
  expectations in modern macroeconomics: In honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press,
  2003.
  , Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton University Press, 2003.
  , “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (1), 1–35.
  , “Macroeconomic Analysis without the Rational Expectations Hypothesis,” Annual Reviews of Eco-
  nomics, 2013, 5, 303–346.
  , “Monetary policy analysis when planning horizons are finite,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2018.




                                                 59
