NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOME SIMPLE ECONOMICS OF THE BLOCKCHAIN
Christian Catalini
Joshua S. Gans
Working Paper 22952
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22952

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised June 2019

We are thankful to Al Roth, Muneeb Ali, Naval Ravikant, Nicola Greco, Tim Simcoe, Scott
Stern, Catherine Tucker, and Jane Wu for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Some Simple Economics of the Blockchain
Christian Catalini and Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 22952
December 2016, Revised June 2019
JEL No. D4,D47,O16,O3,O31,O32,O33,O34
ABSTRACT
We build on economic theory to discuss how blockchain technology can shape innovation and
competition in digital platforms. We identify two key costs affected by the technology: the cost of
verification and the cost of networking. The cost of verification relates to the ability to cheaply
verify state, including information about past transactions and their attributes, and current
ownership in a native digital asset. The cost of networking, instead, relates to the ability to
bootstrap and operate a marketplace without assigning control to a centralized intermediary. This
is achieved by combining the ability to cheaply verify state with economic incentives targeted at
rewarding state transitions that are particularly valuable from a network perspective, such as the
contribution of the resources needed to operate, scale, and secure a decentralized network. The
resulting digital marketplaces allow participants to make joint investments in shared
infrastructure and digital public utilities without assigning market power to a platform operator,
and are characterized by increased competition, lower barriers to entry, and a lower privacy risk.
Because of their decentralized nature, they also introduce new types of inefficiencies and
governance challenges.

Christian Catalini
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-480
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
catalini@mit.edu
Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com

1

Introduction

In October 2008, a few weeks after the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act rescued
the U.S. financial system from collapse, Satoshi Nakamoto (Nakamoto 2008) introduced a
cryptography mailing list to Bitcoin, a peer-to-peer electronic cash system “based on cryptographic proof instead of trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each
other without the need for a trusted third party.” With Bitcoin, for the first time, value
could be reliably transferred between two distant, untrusting parties without the need of an
intermediary. Through a clever combination of cryptography and game theory, the Bitcoin
‘blockchain’ – a distributed, public transaction ledger – could be used by any participant
in the network to cheaply verify and settle transactions in the cryptocurrency. Thanks to
rules designed to incentivize the propagation of new legitimate transactions, to reconcile
conflicting information, and to ultimately agree at regular intervals about the true state of a
shared ledger (a ‘blockchain’)1 in an environment where not all participating agents can be
trusted, Bitcoin was also the first platform, at scale, to rely on decentralized, internet-level
‘consensus’ for its operations: Without involving a central clearinghouse or market maker,
the platform was able to settle the transfer of property rights in the underlying digital token
(bitcoin) by simply combining a shared ledger with an incentive system designed to securely
maintain it.
From an economics perspective, this new market design solution provides some of the
advantages of a centralized digital platform (e.g. the ability of participants to rely on a shared
network and benefit from network effects) without some of the consequences the presence
of an intermediary may introduce such as increased market power, ability to renege on
commitments to ecosystem participants, control over participants’ data, presence of a single
point of failure, etc. As a result, relative to existing financial networks, a cryptocurrency
1

See Appendix for more details.

1

such as Bitcoin may be able to offer lower barriers to entry for new service providers and
application developers, and an alternative monetary policy for individuals that do not live in
countries with trustworthy institutions: Key commitments encoded in the Bitcoin protocol
are its fixed supply, predetermined release schedule, and the fact that rules can only be
changed with support from a majority of participants. While the resulting ecosystem may
not offer an improvement for individuals living in countries with reliable and independent
central banks, it may represent an option in countries that are unable to maintain their
monetary policy commitments. Of course, the open and “permissionless” nature of the
Bitcoin network, and the inability to adjust its supply also introduce new challenges, as the
network can be used for illegal activity, and the value of the cryptocurrency can fluctuate
wildly with changes in expectations about its future success, limiting its use as an effective
medium of exchange.
In the paper, we rely on economic theory to explain how two key costs affected by
blockchain technology – the cost of verification of state, and the cost of networking – change
the types of transactions that can be supported in the economy. These costs have implications
for the design and efficiency of digital platforms, and open opportunities for new approaches
to data ownership, privacy, and licensing; monetization of digital content; auctions and
reputation systems.
While the reduction in the cost of verification has economic consequences mostly on the
intensive margin of production (improving existing applications), on the extensive margin
(new applications), the reduction in the cost of networking is more consequential: Bitcoin
was the first digital platform to be bootstrapped in a decentralized fashion without resorting
to investments by an intermediary or planner. As early adopters and investors experimented
with the cryptocurrency in the hope that the network would increase in users, security2
2

In a proof-of-work blockchain such as the one used by Bitcoin, the security of the public ledger depends
on the amount of computing power that is dedicated to verifying and extending the log of transactions over
time (i.e. that is dedicated to “mining”).

2

and value, the underlying token appreciated, generating the positive feedback loop needed
to attract subsequent batches of users. This organic diffusion process uses high-powered
incentives similar to the venture capital model to reward early adopters for taking risks and
dedicating their time, effort, and capital to a new platform. The same incentive system
is now used by startups to raise capital and lower switching costs for the user base and
developer community of entrenched digital incumbents. This allows them to compete in a
context where network effects are strongly in favor of established players.
Whereas the reduction in the cost of verification is what allows Bitcoin to settle transactions without an intermediary, the reduction in the cost of networking is what allowed
its ecosystem to scale in the first place: Within eight years, the digital, scarce token native
to Bitcoin went from having no value to a total market capitalization of $180B,3 and is
considered by investors to be part of a new asset class and a novel type of store of value.
Beyond the idiosyncratic market design choices behind Bitcoin, the ability to track transaction attributes, settle trades and enforce contracts across a wide variety of digital assets
is what makes blockchain technology a general purpose technology. Entries on a distributed
ledger can represent ownership in currency, digital content, intellectual property, equity, information, contracts, financial and physical assets. As a result, the scaling model pioneered
by Bitcoin has been adopted by open source projects and startups interested in creating
platforms for the exchange of other types of scarce, digital goods. For example, Ethereum
used its own token, Ether, to bootstrap a decentralized marketplace for computing power
and applications, Filecoin for data storage, BAT for digital advertising, Blockstack for digital
identity, etc.
The new types of networks that can be created using the technology challenge the business
3

The market capitalization is calculated as the number of tokens in circulation (approximately 16.8M
bitcoin) times the value of each token (the Bitcoin to USD exchange rate was $10,633 in January 2018).
The second largest cryptocurrency, Ethereum, had a $94B market cap (source: https://coinmarketcap.com/
- accessed 01-22-2018).

3

models of incumbent digital platforms and financial institutions, and open opportunities
for novel approaches to the exchange of digital assets, data ownership and monetization,
information licensing, and privacy. Whereas the utopian view has argued that blockchain
has the potential to transform every digital service by removing the need for intermediaries,
we argue that it is more likely to change the nature of intermediation by reducing the market
power of intermediaries, and by progressively redefining how they add value to transactions.4
This transformation will unfold slowly because even in sectors that are well-suited for a more
decentralized exchange of digital assets such as finance, there are currently substantial legal
and regulatory frictions to adoption. While blockchain allows for the costless verification
of state when all relevant information is born digital, most markets also rely on external
information – including information about identity – to ensure safe and compliant exchanges.
As a result, ‘last mile’ frictions limit the conditions under which blockchain-based networks
can replace existing infrastructure, as complementary innovations are needed to ensure that
the shared data managed through a consensus protocol is kept in sync with critical offline
information and events.
The paper proceeds as follows: We first review the literature in Section 1.1. In Section
2, we discuss the effects of the reduction in the cost of verification. Section 3 focuses on the
reduction in the cost of bootstrapping and operating a network. Section 4 concludes.

1.1

Literature

The paper contributes to the nascent literature on blockchain by providing an economic
framework for understanding how the technology changes the types of transactions and
networks that can be sustained in the economy. By focusing on the two key economic
4

For example, while financial intermediaries are currently able to charge relatively high fees for crossborder payments and remittances, this revenue stream will disappear if blockchain-based payment networks
diffuse and commodify the transfer of value. At the same time, this does not mean that intermediaries will
not be able to provide and charge fees for added value services on top of a basic payments layer (e.g. fraud
protection for merchants, dispute resolution, etc.).

4

costs the technology influences, the paper abstracts away from some of the idiosyncratic
choices different protocols make (e.g. in terms of privacy, consensus algorithms, presence
of mining versus not, etc.), and surfaces high-level dimensions that have implications for
market structure and competition with existing digital platforms. This level of analysis
allows us to highlight commonalities between protocols that may be different at a more finegrained technical level, but ultimately share a similar trust and competition model, and will
thus have a similar impact on how rents are allocated between users, developers and nodes
providing resources to a network. The Appendix provides additional technical details on how
some of the most popular cryptocurrencies work, and a taxonomy of transactions that the
technology can support (e.g. auctions, smart contracts, digital identity and property rights,
audit trails etc).
Previous research in this emerging area has focused on providing an overview of Bitcoin and its operations (Böhme, Christin, Edelman, and Moore 2015, Narayanan, Bonneau,
Felten, Miller, and Goldfeder 2016); has combined theory and data to explain the velocity
of Bitcoin and its use across countries as an investment vehicle, for gambling and illegal
online markets (Athey, Parashkevov, Sarukkai, and Xia 2016); and has studied the role
early adopters play in the diffusion and use of Bitcoin within a large-scale, field experiment
(Catalini and Tucker 2017).
Researchers have also examined competition between alternative cryptocurrencies and
their differences (Gandal and Halaburda 2014, Gans and Halaburda 2015, Dwyer 2015, Halaburda and Sarvary 2016); the changes they entail for trading behavior (Malinova and
Park 2016); their integration with fiat-based currencies and direct use for providing citizens
with central bank money (Raskin and Yermack 2016, Seretakis 2017, Bordo and Levin 2017)
and alternative payment systems (Beck, Czepluch, Lollike, and Malone 2016, Rysman and
Schuh 2017); implications for regulation and governance (Wright and De Filippi 2015, Davidson, De Filippi, and Potts 2016, Kiviat 2015, Walport 2016); and the privacy trade-offs cryp5

tocurrencies and digital wallets introduce for consumers (Athey, Catalini, and Tucker 2017).
From a business perspective, scholars have compared the transformation brought about
by blockchain to the introduction of communication protocols such as TCP/IP (Iansiti and
Lakhani 2017, Ito, Narula, and Ali 2017), and have explored applications to digital platforms
beyond finance and implications for the boundaries of the firm (Catalini 2017a, Catalini
2017b).

2

Cost of Verification

Markets facilitate the voluntary exchange of goods and services between buyers and sellers.
For an exchange to be executed, key attributes of a transaction need to be verified by the
parties involved. When an exchange takes place in person the buyer can usually directly
assess the quality of the goods, and the seller can verify the authenticity of the cash. The
only intermediary involved in this scenario is the central bank issuing and backing the fiatcurrency used in the exchange. When a transaction is performed online instead, one or more
financial intermediaries broker it by verifying, for example, that the buyer has sufficient
funds. Intermediaries add value to marketplaces by reducing information asymmetry and
the risk of moral hazard through third-party verification. This often involves imposing
additional disclosures, monitoring participants, maintaining trustworthy reputation systems,
and enforcing contractual clauses. As markets scale in size and geographic reach, verification
services become more valuable, as most parties do not have preexisting relationships, but
rely on intermediaries to ensure the safety of transactions and enforce contracts. In the
extreme case where verification costs are prohibitively high, markets unravel, and beneficial
trades do not take place.
In exchange for their services, intermediaries typically charge a fee. This is one of the
costs buyers and sellers incur when they cannot efficiently verify all the relevant transaction

6

attributes by themselves. Additional costs may stem from the intermediary having access
to transaction data (a privacy risk), and being able to select which transactions to execute
(a censorship risk).
These costs are exacerbated when intermediaries gain market power, often as a result
of the informational advantage they develop over transacting parties through their intermediation services (Stiglitz 2002). Transacting through an intermediary always involves some
degree of disclosure to a third-party, and increases the chance that the information will be
later reused outside of the original contractual arrangement. Moreover, as an increasingly
large share of economic and social activity is digitized, keeping data secure has become more
problematic and information leakage more prevalent. Classic examples are the theft of social
security numbers (e.g. Equifax hack) and credit card data (e.g. Target data breach), or the
licensing of customer data to advertisers. Blockchain technology can prevent information
leakage by allowing market participants to verify transaction attributes and enforce contracts without exposing the underlying information to a third-party.5 This allows an agent
to verify that some piece of information is true (e.g. good credit standing), without full
access to all background information (e.g. past transaction records): i.e., the technology
allows for the verification of transaction attributes in a privacy-preserving way.
Digitization has pushed verification costs for many types of transactions close to zero.
When the relevant information is digital, blockchain technology contributes to this process
by allowing for costless verification.6 Of course, at the interface between an offline record
and its digital representation blockchain applications still face substantial frictions and “last
mile” costs (Tucker and Catalini 2018). This explains why, despite claims by technology
enthusiasts about the value of using the technology across a variety of applications including
5

This is achieved by combining a distributed ledger with zero-knowledge cryptography. Examples include
cryptocurrencies such as Zcash and Zcoin.
6
In practice, verification costs will never be exactly zero. What we mean by ‘costless’ is low enough to
be irrelevant from an economic perspective relative to the value of the transaction.

7

supply chain monitoring and digital identity, use cases outside of cryptocurrency and fintech
(settings where key information and assets are digital) have been extremely limited. The link
between online “on-chain” activities recorded on a blockchain and offline “off-chain” events
introduces major challenges which cannot be overcome without complementary innovations.
For example, a blockchain such as the Bitcoin one can be used to cheaply verify ownership
and exchanges of its native digital asset. While this technically allows anyone to send and
receive bitcoin globally without using an intermediary or being censored, actually being able
to spend bitcoin to buy goods and services offline still runs into last mile issues. Hence,
while Bitcoin has been used in countries with hyperinflation to escape devaluation, its use
as a medium of exchange has been limited, and governments can still shape how these
digital assets are used at the interface between the digital and the physical world. Similarly,
information about identity is often used to increase the safety of market interactions, reduce
fraud and build robust digital reputation systems, but being able to link an online action and
digital record on a blockchain to an offline individual or entity is as expensive with blockchain
technology as it would be with more traditional solutions. This drastically limits the benefits
blockchain and smart contracts can bring in the absence of complementary technology (e.g.
a tamper-proof GPS sensor), firms and institutions that can help ensure that the digital
records are accurate to begin with.
The high-level process of verification is described in Figure 1: When a digital transaction
is born, it immediately inherits some basic attributes, such as the fact that it exists and
when it was created, information about the seller and buyer involved and their credentials,
etc. We typically rely on these attributes to perform subsequent actions (e.g., once funds are
transferred, the seller may ship the goods). Some of these actions take place every time (e.g.
settlement), whereas others are only triggered by specific events. A particularly interesting
subset of future events are those that require additional verification. For example, a problem
may emerge, and transaction attributes may need to be checked through an audit. The
8

audit could range from actual auditors accessing the relevant logs or requesting additional
information from market participants, to the execution of an internal process designed to
handle the exception. Such processes tend to be costly, may involve labor and capital, and
may require a third-party to mediate between buyer and seller. The ideal outcome of an
audit is the resolution of the problem that emerged.

Figure 1: Costly Verification Through an Intermediary (Audit) versus Costless Digital Verification on a Blockchain
Blockchain technology affects this flow by allowing, when a problem emerges, for the
costless verification of digital information. Any transaction attribute or information on the
agents and goods involved that is stored on a distributed ledger can be cheaply verified, in
real time, by any market participant. Trust in the intermediary is replaced with trust in the
underlying code and consensus rules.7 These rules define how a distributed network reaches
agreement, at regular intervals, about the true state of the shared data it needs to maintain
to operate a well-functioning marketplace. At a minimum, such shared data can represent
7

If we think of the audit capability of the third-party that intervenes when a problem emerges in a
traditional market as surveillance or monitoring, blockchain technology can deliver “sousveillance” (Mann,
Nolan, and Wellman 2002), i.e. an audit that is embedded within the rules of the marketplace.

9

past transactions and outstanding balances in an underling, cryptographic token (i.e. it
could be a snapshot of the ownership rights in the token). In more complex applications,
the shared data can also cover the rules and data required to perform a specific operation
(i.e. to run an application, verify that a contract clause is enforced). These operations,
often referred to as ‘smart contracts’,8 can be automated in response to new events, adding
flexibility to the verification process. For example, on a shared ledger used to exchange
financial assets, transacting institutions can agree, ex-ante, on the rules for the settlement
and reconciliation of trades, as well as on the process they will follow and third-parties they
will involve if an audit is necessary or a dispute emerges. Trusted, independent oracles can
also be incorporated to ensure that such financial contracts can respond to market conditions
and new information (e.g. to implement a weather derivative, a smart contract can aggregate
information across multiple weather sources to assess if a payout has to be made).
As with past improvements in information and communication technology, reductions in
the cost of verification enable the unbundling of services that were previously offered together,
as part of the steps traditionally performed by an intermediary can now be delivered through
a shared ledger. This allows these steps to be collectively owned and managed by a broader
group of ecosystem stakeholders, in a way that resembles collaboration among competitors
and complementors in standard setting organizations (Bekkers, Catalini, Martinelli, Righi,
and Simcoe 2019) or open source foundations. The effects of this change have been mostly
8

In 1996, Nick Szabo defined smart contracts as: “The basic idea of smart contracts is that many kinds of
contractual clauses (such as liens, bonding, delineation of property rights, etc.) can be embedded in the hardware and software we deal with, in such a way as to make breach of contract expensive (if desired, sometimes
prohibitively so) for the breacher. A canonical real-life example, which we might consider to be the primitive
ancestor of smart contracts, is the humble vending machine. Within a limited amount of potential loss (the
amount in the till should be less than the cost of breaching the mechanism), the machine takes in coins, and via
a simple mechanism, which makes a beginner’s level problem in design with finite automata, dispense change
and product fairly. Smart contracts go beyond the vending machine in proposing to embed contracts in all sorts
of property that is valuable and controlled by digital means. Smart contracts reference that property in a dynamic, proactively enforced form, and provide much better observation and verification where proactive measures must fall short.”Source: http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/
Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/smart_contracts_2.html

10

felt on the intensive margin of production (i.e. on improving the efficiency of pre-existing use
cases), as firms are experimenting with moving different types of transactions to blockchainbased systems to reduce settlement and reconciliation costs.9
As a consequence, applications resulting from the reduction in the cost of verification
have been complementary to incumbents, as they improve existing value-chains by lowering
the cost of tracking ownership and trading digital assets without reducing the market power
of existing players. Furthermore, even when verification can be automated, intermediaries
can still add value and retain influence over a market by supporting regulatory compliance,
market safety, handling edge cases (e.g. a chargeback), and certifying information that
requires labor-intensive, offline forms of verification. This explains why implementations
of the technology targeted at identity and provenance have been slower to diffuse: While
the verification of digital attributes can be cheaply implemented on a blockchain, the initial
mapping between offline events and their digital representations is still costly to bootstrap
and maintain. Therefore, as digital verification costs fall, key complements to it that can
improve the process of offline verification become more valuable.
On one extreme, blockchain technology can be used to settle trades of digital assets that
are completely self-contained within a shared ledger (e.g. bitcoin, ether). The consensus
rules established in the code define how tokens are created and earned, and how the network
reaches agreement about the true state of ownership over time.10 The cost of verifying transaction attributes and enforcing simple contracts for self-contained tokens can be extremely
low. This is what allows for value to be transferred through Bitcoin across the globe at
9

Ripple, for example, uses the technology to allow for cross-border payments between existing financial
institutions; Digital Asset Holdings is using the same approach to enable more efficient trades of financial
assets; Western Union has invested in the space to lower costs in the remittances market; NASDAQ deployed
a solution to track equity in privately held companies; the state of Delaware is moving incorporation data
on a distributed ledger, etc.
10
Changes in the rules are implemented through a voting process similar to standard setting negotiations,
and disagreements can lead to part of the network forking the codebase and current state of the shared
ledger to launch a competing platform with different market design rules.

11

a relatively low cost. Of course, compliance with Know-Your-Customer (KYC) and AntiMoney-Laundering (AML) rules may require individuals and firms to sustain additional costs
to credibly link their offline identities with their Bitcoin ones, but as long as individuals agree
that the underlying token has value, using it as a store of value and medium of exchange
is possible. Similarly, a native crypto token can be used to facilitate low cost transactions
of digital resources such as computation (Ethereum), data storage (Filecoin), bandwidth or
electricity, as in all these cases verifying the exchange of a resource is not too expensive.
On the other extreme, when entries on a shared ledger are digital representations of
offline identities, products, services and related transactions, costless verification is difficult
to achieve. Under this scenario, the reduction in the cost of verification is contingent on
maintaining a credible link between offline events and their online record. This link is
cheaper to establish when offline attributes are easy to capture and expensive to alter or
fake: e.g., in the case of diamonds, Everledger uses the physical properties of the gems as a
digital fingerprint that can be recorded and tracked on a blockchain as the products move
through the supply chain. In many cases, maintaining a robust link between offline events
and distributed ledgers is very expensive, and may require not only one or more trusted
intermediaries, but also multiple parties to agree on rules for secure data entry and sharing.
In the absence of a strong link between offline and online events, asymmetric information
and moral hazard will be an issue in these markets. In this context, Internet of Things
devices are instrumental in expanding the set of contracts that can be automated on a
blockchain because they can be used to record real-world information (e.g. through sensors,
GPS devices, etc.) and substitute labor intensive verification with inexpensive hardware.
Overall, when last mile problems are limited – such as in the case of digital assets that are
native to a blockchain – decentralized verification goes from being costly, scarce and prone
to abuse, to being cheap and reliable. While this process is unlikely to be more efficient on
a per transaction basis than verification through a centralized intermediary, the ability to
12

perform it without trusting a third-party can lead to savings from increased competition,
the absence of centralized control, higher privacy and censorship resistance, and the removal
of single points of failure. At the same time, when frictions between offline events and
their digital representations are high, these improvements are unlikely to materialize in the
absence of complementary innovations, as intermediaries will still be able to control key
existing complements to digital verification and use them to exert influence over market
participants.
As decentralized verification becomes cheaper, the scale at which it can be efficiently
implemented also drops: On a distributed ledger, data integrity can be built, from the
ground up, from the most basic transaction attributes to more complex ones. For example,
a robust reputation system can be constructed from the full set of interactions an economic
agent has throughout the economy, increasing transparency and accountability. Expensive
audits and due diligence can be progressively substituted with more frequent and fine-grained
verification to ensure market safety and reduce the risk of moral hazard. A lower cost of
verification also makes it easier to define property rights at a more granular scale than before,
as any digital asset (or small fraction of it) can be traded, exchanged or tracked at a low
cost on a shared ledger.11

3

Cost of Networking

The ability to verify state (e.g. the current ownership status of a digital asset) at a lower
cost because of the reduction in the cost of verification allows a blockchain protocol to not
only reach consensus about the history and proposed evolution of a digital asset, but also to
define rules for state transitions that are particularly valuable from a network perspective.
11

In the same way that Twitter, because of the 140 character limitation, enabled new forms of communication, the ability to implement costless verification at the level of a single piece of information has the
potential to change how information markets, digital property rights and micropayments are designed.

13

These transitions can be used to reward participants for performing actions that accelerate
adoption and increase network value and welfare. For example, the protocol can be used to
incentivize behavior that builds network effects (both in terms of users and applications),
ensures the network has sufficient resources available to meet demand, guarantees its security,
encourages savings or spending behavior, etc. Taken together, these incentives lower the cost
of networking, i.e. the cost of bootstrapping, operating and scaling an economic network.
Whereas a reduction in the cost of verification is a necessary condition for a reduction
in the cost of networking – as it is the ability to verify state that allows economic agents
to establish property rights on network resources and define incentives without relying on
an intermediary – it is not a sufficient condition, as implementations can take advantage of
the former without the latter. In particular, when a blockchain protocol is permissioned and
the entities developing it retain control over which participants can update and verify state,
transitions are not fully defined by code and self-contained within the system, but rather can
be influenced by external parties through fiat. As a result, from an economics perspective,
the network will operate under constraints similar to those of traditional digital platforms,
and participants will have to trust the platform architect and core constituents through
formal and relational contracts, past reputation, etc. This tension is an important one from
an organizational perspective, as it determines if a blockchain network can be considered a
novel organizational form versus not (Catalini and Boslego 2019).
A permissionless blockchain protocol, instead, allows a network of economic agents to
agree, at regular intervals, on the true state of a set of shared data without assigning residual
rights to trusted entities. The flexibility in terms of what such shared data represents across
settings (e.g. currency, intellectual property, financial assets, contracts, etc.) makes it a
general purpose technology (GPT). GPTs typically take a long time to diffuse through
the economy, but also lead to productivity gains across multiple industries (Bresnahan and
Trajtenberg 1995, Helpman 1998, Rosenberg and Trajtenberg 2001, Moser and Nicholas
14

2004). Classic examples of GPTs include the steam engine, electricity, and the internet.
While permissionless networks have been compared to communication protocols such as
TCP/IP – which focus on how information is packetized and routed through the internet –
they fundamentally differ from them because they allow for the secure provision, transfer and
enforcement of property rights. On these networks, trust in a platform operator is replaced
by trust in the underlying incentives, code and consensus rules. As a result, market power
of the intermediary, privacy risk and censorship risk can be potentially reduced. The switch
in the trust model also introduces new challenges, as bugs in the code can leave participants
with little recourse beyond trying to coordinate a hard fork of the network. Issues with
the new trust model have resulted from benign programming mistakes (such as the Parity
wallet library removal),12 from deliberate attempts at defrauding investors by promising high
returns in the absence of any real technical or business plan (as in the case of fraudulent
initial coin offerings), as well as from malicious attacks (such as the DAO hack, which led to
a split of the Ethereum network).13 Similarly, while blockchain protocols can be designed to
offer participants a high degree of privacy (e.g. Zk-Stark, Zcash, Monero, etc.), and users can
take additional measures to protect their privacy from the public (e.g. using a mixing service,
not reusing addresses), many shared ledgers such as the Bitcoin one are pseudonymous,14
allowing third-parties to deanonymize transactions and trace movements of funds over time.
Whereas permissioned networks only take advantage of the reduction in the cost of verification, permissionless ones build on the first by adding a self-contained incentives system
to also deliver a decrease in the cost of launching and operating a network without relying
on trusted intermediaries. The effects of this reduction in the cost of networking are felt
both in the phase of bootstrapping a new platform, and in the phase of operating it. In
12

See https://www.parity.io/a-postmortem-on-the-parity-multi-sig-library-self-destruct/
See https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2017-the-ether-thief/
14
Like a writer writing a book under a pseudonym, if a Bitcoin user is ever tied to a specific address, the
entire history of her transactions with that address can be read on the public Bitcoin blockchain.
13

15

the first phase, a native token can be used to create incentives for adoption and to fund the
development and scaling of the network, for example by having mining rewards or by raising
capital through an initial coin offering (ICO). In the second phase, market design is used
to define the conditions under which participants can earn tokens for contributing resources
to the network (e.g. computing power in the case of Bitcoin, computing and applications
for Ether, disk storage for Filecoin, digital content and advertising in the case of the Basic
Attention Token, etc.).
Since during the bootstrapping phase the actual utility the network can deliver to users
is limited by its small scale, and network effects work against users switching from existing alternatives, this phase relies on contributions from early adopters and investors with
positive expectations about the future value of the network. As in open source projects
(Von Hippel 2002, Von Hippel and Von Krogh 2003, Von Hippel 2005), early adopters may
be willing to dedicate time and effort to support a new network because they want to create a viable alternative to established products or they derive utility from advancing the
underlying technology (e.g. consumption utility from early access, from working on novel,
complex problems, job-market signalling). Investors, instead, as in traditional equity finance,
may come in early because they expect the token to appreciate in value and reward their
investment (Catalini and Gans 2018). Of course, individuals can be simultaneously early
adopters and investors, and contribute both effort and capital to these projects. For this
set of individuals, the presence of a native token serves a similar purpose to founder and
early-employee equity in startups, and allows these projects to attract talent without raising
investment from traditional angels and venture capitalists. Since it only takes a few lines
of code to write a smart contract for an initial coin offering, open source codebases can
be forked or imitated at a low cost, and regulation is still uncertain in many jurisdictions,
the ability to profit from launching a new cryptocurrency or manipulating its trading have
attracted a large number of bad actors and speculators. While lower entry barriers and the
16

presence of technical investors could in theory open up capital for new types of entrepreneurs
and ideas that traditional investors may be more reluctant to fund, the absence of regulation and oversight also allows fraudulent projects to blend in with legitimate ones and raise
capital from unsophisticated investors. Combined with the fact that the value of a new
token is, in most cases, purely based on expectations about its future success, and that such
expectations, because of technical, regulatory and market uncertainty can rapidly turn when
new information emerges or sentiment evolves, the valuations of cryptocurrencies have been
extremely volatile. The resulting turmoil and speculative bubbles have made it more difficult
for investors to identify high quality projects and teams, have attracted speculators and low
quality entrants, and have shifted attention from technology R&D to short-term speculative
returns.
If in the first phase of growth of a blockchain-based network incentives are predominantly
targeted at accelerating adoption, in the second phase the key challenges from a market design perspective are ensuring that the incentives continue to support contributions of key
resources to the ecosystem, and avoiding a tragedy of the commons. By design, the protocol
layer is a shared resource among all network participants, and everyone benefits from investments in it – from better security to removing technical constraints on throughput, latency
or liveness. At the same time, because of the public good nature of these improvements,
in the absence of proper governance, a blockchain-based network may fail to invest enough
resources on them. From a valuation perspective, whereas the bootstrapping phase of a
new token is associated with extremely high volatility, as uncertainty around a network’s
potential is resolved, it should enter a more stable growth trajectory.15
Overall, relative to blockchain implementations that only take advantage of the reduction
15

This is similar to the process of early-stage startup funding and growth. Within the cryptocurrency
space, token sales and ICOs have shortened the time it takes for a developer team to raise capital. For
instance, while Bitcoin – which was bootstrapped through a slow process of word-of-mouth within the
cypherpunk community – took four years to reach a $1B market cap, Ethereum took only two years to reach
the same milestone.

17

in the cost of verification (e.g. permissioned networks), those that also benefit from the
reduction in the cost of networking (e.g. permissionless ones) are different on at least four
dimensions. First, they are less likely to leave market power in the hands of their founders or
early participants. This limits the ability of any party to unilaterally censor transactions or
exclude participants from the network, and removes single points of failure, as the network
does not depend on the availability of one or a few key players to operate.16
Second, they are less reliant on off-chain governance, relational contracts and laws to
support their operations, as by design, to take advantage of the lower cost of networking
they need to embed as much as possible of the incentives and governance rules required for
their operations into the protocol. Of course, permissionless networks still need off-chain
governance and coordination between their key stakeholders to execute a hard fork, implement controversial changes, or respond to an attack, but relative to more closed networks
that rely on trusted intermediaries they leave less discretion to any single party, and end up
codifying more of their rules into their codebases.
Third, they involve a lower privacy risk, as no single entity (or group of entities) has
preferential access to or visibility over the information generated by the network.17 In traditional platforms, the privacy risk is particularly salient in markets where consumers pay
for services by allowing intermediaries to access and monetize their data, an issue that is
increasingly relevant because of the role such data can play in the training of AI algorithms
(Agrawal, Gans, and Goldfarb 2016). Whereas the trend of consumers relinquishing private
16

The censorship risk is visible when an intermediary revokes a participant’s access to the marketplace
and digital assets through fiat; when it degrades access (e.g. in terms of speed, features, etc.) to some
participants to reduce their ability to effectively compete; and when it loses control over the marketplace
because of an attack or technical failure. All three cases have been observed in online platforms, which are
heavily concentrated markets because of network effects and economies of scale in data collection, storage,
and processing. This not only gives market power to a small number of entrenched incumbents, but also
makes the underlying services less resilient to targeted attacks and errors.
17
Although privacy may still be a concern if the public nature of the shared data exposes critical information about market participants and their transactions. For example, third-parties can use data from the
public Bitcoin ledger to deanonymize transactions and identify entities (Athey, Catalini, and Tucker 2017).

18

information in exchange for free or subsidized digital services is unlikely to change because of
blockchain technology – as small incentives and frictions can be used by digital platforms to
persuade even privacy sensitive individuals to relinquish sensitive information (Athey, Catalini, and Tucker 2017) – startups in this space are experimenting with approaches that give
users greater control over how, when and why their private data is accessed and monetized.
Fourth, blockchain implementations that take advantage of the lower cost of networking
inevitably induce architectural changes in how firms create and capture value within markets. Architectural innovations, by destroying the usefulness of the assets and accumulated
knowledge of incumbents (Henderson and Clark 1990), open opportunities for entrants to
reshape the dimensions firms compete on, and experiment with new business models. In
particular, by allowing for the separation of some of the benefits of network effects from the
costs of market power – since even in the absence of a platform architect participants in
a blockchain network are able to rely on shared infrastructure – the technology offers new
ways to reward contributors, allocate rents in a marketplace, and build applications on top of
shared data while preserving the privacy of the underlying information. In traditional digital
marketplaces, platform operators have wide visibility over all interactions that take place on
their networks, and users are unable to directly custody or control the digital assets they use
or create while transacting on them. This is a direct result of the inability of these systems
to generate and trade scarce, digital assets and establish digital property rights without also
assigning control over them to a third-party (usually the platform operator). Before Bitcoin,
for example, a central clearing house of some type was necessary to prevent the copying and
double spending of digital cash. Bitcoin solves this problem by allowing users to self-custody
digital tokens and exchange them without relinquishing control over them to a third-party.
This reduces switching costs between digital wallets, and offers users a higher degree of privacy from service providers. Interestingly, while blockchain technology provides individuals
and organizations with the opportunity to self-custody and exchange digital assets with19

out the need for traditional intermediaries such as banks, significant work is needed before
users can reap the full benefits of this change – such as greater privacy, higher portability
between service providers, and increased competition – as many implementations lack the
convenience and usability of the centralized solutions consumers are used to. For example,
while Bitcoin users can store and protect their own private keys, a large number of them
rely on third-party wallets to do so, essentially trusting these entities with their funds as in
traditional systems.

4

Conclusions

The paper focuses on two key costs that are affected by blockchain technology: the cost of
verification, and the cost of networking. For markets to thrive, participants need to be able to
efficiently verify and audit transaction attributes, including for example, the credentials and
reputation of the parties involved, characteristics of assets exchanged, and external events
and information that have implications for contractual arrangements.
Outside the boundaries of an organization, this is typically achieved by relying on trusted
intermediaries. In exchange for their services, intermediaries charge fees and capitalize on
their ability to observe all transactions taking place within their marketplaces. This informational advantage, combined with network effects and economies of scale, gives them
substantial market power and control over market participants. Consequences of market
power include higher prices, user lock-in and high switching costs, the presence of single
points of failure, censorship risk, barriers to innovation, and reduced privacy.
Blockchain technology, by reducing the costs of running decentralized networks of exchange, allows for the creation of ecosystems where the benefits from network effects and
shared digital infrastructure do not come at the cost of increased market power and data
access by platform operators. This reduction in the cost of networking has profound con-

20

sequences for market structure, as it allows open-source projects and startups to directly
compete with entrenched incumbents through the design of platforms where the rents from
direct and indirect network effects are shared more widely among participants (e.g. users, application developers, investors, etc.), and no single entity has full control over the underlying
digital assets.
Because of the absence of a central clearing house or market maker, these novel networks,
when permissionless, exhibit low barriers to entry and innovation. As long as applications are
compatible with the rules of the protocol, they can be deployed without permission from other
participants, and compete for market share. This reduces the expropriation risk application
developers face when building on top of traditional digital platforms. Furthermore, since
contributors can participate in governance in a way that is often proportional to their stake
in the system, these networks can democratically evolve over time to accommodate changes
that are beneficial to the majority of their constituents.18
From a talent acquisition perspective, unlike open source projects, the digital platforms
built on top of crypto tokens do not have to rely solely on pro-social contributions of time and
labor and job market signalling (Lerner and Tirole 2002) to support their development. Using
a native token, they can directly incentivize early contributions by developers, investors and
early adopters. This novel source of funding combines crowdfunding with the simultaneous
crowdsourcing of key resources needed to scale a platform and attract both developer and
user activity on to it. Because of the reduction in the cost of verification, this model also
allows for equity in the system to be defined at a much narrower scale, and to be allocated
to a wider population of participants in response to verifiable contributions of resources.
Similarly, by allowing for the definition of scarce digital property rights, native tokens
18

Minorities that disagree with a proposed change face reduced lock-in and hold-up risk because they
can fork the existing codebase at any time and launch a separate, backwards-compatible platform under
their preferred rules. At the same time, since forks introduce uncertainty and a network split may decrease
the overall value of a platform, off-chain governance is needed to allow communities of developers to reach
agreement about fundamental changes to market design without destroying confidence in the network.

21

allow decentralized networks of exchange to coordinate activity around shared objectives,
and transact digital resources without assigning market power to a market maker. Through
blockchain-based networks, individuals and organizations can source ideas, information, capital and labor, and enforce contracts for digital assets with substantially reduced frictions.
These changes allow for the design of novel types of networks that blend features of competitive markets with the more nuanced forms of governance used within vertically integrated
firms and online platforms.19
Whereas intermediaries will still be able to add substantial value to transactions by
focusing on tasks that are complementary to digital verification (e.g. secure recording of
offline events, curation, certification of identity and services, etc.), they are likely to face
increased competition because of the ability to establish and exchange digital assets on
decentralized open networks without them. This challenges some of their revenue sources
and reduces their influence over markets, opening up opportunities for new business models
and novel approaches to data privacy, ownership and portability, as well as to the regulation
of networks that should be considered public utilities. By reducing barriers to entry within
sectors that are currently heavily concentrated because of network effects and control over
data, the technology may enable a new wave of innovation in digital services, and greater
consumer choice.
For these changes to materialize, however, substantial hurdles will have to be overcome.
First, the technology will need to reach a level of performance (e.g. throughput, latency, cost
per transaction, etc.) comparable to traditional networks. While decentralization inevitably
comes at a cost, the gains from greater competition, openness, privacy and censorship resistance will have to outweigh the lower efficiency of blockchain networks to make adoption
19

For example, the hedge fund Numerai uses smart contracts to transparently reward contributions to its
financial prediction model: Data scientists across the globe can collaborate through this new type of network
knowing that their inputs will be rewarded – using the native Numeraire token – according to their impact
on the performance of the fund.

22

worthwhile. Hybrid networks that embrace key features of permissionless systems – such as
low barriers to entry and a competitive market for resources and applications – while initially
borrowing trust from existing institutions to overcome scaling problems, may also provide a
viable transition path when performance is an obstacle to adoption.
Second, regulatory frameworks will have to evolve to reduce uncertainty for founders and
network participants, and to provide stronger protections for investors and early adopters.
Because of their similarities but also their differences with equity finance (Catalini and Gans
2018), crypto tokens lend themselves to both legitimate fundraising activity by high quality
entrepreneurs, as well as flagrant abuse by fraudsters (Catalini, Boslego, and Zhang 2018).
As in other technological bubbles, this constitutes a challenge for the space, as investors
have a difficult time separating projects worth supporting from the much larger number of
low quality imitators, and entry by speculators has brought extreme price volatility and
additional risks to the market.
Third, and possibly most important, blockchain technology, like other technological advancements, is not a panacea for every possible technical and market challenge a digital
ecosystem may face. As discussed throughout the paper, the technology can add substantial
value under fairly narrow conditions: 1) when last mile problems are not severe and digital
verification can be implemented in a novel or more fine-grained way because of a reduction in
the cost of verifying state without assigning control to an intermediary; 2) when the reduction
in the cost of networking allows participants to allocate rents from a digital platform more
efficiently between users, developers, and investors; 3) when the combination of a reduction
in both costs (verification and networking) allows for the definition of new types of digital
assets and property rights; 4) when there is a need for greater privacy and ability for users
to control when and how their data is accessed and used. When none of these conditions are
met instead, more centralized solutions that rely on traditional intermediaries and relational
contracts are unlikely to be replaced, as the benefits of transitioning to a blockchain-based
23

system are unlikely to counterbalance the costs introduced by a decentralized infrastructure
and governance, and the replication of state across the network.

24

References
Agrawal, A., J. Gans, and A. Goldfarb (2016): “The simple economics of machine
intelligence,” Harvard Business Review, 17.
Athey, S., C. Catalini, and C. Tucker (2017): “The Digital Privacy Paradox: Small
Money, Small Costs, Small Talk,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Athey, S., I. Parashkevov, V. Sarukkai, and J. Xia (2016): “Bitcoin pricing, adoption, and usage: Theory and evidence,” .
Ausubel, L. M., P. Milgrom, et al. (2006): “The lovely but lonely Vickrey auction,”
Combinatorial auctions, 17, 22–26.
Beck, R., J. S. Czepluch, N. Lollike, and S. Malone (2016): “Blockchain-the
Gateway to Trust-Free Cryptographic Transactions.,” in ECIS, p. ResearchPaper153.
Bekkers, R., C. Catalini, A. Martinelli, C. Righi, and T. Simcoe (2019): “Disclosure rules and declared essential patents,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Böhme, R., N. Christin, B. Edelman, and T. Moore (2015): “Bitcoin: Economics,
technology, and governance,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2), 213–238.
Bordo, M. D., and A. T. Levin (2017): “Central Bank Digital Currency and the Future
of Monetary Policy,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Bresnahan, T. F., and M. Trajtenberg (1995): “General purpose technologies Engines
of growth?,” Journal of econometrics, 65(1), 83–108.
Catalini, C. (2017a): “How Blockchain Applications Will Move Beyond Finance,” Harvard
Business Review.
(2017b): “How Blockchain Technology Will Impact the Digital Economy,” Oxford
Business Law Blog.
Catalini, C., and J. Boslego (2019): “Blockchain Technology and Organization Science:
Decentralization Theatre or Novel Organizational Form?,” MIT Working Paper.
Catalini, C., J. Boslego, and K. Zhang (2018): “Technological Opportunity, Bubbles
and Innovation: The Dynamics of Initial Coin Offerings,” Working Paper.
Catalini, C., and J. S. Gans (2018): “Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto
tokens,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Catalini, C., and C. Tucker (2017): “When early adopters don’t adopt,” Science,
357(6347), 135–136.
25

Davidson, S., P. De Filippi, and J. Potts (2016): “Economics of blockchain,” Working
Paper.
Dwyer, G. P. (2015): “The economics of Bitcoin and similar private digital currencies,”
Journal of Financial Stability, 17, 81–91.
Edelman, B., M. Ostrovsky, and M. Schwarz (2007): “Internet Advertising and
the Generalized Second-Price Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of Keywords,”
American Economic Review, 97(1), 242–259.
Gandal, N., and H. Halaburda (2014): “Competition in the Cryptocurrency Market,”
NET Institute Working Paper.
Gans, J. S., and H. Halaburda (2015): “Some economics of private digital currency,”
in Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy, pp. 257–276. University of Chicago Press.
Halaburda, H., and M. Sarvary (2016): Beyond bitcoin: The economics of digital
currencies. Springer.
Helpman, E. (1998): General purpose technologies and economic growth. MIT press.
Henderson, R. M., and K. B. Clark (1990): “Architectural innovation: The reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms,” Administrative
science quarterly, pp. 9–30.
Iansiti, M., and K. R. Lakhani (2017): “The Truth About Blockchain,” Harvard Business Review, 95(1), 118–127.
Ito, J., N. Narula, and R. Ali (2017): “The Blockchain Will Do to the Financial System
What the Internet Did to Media,” Harvard Business Review.
Kiviat, T. I. (2015): “Beyond Bitcoin: Issues in Regulating Blockchain Tranactions,” Duke
LJ, 65, 569.
Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2002): “Some simple economics of open source,” The journal
of industrial economics, 50(2), 197–234.
Luca, M. (2017): “Designing Online Marketplaces: Trust and Reputation Mechanisms,”
Innovation Policy and the Economy, 17(1), 77–93.
Malinova, K., and A. Park (2016): “Market Design with Blockchain Technology,” Working Paper.
Mann, S., J. Nolan, and B. Wellman (2002): “Sousveillance: Inventing and using
wearable computing devices for data collection in surveillance environments.,” Surveillance
& society, 1(3), 331–355.
Milgrom, P. R. (2004): Putting auction theory to work. Cambridge University Press.
26

Moser, P., and T. Nicholas (2004): “Was electricity a general purpose technology?
Evidence from historical patent citations,” The American Economic Review, 94(2), 388–
394.
Nakamoto, S. (2008): “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” White Paper.
Narayanan, A., J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, and S. Goldfeder (2016):
Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies: A Comprehensive Introduction. Princeton University Press.
Raskin, M., and D. Yermack (2016): “Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers, and the
future of central banking,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Rosenberg, N., and M. Trajtenberg (2001): “A General purpose technology at work:
the Corliss steam engine in the late 19th Century US,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper.
Roth, A. E. (2002): “The economist as engineer: Game theory, experimentation, and
computation as tools for design economics,” Econometrica, 70(4), 1341–1378.
Roth, A. E., and A. Ockenfels (2002): “Last-minute bidding and the rules for ending
second-price auctions: Evidence from eBay and Amazon auctions on the Internet,” The
American Economic Review, 92(4), 1093–1103.
Rothkopf, M. H., T. J. Teisberg, and E. P. Kahn (1990): “Why are Vickrey auctions
rare?,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(1), 94–109.
Rysman, M., and S. Schuh (2017): “New innovations in payments,” Innovation Policy
and the Economy, 17(1), 27–48.
Seretakis, A. (2017): “Blockchain, Securities Markets and Central Banking,” Working
Paper.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2002): “Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics,” The
American Economic Review, 92(3), 460–501.
Tucker, C., and C. Catalini (2018): “What Blockchain Cant Do,” Harvard Business
Review.
Von Hippel, E. (2005): Democratizing innovation. MIT press.
Von Hippel, E., and G. Von Krogh (2003): “Open source software and the privatecollective innovation model: Issues for organization science,” Organization science, 14(2),
209–223.
Von Hippel, E. A. (2002): “Open source projects as horizontal innovation networks-by
and for users,” .
27

Walport, M. (2016): “Distributed ledger technology: beyond block chain,” UK Government Office for Science.
Wright, A., and P. De Filippi (2015): “Decentralized blockchain technology and the
rise of lex cryptographia,” .

28

A
A.1

Online Appendix
What is a Blockchain?

Using blockchain technology, a network of economic agents can agree, at regular intervals,
about the true state of shared data. The flexibility in terms of what such shared data
represents makes the technology extremely versatile, and allows distributed ledgers to track
and settle exchanges across multiple types of digital assets. The rules through which the
network reaches consensus about the state of the shared data over time are a key aspect of
the market design of a crypto token, as they define the incentives for users and contributors
of key resources to the platform. The extent towards which the data in a shared ledger is
completely public and associated with pseudonyms (as in Bitcoin), 20 or can be strategically
shielded for anonymity (as in Zcash) is also a market design choice of a specific token.
Similarly, the frequency at which the network reaches consensus and the amount of data
recorded in each period of time are features that vary across implementations.
The distributed ledger where the shared data resides is called a ‘blockchain’ because it
typically constitutes a chain of blocks of transaction data (see Figure A-2). Each one of the
blocks contains valid transaction records for a specific period of time and their attributes.
A key attribute of each transaction (and each block) is its timestamp. Blocks are chained
together by incorporating a digital fingerprint of the previous block (a hash) in the current
block. Any change in the transaction information contained in a specific block would alter
such a fingerprint, irreparably breaking the chain of consensus linking that block with all
subsequent ones. As a result, one can think of a blockchain not only as a large-scale,
distributed database, but also as an immutable audit trail where the ‘DNA’ of each block
is incorporated in all following ones, making it impossible to alter history without being
noticed.

Figure A-2: A Blockchain
20

Whereas it is often believed that Bitcoin transactions are anonymous, they are actually pseudonymous.
Like a writer writing a book under a pseudonym, if a Bitcoin user is ever tied to a specific address, the entire
history of her transactions with that address can be read on the public Bitcoin blockchain.

A-1

A.2

Proof of Work and ‘Mining’

In proof-of-work systems (PoW) such as Bitcoin or Litecoin, participants contribute to broadcasting and verifying transactions while “miners” take on the additional computational work
required to assemble new, valid blocks and commit them to the shared ledger. The computationally costly tasks involved in mining are essentially part of a race between miners
for the right to add the next block to the chain, and earn the associated reward. The more
computing power a miner dedicates to mining, the higher the chances of winning the race by
finding a valid solution for a new block first and broadcasting it to the rest of the network.
Each time a miner commits a new block to the chain it can assign a predefined amount
of the crypto token to itself as a reward (coinbase transaction). This reward, combined
with the transactions fees participants may have included in their individual transactions
to incentivize miners to prioritize them over others in the construction of the next block,
serves as an incentive for miners for the work they perform. To incentivize a decentralized
network of miners to contribute resources to secure and operate the network, blockchain
protocols typically rely on a native, built-in “token” (in Bitcoin, this is represented by an
unspent output on the ledger). This explains why Bitcoin and its blockchain are “joined at
the hip”:21 for the network to operate in a decentralized way without trusted intermediaries,
the process of maintaining the shared ledger must generate enough of an incentive in bitcoin
for attracting miners.
Interestingly, in proof-of-work systems, mining does not serve the purpose of verifying
transactions (as this activity is fairly light computationally), but of building a credible commitment against an attack: since blocks are chained together, the audit trail formed over
time becomes more difficult to tamper with as more blocks are added, and computing power
has been sunk to support it. Consensus about the true state of a distributed ledger therefore
emerges and becomes stronger as time (and blocks) go by. If a bad actor wanted to reverse
a past transaction (e.g. one that is stored n blocks in the past), it would have to spend
a disproportionate amount of resources to do so. This is the result of the bad actor not
only having to outpace the growth rate of the legitimate chain (which is still maintained by
the rest of the network), but also of having to recompute all the blocks after the one that
is being manipulated. Since the network always takes the longest valid chain as the true
state of the ledger (i.e. as the “consensus”), the task of altering a past block of transactions
and imposing it on the rest of the network becomes increasingly difficult as the chain is
extended.22
As a result, in proof-of-work systems, a blockchain is only as secure as the amount of
computing power dedicated to mining it. This generates economies of scale and a positive
feedback loop between network effects and security: as more participants use a crypto token,
21

See http://avc.com/2015/11/are-bitcoin-and-the-blockchain-joined-at-the-hip/
and http://www.multichain.com/blog/2015/07/bitcoin-vs-blockchain-debate/ (accessed 11-01-2015).
22
Ironically, even if bad actors managed to control a disproportionate share of the computing power
dedicated to securing a specific blockchain, it would be in their rational best interest to keep mining honestly
(and earn the corresponding mining rewards and transaction fees), as tampering would be visible to others
and would destroy the value of the underlying cryptocurrency.

A-2

its value increases, which in turn attracts more miners (due to higher rewards), ultimately
increasing the security of the shared ledger. Similarly, if confidence in a crypto token drops
(e.g. because of a security flaw or because of conflict between developers on its future direction), its value would drop, possibly triggering a negative feedback cycle where miners
leave the ecosystem because of the lower rewards until the point where the ledger becomes
insecure and is rendered useless. Whereas proponents of alternative consensus systems (such
as proof-of-stake) criticize proof-of-work for being inherently wasteful (e.g. in terms of electricity, hardware), from a game theoretic perspective it is exactly the wasteful nature of
the mining computations that defends the ledger from an attack: i.e. the sunk, irreversible
commitment to the audit trail constitutes the cost a bad actor would have to sustain to
manipulate it. If the output of mining was useful for some other purposes too (e.g. if the
computations helped find large prime numbers), then the marginal cost of mining would be
lower (as part of the cost would be absorbed by the benefits the miner can obtain from selling
the solutions to these problems). This does not mean that the network would be less secure,
as the marginal returns from mining would also increase and miners would dedicate more
resources to it, leading to a corresponding increase in the difficulty of mining. As a result,
the network would be as secure as before, and in a scenario in which there are frictions in the
market for solutions, it could actually become harder for an attacker to accumulate enough
resources to perform a 51% attack.23
The process through which consensus on the true state of a distributed ledger is reached
and secured over time has implications for market design. Depending on the degree of security
needed for a specific transaction (e.g. buying a house versus buying coffee), participants will
want to wait for a different number of blocks to be settled after the one containing their
transaction. This means that the interval at which a new block is added to the chain and
consensus is formed, together with the maximum number of transactions that can be included
in a block (block size) endogenously determine the optimal transaction type on a specific
blockchain. Whereas participants can include higher transaction fees to entice miners to
grant them priority within the first available block (i.e. they can reward miners with a
higher transaction fee to increase their priority in the queue of unsettled transactions), there
is still a limited number of transactions that can be included in any single block.24
23

Proof-of-stake, where the ability to extend a ledger depends on one’s ownership stake in
the currency, is among the proposed solutions to this trade-off between security and wasteful computations.
See: http://bitfury.com/content/5-white-papers-research/pos-vs-pow-1.0.2.pdf and
https://bytecoin.org/blog/proof-of-activity-proof-of-burn-proof-of-capacity/ - accessed 09-07-2016.
24
For example, Bitcoin currently adds a new block every 10 minutes, and blocks currently have a size of
1MB. The alternative cryptocurrency Litecoin was instead designed with shorter confirmation times (2.5
minutes): while this means that less computing work is done for each block (and therefore the sunk commitment and security per block is lower), the shorter time interval between blocks makes Litecoin more suited for
smaller transactions. This basic trade-off between security and bandwidth also affects how different stakeholders within an ecosystem view scaling: in the case of Bitcoin, startups and users that see it predominantly
as a cheap medium of exchange would rather have it process a large number of transactions per second and
keep transaction fees low, whereas others that are interested in security because they see the token as a
store of value (‘digital gold’) would rather have the incentives system drive out smaller transactions to other
blockchains through fees and keep the same level of decentralization. Solutions like the Lightning Network

A-3

From a standards perspective, whereas there are advantages to being able to rely on a
single blockchain because of economies of scale in security and direct and indirect network
effects, it is clear that a single blockchain will not be able to perfectly accommodate every
type of transaction (e.g. exchange of value versus the execution of software applications
or of legal contracts). The size of a transaction, its attributes and functionality, and the
related degree of security and privacy needed to execute it will push different marketplaces
on different blockchains.25

A.3

Permissionless versus Permissioned Blockchains and Privacy
of Transactions

Bitcoin’s market design choices were driven by a desire to make the cryptocurrency as decentralized and democratic in its governance as possible:26 there are no trusted intermediaries,
anybody can become a miner or add legitimate transactions, and nobody can block other
participants’ transactions. Whereas this makes Bitcoin extremely resilient to attacks and
censorship, it also makes it less efficient, in its current form, than centralized payment networks.27 Permissioned blockchains, which are distributed ledgers where participants typically
need to be granted permission to add (or even view) transactions, can instead deliver higher
bandwidth because they do not need to rely on proof-of-work for maintaining a shared ledger.
When mining is completely absent from a private blockchain, the audit trail is not protected
by sunk computational work, and if the trusted nodes are compromised (or if they collude
to rewrite the ledger), the integrity of the chain is at risk.28
Private blockchains are therefore very similar to the replicated, distributed databases
already extensively used by corporations. The introduction of distributed ledger technology
in this context is usually motivated by incentives to further standardize operations and
increase compatibility across industry participants without, at the same time, changing
the pre-existing market structure. It is important to note that while private blockchains
enable instantaneous transactions between users through bidirectional payment channels (as in correspondent banking). If successful, this approach would allow a large number of payments to be routed through
this parallel network of two-parties ledger entries, drastically reducing the number of transactions that need
to be recorded on the main ledger.
25
Solutions such as sidechains are being developed through which different blockchains could sync and
exchange information seamlessly: e.g. daily microtransactions could take place on a sidechain with lower
security but faster confirmation times, and end-of-the-day settlement takes place on the Bitcoin blockchain.
26
Whereas Bitcoin was designed to be fully decentralized (one cpu, one vote in the consensus process),
economies of scale in mining have driven this activity towards centralization. In 2014, one single mining pool
reached more than 50% of the network raising concerns about the integrity of the consensus process (as a
miner with such a share could potentially censor transactions, revert them or perform double spending).
27
According to a 2014 stress test, the VISA network was able to handle at peak 56,582 transactions messages per second. As of this writing, Bitcoin can only handle approximately 7 transactions
per second (source: http://visatechmatters.tumblr.com/post/108952718025/56582-transaction-messagesper-second and https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Scalability - accessed 09-08-2016).
28
This makes them less suited for problems where the integrity of the audit trail is paramount (e.g. for
regulatory compliance, a network of banks should not be able to collude and revert the state of a distributed
ledger ex-post).

A-4

benefit from costless verification, they do not take advantage of the reduction in the cost of
networking, since control over transactions and assets is still in the hands of trusted nodes.
Reliance on trusted intermediaries also comes with advantages, as these systems are more
likely to be compatible from the start with pre-existing regulation.29 Whereas this makes
a distributed ledger more compatible with legacy systems, it also ties it back to traditional
intermediaries as sources of trust. As a result, such a blockchain is unlikely to have a drastic
effect on market structure and innovation in the long run.
Related to the issue of trusted intermediaries, is the question of how much privacy a
particular blockchain needs to deliver to its users: patterns in a publicly available, distributed
ledger can be used to de-anonymize transacting entities behind a pseudonym and gather
useful information about the market (Athey, Parashkevov, Sarukkai, and Xia 2016, Athey,
Catalini, and Tucker 2017, Catalini and Tucker 2017). To protect their privacy, users can
adopt privacy enhancing techniques (e.g. use a new address for each transaction, obfuscate
their transactions by mixing them with others), use a truly anonymous cryptocurrency (e.g.
Zcash), rely on an intermediary (e.g. a digital wallet provider),30 or use a system that
separates basic information about a transaction (e.g. its existence and timestamp) from
more sensitive attributes. Additional, sensitive information could be stored on a private
blockchain (or database) and immutably linked to the public blockchain entry using a digital
fingerprint.31 This would preserve the blockchain role as a time-stamping machine, since any
tampering with the private record would irreparably break the cryptographic link between
the two data sources.32
While this is still an active area of research, new protocols are being developed to obfuscate transaction data, offer full anonymity to users through zero-knowledge cryptography,
and implement different degrees of access to transaction information. Although perfect obfuscation might be not always possible to achieve,33 it is clear that different cryptocurrencies
will be able to compete also in terms of the privacy level they provide to their users (either
at the protocol level, or through a trusted intermediary).
As discussed in the paper, costless verification can take place at the level of a single
piece of information. When combined with privacy-enhancing measures, this can solve the
trade-off between users’ desire for customized product experiences (e.g. when using a virtual
assistant like Siri), and the need to protect their private information (e.g. the queries sent
to the service). If the sensitive data is stored on a blockchain, users can retain control of
29

For example, they can be designed to allow for ex-post editing of transactions through fiat, a feature
that would undermine the very premise of a public, immutable blockchain, but that clearly has value for
certain types of financial transactions.
30
Some digital wallet providers do not settle each transaction of their customers on a public blockchain,
but only record aggregate inputs and outputs among all their users at regular intervals. These “off-chain”
transactions offer a greater degree of privacy from the public, although all information is of course available
to the digital wallet provider.
31
For example, this could be achieved by applying a cryptographic hash function to the private part of
the record and recording the output (typically a short string of characters) on the distributed ledger.
32
The blockchain entry would only act as “proof-of-existence” of the original transaction, and if the private
record was lost or destroyed there would be no way from the public ledger to extract that information again.
33
See https://www.iacr.org/archive/crypto2001/21390001.pdf (accessed 08-01-2016).

A-5

their data and license it out as needed over time (e.g. Electronic Medical Records, etc).

A.4
A.4.1

Types of Transactions Enabled By Blockchain Technology
From Atomic Transactions and Immutable Audit Trails to the Exchange
of Intellectual Property and Other Types of Digital Assets

An atomic transaction is a transaction that can be fully executed and enforced through a
distributed ledger, and whose key attributes can also be verified through the same ledger at
a very low cost without the need for an intermediary. Examples include transactions that
imply an exchange of cryptocurrency between a buyer and a seller (e.g. a Bitcoin lending
contract, a gambling contract) or an exchange between different crypto tokens.34
If all we care about proving with certainty is if (existence) or when (timing) a certain
transaction took place, then we can use a pre-existing blockchain to do so: e.g. we could
rely on the Bitcoin blockchain to prove that we knew a certain piece of information at a
specific point in time (proof of existence). Whereas we would not be able to directly embed
the information on the Bitcoin blockchain, we could incorporate a digital fingerprint of it
(e.g. a hash) inside a regular transaction. The digital fingerprint would then be secured by
the proof-of-work done to maintain and extend the Bitcoin blockchain. At the verification
stage, we could point the public to our transaction while at the same time revealing our
private piece of information (e.g. the lab notes we wanted to timestamp) to prove the
immutable link between the two. Without any additional infrastructure, a blockchain allows
us to implement a “first to file” system based on a secure, historical record of timestamped,
digital fingerprints.
Because of the ability to implement atomic transactions, build immutable audit trails, and
simplify settlement and reconciliation across organizations, blockchain technology has seen
fast adoption and experimentation within finance and accounting. Within these fields, the
technology can be used to create more open, flexible and programmable exchange platforms,
substantially extending the concept of double-entry bookkeeping (e.g. examples include
Chain, Digital Asset Holdings, Blockstreatm etc.).35 Beyond time, labor and cost savings,
the development of more interoperable exchange platforms for digital assets substantially
reduces entry cost for new players in these heavily regulated markets.
Applications also include novel forms of intellectual property registration and content
licensing (e.g. Mediachain). Royalties for the use and remixing of IP or digital content can
be tracked in a granular and transparent way on a blockchain by all market participants,
which is likely to be particularly useful when different parties have conflicting incentives (e.g.
34
Online gambling is an interesting example because costless verification allows for the house to transparently demonstrate fair odds, as users can ex-post verify a dice roll or deck reshuffle was not manipulated to
favor the house. Reputation of the gambling house would still be important, as a one-time defection would
only be visible ex-post.
35
For example, the underlying structure and performance of mortgage-backed security can tracked on a
blockchain and made accessible to relevant parties in real time (including regulators), and accounting records
can be audited in an automatic fashion while preserving the privacy of the entities involved.

A-6

in a principal-agent relationship).36 Pricing and digital privacy models are also becoming
more flexible and granular thanks to crypto tokens: e.g. with micro-payments implemented
within a browser (e.g. Brave), users can seamlessly pay for access to content behind a paywall,
or for an ad-free or no-tracking experience. Similarly, content creators and advertisers can
reward users for their attention or for revealing their preferences (e.g. BAT).
A useful extension of an atomic transaction is one that relies on an external source of
information (e.g. weather data, exchange rate, price of a stock, outcome of public events)
to execute a contract. Examples range from prediction markets (e.g. Gnosis) to betting
denominated in a crypto token, to future contracts, mining pool contracts, escrow contracts
etc. The external source of information (an ‘oracle’) could be a trusted intermediary, the
aggregation of multiple sources (to avoid manipulation), a crowdsourced voting mechanism,
or a trusted hardware device. A particularly interesting set of transactions is the one enabled
by linking an IoT device to a cryptocurrency. If the hardware device is secure and cannot
be tampered with, then the information it collects can act as the trusted arbiter in a digital
transaction.37 This allows new marketplaces to emerge where energy (e.g. from solar panels),
bandwidth, access to resources and information, data processing through an API, or work
performed by the crowd are priced in novel ways.39
A.4.2

The Identity, Credentials and Provenance Verification Problem

The process of identity verification is central to all economic transactions. Each time we
authenticate ourselves (or an entity we represent, or a device), we are essentially creating a
transaction allowing a third-party to verify that we are authorized to perform an action. This
transaction is usually what stands between a legitimate use and fraud, leakage of information,
digital and physical theft. A well functioning market (and economy), relies on robust identity
verification as well as on the ability to verify the goods and services being exchanged (e.g.
in terms of their provenance, how they were changed through the supply chain etc.), and
36

For example, artists that license their music to Apple or Spotify could track how many times their songs
are played by consumers, or seamlessly receive royalties from other artists for remixes that include parts
of their songs according to a predetermined smart contract. Similarly, backers on a crowdfunding platform
could obtain royalties each time a song they funded is played, artists could sell the rights to the first copy of
a digital artwork, stock photography websites could certify legitimate uses of their content at a lower cost.
37
For example, a weather or pollution sensor38 could capture local information and sell it back to the
network for a price. IoT devices and robots, when combined with a cryptocurrency, can seamlessly earn,
barter or exchange resources with other devices on the same network. In a futuristic scenario, a self-driving
car could buy up lane space from surrounding vehicles on a highway for priority. If the IoT device also
contributes to mining the underlying cryptocurrency (e.g. by dedicating computing cycles during idle time
to securing a digital ledger), then this may also allow for new business models to emerge (e.g. a cellular
phone’s plan could be partially subsidized through its mining chip).
39
Given current technology, users can already be paid instantaneously and with less frictions through a
cryptocurrency to perform small tasks both offline and online across the globe (e.g. answering surveys,
translating text or audio, writing a review, training machine learning algorithms, collecting offline prices
etc.). Whereas payments from users to services online are pervasive, the reverse flow is substantially more
rare (e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk) and cumbersome (e.g. linking of a bank account). Crypto tokens, by
enabling bidirectional, low friction exchange of value, can substantially expand these markets (e.g. 21.co).

A-7

the credentials of the parties involved (e.g. degrees on a curriculum vitae, professional
licensing status, bad actor status, driving record etc.). Current solutions to the identity and
credentials verification problem typically rely on insecure secrets and documents (e.g. social
security number, passwords, passports, signatures, university transcripts etc.) or public-key
encryption and hardware (e.g. multiple factor authentication, certificates). In many cases
the intermediary is the government, although it can also be a consortium, or a private firm
(e.g. Facebook Connect). This always involves some degree of information leakage and risk
of reuse of private information outside of the designated transactions. Blockchain technology
can reduce this risk by allowing for authentication without disclosure of sensitive information.
The same way a distributed ledger can track the attributes of financial transactions, it can
also track changes to an individual’s status and credentials (or firm, good, service). An
individual’s ability to perform (or not) a certain action could be tracked on a blockchain
and queried when needed without necessarily disclosing all underlying information (e.g. a
bank could verify, after being authorized by a customer, a credit history). Similarly, access
to medical records could be granted, revoked or ported between providers as needed.
From a privacy perspective, the ability to license out subsets of personal information for
limited amounts of time and to seamlessly revoke access when necessary has the potential
to not only increase security, but also to enable new business models where customers retain
greater control over their data and firms can dynamically bid for access.
Attributes of digital and physical goods can also be tracked on a distributed ledger as
they move through the economy, increasing our ability to verify their integrity, provenance,
manipulation and status (e.g. warranties, food safety) over time. This is particularly powerful when immutable properties of a good (e.g. the properties of a diamond, art piece or
geographic coordinates of a parcel of land) can be reliably recorded on a blockchain, i.e.
when a unique, digital fingerprint can link ownership of a blockchain token to the underlying
asset. When this is not possible, the problem of identity, credential and provenance verification will still require trusted intermediaries (or at least a secure IoT device or sensor) to
reliably capture what is happening in the offline world and record it on a distributed ledger:
Intermediaries and secure devices act as key complements to online forms of verification
enabled by blockchain technology.
A.4.3

Online Reputation Systems

A key function of online intermediaries is to design and maintain a robust reputation system
to facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers (Luca 2017). In this context, blockchain
technology can be used to increase transparency, ensure that reviews and ratings are only
produced after a verified purchase, and to build open reputation platforms. Advantages
include the ability to port and use the resulting reputation scores across different services
and contexts, increased transparency, and lower barriers to entry in markets currently dominated by a few intermediaries (e.g. Yelp, Airbnb, Uber). This has implications for how
policymakers approach regulation, monitoring, and antitrust issues in these markets, as it
gives a public entity the ability to enforce market design rules (e.g. safety standards, worker
compensation, liquidity standards etc.) through a well-designed protocol.
A-8

A.4.4

Central Bank Money

A particularly interesting application is the development of a blockchain-based, fiat-endorsed
digital currency. If a central bank were to switch from the current infrastructure to a cryptocurrency, it would be able to directly provide citizens with digital, central bank money.
This would challenge some of the revenue models of commercial banks, as citizens may
prefer the more secure central bank money to their traditional checking account. Startups
could then compete in providing security and protection for consumer digital wallets, payments and billing services, etc. While the implications of such a switch are not the focus
of this paper, the change would have broad implications for how governments implement
taxation (because of costless verification), manage money supply and interest rates, deliver
quantitative easing, on their ability to enforce financial sanctions on other governments, and
more generally facilitate intertemporal transactions in the economy. Such a currency would
also become an appealing alternative - because of its digital nature - for foreign citizens
in countries facing currency devaluation or where trust in the government is low. Events
such as India’s demonetization of the 500 and 1000 rupee notes, and broader pushes towards
greater traceability and government surveillance in transactions (e.g. by reducing the role of
cash), are likely to increase consumers’ interest in cryptocurrencies as a store of value and
for privacy concerns (i.e. fiat-based currencies will have to increasingly compete with their
decentralized counterparts). Recent moves such as the Chinese ban of initial coin offerings
and Bitcoin exchanges foreshadow increasing tension between regulators and permissionless
cryptocurrencies, possibly while the same governments consider adopting blockchain technology to lower cost and enable new types of services for their citizens through a fiat-based
digital currency.
A.4.5

Auctions

Economists have made great strides in applying economic theory to the design of practical
markets (Roth 2002). But issues remain and, apart from once-off auctions of public assets,
the best designs are not often implemented. An example of this is the second-price auction
developed by William Vickery (Ausubel, Milgrom, et al. 2006), where bidders submit their
reservation price to an auctioneer, and the bidder with the highest bid wins the auction but
only has to pay the second highest bid. This auction has the property that its outcomes
are efficient (the auction winner is the agent with the highest valuation), and involves a
straightforward bidding process since bidders can simply submit the highest amount they
would be willing to pay. Nonetheless, it has found limited applicability in practice. A
notable exception is Google’s AdWords auction (Edelman, Ostrovsky, and Schwarz 2007).
One of the reasons why market designs that require agents to submit their true valuation
(or costs) do not actually emerge in practice is that there is a potential lack of trust in the
intermediaries involved. One aspect of this is that a seller may use the fact that a bidder has
a high willingness to pay for an object to somehow turn the tables on them in the auction.40
40

For example, suppose there are two bidders for an object. One has a value of $5 and another has a
value of $10. Suppose also that it turns out that the seller will keep the object if it does not attract more

A-9

Hence, they may choose not to do so and the value of the auction may be undermined. An
open-cry auction may resolve this issue by forcing the seller to reveal when their reserve price
is met but such auctions have their own costs (including having to assemble all bidders at
the same time and location) and may not be practical online.
A distributed ledger solves these potential expropriation problems. For instance, eBay
offers an automated bidder which allows people to submit their highest bid and then bids
on their behalf. In effect, it is supposed to replicate a second-price auction. Often people do
not actually use the automated bidder properly and wait until the last minute to bid (Roth
and Ockenfels 2002). One reason could be some kind of mistrust or alternatively a concern
that the bids will not be submitted properly. With a distributed ledger, the bids could be
collected through a smart contract without ever exposing the information to the seller or a
third party. When the auction closes, the contract would rank the offers, identify the winner,
and destroy the information about the other bids. The smart contract could also ensure
that the bidder has enough funds to make an offer and does not default (Milgrom 2004),
reducing the worry that the auction will be re-run and the bidding information used against
participants. Thus, we can see how the full verifiability that accompanies a blockchain can
potentially render practical the full commitment assumptions required for efficient auction
designs to be implemented.

than $4 in the auction. In a second-price, auction where bidders bid their true values, the winning bidder
would be the $10 value bidder who would only have to pay a price of $5. Suppose, however, that the seller
does not reveal their reservation price. A concern might arise that they might see the bids and then claim
the reservation price is $7. In that situation, the bidders would face expropriation and a reduced surplus
from bidding their true values. See (Rothkopf, Teisberg, and Kahn 1990) for an analysis. The authors also
examine what might happen if truthful bids leak to third parties who can then exploit the bidders.

A-10

