                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CHARACTERISTICS OF HOSTILE
                         AND FRIENDLY TAKEOVER TARGETS




                                 Randall Morck

                                Andrei Shleifer

                                Robert W. Vishny




                             Working Paper No. 2295




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, NA 02138
                                   June 1987




Support from the Seaver Institute is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Oliver
Hart, Michael Jensen, Kevin M. Murphy, Edward Rice1 and Lawrence Sunriers for
helpful connents and the National Bureau of Economic Research for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the USER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                FIBER Working Paper #2295
                                                June 1987




          Characteristics of Hostile and Friendly Takeover Targets




                                 ABSTRACT

        Compared to an average Fortune 500 firm, a target of a
  hostile takeover is smaller, older, has a lower Tobin's Q,
  invests less of its income, and is growing more slowly. The low
  Q seems to be an industry-specific rather than a firm-specific

  effect. In addition, a hostile target is less likely to be run
  by a member of the founding family, and has Tower officer
  ownership, than the average firm. In contrast, a target of a
  friendly acquisitions is smaller and younger than an average
  Fortune 500 firm, and has comparable Tobin's Qs and most other
  financial characteristics. Friendly targets are more likely to
  be run by a member o the foUnding family, and have higher
  officer ownership, than the average firm. The decision of a CEO
  with a large stake and/or with a relationship to a founder to
  retire often precipitates a friendly acquisition.
        These results suggest that the motive for a takeover often
  determines its mood. Thus disciplinary takeovers are more often
  hostile, and synergistic ones are more often friendly.


Randall Horck                Andrei Shleifer            Robert W. Vishny
Department of Finance        Department of Economics    Graduate School of
4—12D                        Princeton University         Business
Faculty of Business          Princeton, NJ 08544        University of Chicago
University of Alberta                                   iioi East 58th Street
Edmonton, Alberta                                       Chicago, IL 60637
CANADA
     Economic analysis has identified two broad classes of takeovers. The
first is what we call disciplinary takeovers, the purpose of which seems to
be to correct non-value-maximizing (NVM) practices of managers of the target
firms. Such practices    might include excessive growth and diversification,

lavish consumption   of perquisites, overpayment to employees and suppliers, or
debt-avoidance   to secure a quiet life. Disciplinary takeovers thus address

the problem of what Williamson (1.965) has called discretionary behavior by

managers, and Jensen (1986) has christened "free cash flows."    Because

disciplinary takeovers are designed to replace or change the policies of

managers who do not maximize shareholder value, the actual merger of the two

firms is not really essential. The takeover is only the most effective way

to change control and with it the target's operating strategy.

     The second class of takeovers can be loosely called synergistic, since

the motivating force behind them is the possibility of benefits from

combining the businesses of two finns. Synergy gains can come from increases

in market power, from offsetting profits of one firm with tax loss

carryforwards of the other, from combining R & D labs or marketing networks,

or from simply eliminating functions that are common to the two firms. The

combination of the two businesses is thus essential for realizing the gains

in synergistic takeovers.

     It is important to note from the start that the gains in synergistic

takeovers could well be gains for the managers as much as for shareholders.

For example, when managers launch diversification programs, they may be

creating no value for shareholders, but only satisfying their own preferences

for growth. The point nonetheless remains that the acquiror is seeking a
                                      2

combination of the operations or cash flows of the two firms and not an

improvement of the target. This would not be the case in disciplinary

takeovers.

     This paper attempts to verify the conjecture that disciplinary takeovers

are more often hostile, and synergistic takeovers are more often friendly.

We assemble evidence showing that targets of hostile and friendly bids have

ownership and asset characteristics that one would expect of the targets of

disciplinary and synergistic takeovers, respectively. We interpret this

evidence as showing that, at least to some extent, the motive for a takeover

determines its mood.

     The claim that hostility and friendliness typically reflect two

different takeover motives is by no means clearcut. Some diversification-

motivated takeovers undoubtedly run into resistance from managers of target

firms, who are unhappy either with expected changes in operations or with the

compensation they get for giving up control.   Similarly, some takeovers

launched in order to change the target's operating strategy proceed with the

consent of target managers who obtain lucrative enough rewards to give up

control peacefully, or else simply want to retire. These grey areas suggest

the possibility that the variation in the monetary incentives of managers

across target firms can completely account for mood differences from

acquisition to acquisition. Walkling and Long (1984) appear to take this

view. In contrast, we show that there are numerous characteristics, in

addition to measures of financial incentives of their managers, that differ

across hostile and friendly targets. Moreover, these are the differences one

would expect to find between targets of disciplinary and of synergistic

takeovers.
                                           3

     The analysis of this paper is based on the sample of all publicly traded
Fortune 500 firms     as   of 1980. Of the 454 firms in the sample, 82 have been
acquired   by third parties    or went through a management buyout (MBO) in   the

period   1981-1985.    Based on an examination of the Wall Street Journal Index,

40 of those appear to have started hostile and 42 friendly. We call an

acquisition hostile if the initial bid for the target (which need not be a

bid from the eventual acquiror) was neither negotiated with its board prior

to being made nor accepted by the board as made. Thus initial rejection by

the target's board is taken as evidence of the bidder's hostility, as is

active management resistance to the bid, escape to a white knight, or a

management buyout in response to unsolicited pressure. We sort acquisitions

on the basis of the initial mood because we are interested in the source of

the takeover gains that sparked the bidding in the first place. Targets that

are not classified as hostile are called friendly.

     The remaining sections of the paper etamine ownership and financial

characteristics of our Fortune 500 sample. Section 2 focuses on the

ownership characteristics of friendly and hostile targets. Friendly targets

appear to have much higher board ownership than either hostile targets or the

rest of the sample, and in particular much higher ownership by the top

officers. Compared to an average firm in the sample, a friendly target is

much more likely, and a hostile target much less likely, to be run by a

founder or a member of the founder's family. Furthermore, the probability of

an acquisition, and particularly of a friendly acquisition, rises with

management ownership. In fact, intentional exit of the founding family or of

a CEO with a very large stake is a frequent impetus for a friendly

acquisition in our sample. Although the results on ownership identify some
                                       4

clear differences between hostile and friendly targets, they do not suggest a

clear link between the motive for a takeover and its mood.

    Section 3 examines the asset and performance characteristics of the

sample. The results suggest that targets of friendly acquisitions have

comparable Tobin's Qs to those of non-targets, but that hostile targets have

lower Qs. Hostile targets not only have low Qs within their industries but

are concentrated in low Q industries. Friendly targets are younger and faster

growing than hostile targets and are basically indistinguishable from the

sample as a   whole in tens of performance variables.
     These results are the basic evidence consistent with our conjecture that
synergistic takeovers are more likely to be friendly and   disciplinary

takeovers are more likely to be hostile. Hostile targets appear to be poorly
performing   firms, as we would expect of candidates for disciplinary
takeovers. In contrast, it seems less likely that match-specific attractions
of synergistic targets would be easily captured by basic performance
measures.
     Section   4 presents probits of the effects of firm characteristics   on the
probability   of its hostile or friendly acquisition. The results confirm that

a firm with a low market value relative to the amount of fixed assets it

holds is more likely to become a hostile target than the average firm. This

appears to be accounted for by an industry effect, and not by a particularly

low valuation within an industry. Controlling for size, top officer

ownership and Q, we find that the presence of the founding family reduces the

likelihood of hostile bids, but does not raise that of friendly bids. Large

management stakes, on the other hand, do more to encourage friendly

acquisitions than to discourage hostile ones.
                                         5

        Section 5 takes a separate look at management buyouts. These deals

deserve special attention because they cannot be motivated by synergistic

gains. We define hostile MBOs as deals done in response to a third party bid

or 13-D filing with an expression of intent to seek control. Friendly NEOs

then are transactions in which such pressure is not apparent. Because our

sample   of MBOs is quite small, accurate statistical inference is impossible
and all we do is eyeball the data. Except for the fact that leveraged
buyouts are, on average,   much smaller transactions, differences between

friendly    and hostile MBOs largely mimic the differences between friendly and
hostile acquisitions more generally. The external pressure that prompts
defensive   MBOs seems likely to be an attempt to discipline the management.

Friendly MZOs, however, seem more likely to be done for tax reasons or

possibly to buy undervalued shares.

     We interpret this study as furnishing some evidence consistent with the

view that hostile and friendly targets are very different types of companies.

While   targets of friendly bids appear to be a wide range of firms in many
industries, hostile targets are usually older, slowly growing firi,is that are
valued much below the replacement cost of their tangible assets. Friendly

acquisitions   could be motivated by corporate diversification, synergies, and,

as our results suggest, life cycle decisions of a founder or a manager with a

dominant stake. Bidders in hostile transactions may be more interested in

shutting down, selling off, or redepreciating the physical capital of the

target, than they are in continuing business as usual. In addition to

possible heterogeneity of financial incentives, resistance to takeovers may

be related to the unwillingness of target management to accept the particular

changes sought by the bidder, and often lead it to seek a white knight or an
                                                 6

1(30.   In short, the evidence is consistent with our notion that the source of

gains from a takeover can determine its mood.



        2. Ownership Structure and Acquisitions.

        In this Section, we present ownership characteristics of 1980 Fortune

500 firms that were acquired in the subsequent five years. Recent empirical

research (Demsetz and latin, 1985, Morck, Shleifer and Vishny, 1986) has

documented the incidence of substantial managerial ownership of large

industrial corporations. These studies have not, however, focused on the

ownership structure of acquisition targets, which is the task of this

section. Evidence on ownership enables us to see whether managers of non-

targets, hostile targets, and friendly targets have different financial

interests in an acquisition.

        The   relationship between management ownership and the takeover mood has
been previously examined by Walkling and Long (1984). who found managers
personal      wealth changes from a successful acquisition to be negatively

 related to the decision to resist. In our analysis, we also consider the

 impact of management ownership on the probability of an acquisition, be it

hostile or friendly, as well as the influence of the presence of a founding

 family and of the chairman of the board's age on the probability of either a

hostile or a friendly acquisition. In this way, we hope to obtain a more

 complete picture of the function of managers' financial incentives in

 takeovers.

        Throughout this   analysis,   we   try   to   avoid sample selection problems and
 to   this end begin with all publicly traded 1980 Fortune 500 firms (Walkling

 and Long might have had some sample selection problems since they report
                                              7

implausibly high initial stakes of acquirors - -       11   and 27 percent for

contested and uncdntested offers, respectively). Also, since we are

interested in differences between firms, we try to get away from cyclical

variation   and compare all firms as of 1980. In the case of ownership, data
come from the 1980 Corporate Data Exchange directory, which contains data on
ownership   positions of board members as well as large outside shareholders.

We do not have data on executive compensation, or on the ownership positions

taking the form of options; many studies (e.g., Murphy, 1985) indicate that

executive wealth changes from stock ownership are large relative to those

from other sources.

      The first measure of ownership we use is the combined percentage stake

of   the board of directors. Because of the nature of CDE        reporting, the
stakes   are added   up   over only   those board members whose positions exceed .2%.

This may lead to some problems for the largest firms, where even the tiniest

percentage ownership positions are worth millions of dollars.

      To the extent that the board makes the decision as to whether to resist

an offer, the board's stake may be the appropriate measure of financial

incentives.   In addition to this measure, we divide the board ownership into
that of the top two officers and that of the rest of the board. The first
captures   the interest of the top officers whose concern for the outcome of a

bid might go well beyond their personal capital gain, and the second captures

the interest of important decision-makers who might care little about the

outcome of a bid except for their personal financial gain. These two

measures complement the board's stake in that they reflect the pecuniary gain

of the two constituencies on the board with possibly different attitudes to

the acquisition.
                                        8

       Other personal characteristics of the management team might influence
their attitude to being acquired independent of their ownership stake.
First, top officers who are founders or members of the founding family might
play   a special rote in the company, either because they command the loyalty

of shareholders and employees, or because their attachment to the company is

more than just financial. For this reason, it seemed useful to ask which

fraction of friendly and hostile takeover targets were run by a member of the

founding family. This is of particular interest in the context of executive

succession, since sale of the company might be a natural, means for a

founder's retirement. For a similar reason, we are interested in the age of

the chairman, since his retirement plans might influence his attitude toward

the sale of his company.

       Recall that an acquisition is called hostile if it was not negotiated

prior to the initial bid, was not accepted by the board from the start, or

was contested by the target management in any way. This category thus

includes acquisitions by white knights. It also includes management buyouts

that were precipitated by a bid or a 13-D filing expressing the intent to

acquire control, since such pressure is clearly hostile (Shleifer and Vishny,

1986). Our calling a target hostile whenever there is any evidence of the

board's rejection of the initial offer may misclassify as hostile some

situations in which the board is only attempting to obtain a higher bid.

Because there are only three transactions in our sample where resistance was

limited simply to a rejection of the first offer, we proceed using this

classification. Also, our classification records a transaction as friendly

either if there is no evidence of resistance from the target management to

the first prospective acquiror or if the management implemented an 1430 and we
                                          9

have no evidence of a hostile threat. Again, the classification is far from

perfect given that target management may      have   been coerced into going along

in the face of imminent defeat.

       Although Section 5 presents some evidence to the effect that it is

appropriate to include hostile and friendly 2(BOs into the general samples of

hostile and friendly transactions, we try     to   be cautious and present many of

the results both including and excluding }tBOs       from the samples of targets.
Unless specifically noted, our discussion will concern the results for the

case where management buyouts are included.

       Table LA presents the means and medians of various ownership variables

for different groups of companies, and Table lB gives t-statistics for tests

of the differences of means between these groups. In the whole sample, the

board of directors owns on average 10.9% of the company; 6.3% is the average

stake of the top two officers and 4.5% is the average stake of the rest of

the board. Not surprisingly, ownership positions are skewed to the right:

the medians for the above three measures are 3.54%, .61% and 1.09%

respectively. One way to describe the magnitude of these stakes is that the

average value of the top officers' position is $40.5 million and the median

is $2.26 million. Almost a quarter of the companies in the sample are run by

members of the founding families, and the average chairman of the board is a

youthful 58 years old.

       From the viewpoint of ownership, friendly targets are very different

both from the sample and from hostile targets. Boards of friendly targets

own   over   20% of the company, on average, which is statistically significantly

higher than either the 10.9% average board ownership in the sample,       or   the

8.3% average of hostile targets. Hostile targets have on average lower board
         TABLE is: Characteristics of Top Management By Acquisition Type




                                                              Friendly     Hostile
                               Sarle     Friendly   Hostile   Non-MED      Non-MBO


Founding Family       Mean      .244        .405      .100      .412         .0938
Present on Top
Management Team — 1   Median      0           0        0          0           0

Fractional Equity     Mean      .109        .208      .0829     .136         .0874
Ownership By The
Board of Directors    Median    .0354       .135      .0418     .0894        .0382

Fractional Equity     Mean      .0635       .145      .0318     .1.39        .0364
Ownership By Top
Two Officers          Median    .0061       .0176     .0049     .0139        .0044


Fractional Equity     Mean      .0455       .0625     .0512     .0464        .0510
Ownership By The
Rest of the Board     Median    .0109       .0172     .0233     .0152        .0227


Age of Chmn.          Mean       58.4       58.7      57.1      58.5         55.3
                      Median      59         57        58         57         57.5


Dollar Value of       Mean       40.05     83.75      9.22     60.79        11.23
Top Officers Stake
  (in millions)       Median      2.26      6.02       .795     4.22         1.11
                   TABLE is: T-Statistics for Tests    of Equality of Means of
                       Top    Management Variables by Acquisition Type


                                             Friendly Hostile
                      Friendly     Hostile   Non-MED   Non-MED   Friendly Friendly Non-laO
                         vs.        vs.        vs.       vs.       vs.            vs.
                      Sanole        Sanle     SaDie     Samole    Hostile Hostile Non-MO

Founding Family        2.55          -2.23     2.37      -2.06      3.33         3.12
Present on Top
Management Team — 1


Fractional Equity      4.42          -1.11     3.03      -.811      3.28         2.26
Ownership By The
Board of Directors

Fractional Equity      4.20          -1.56     3.45      -1.18      3.33         2.55
Ownership By Top
Two Officers

Fractional Equity      1.27          .415     .0611       .358      .559         - .23
Ownership By The
Rest of the Board

Age of Chmn.           .217        -1.13      .0481      -2.28      .742         1.34


Dollar Value of        1.55        -1.25       .667      -1.04      2.03         1.60
Top Officers' Stake
  (in millions)
                                        10

ownership    than the whole sample, although this difference is not

statistically significant. The higher board ownership of friendly targets

comes from higher ownership of the top officers. In fact, stakes of outside

board members do not seem to be much different from either those in hostile

targets or in the whole sample. At the 15% confidence level, hostile targets

seem to have lower top officer ownership than does an average firm. The

difference in officer positions is even more dramatic if one looks at dollar

values of the stake, where the average for a friendly target is twice that

for the sample as a whole, and nine times that for a hostile target. All

these results come through in the medians as well, although not as

dramatically.

     The    incidence of the presence of a founder is also very high in friendly
targets, showing up as an impressive 40%. This is statistically
significantly higher than the 24% average for the sample as a whole and the
10% average for hostile targets. The incidence of the presence of a founder

in hostile targets is low relative to the sample, with a t-statistic of

-2.23. There does not seem to be any significant difference in the age of

the chairman or in the outside board ownership between    the whole sample and
friendly    and hostile targets. However, when MBOs are not classified as

acquisitions, we find that the chairmen of hostile targets are slightly

younger than the average chairman in the sample, perhaps suggesting that the

younger managers are more likely to strike a favorable deal with a white

knight or fight harder to remain independent,    while the older managers more
often rely   on the MBO as a takeover defense.

    Before interpreting these results, we should explicitly acknowledge that

the means we compute are only intended to be suggestive, since in their
                                         11
calculation we do not control for important differences between firms. For
example, firms   with   very small ownership are larger firiis that are less
likely   to be acquired. Without a multivariate anatysis, some of the

correlations we describe might be spurious. We deal with these issues in

Section 4, but meanwhile proceed as if the evidence was indicative of the

causal relationship between ownership and takeovers.

     One interpretation of the results presented so far is that management

teams with strong financial incentives to accept a tender offer at a premium

do not resist. This is supported by the fact that boards of friendly targets

have higher stakes and boards of hostile targets have lower stakes than the

sample average. Moreover, the entire difference is basically accounted for

by differential ownership of the top officers. Since officers have more to

lose as a result of an acquisition than do other board members, looking at

top officers rather than whole boards may be more powerful in explaining the

adopted resistance strategy.

     An alternative interpretation of the findings on friendly offers is that

management teams with very large ownership have close to a veto power over

the outcome of the bid, and that therefore the only acquisitions with large

management ownership we observe are friendly. This is corroborated by the

fact that firms where founders are present are more likely to be the targets

of friendly bids, since founders might have a stronger preference for control

as well as a better ability to resist. The two interpretations are not, of

course, incompatible. Companies might be targets of friendly offers both

because managers have a large incentive to succumb and because if they chose

not to. the offer could not succeed.

    The latter view suggests that a number of would-be hostile offers end up
                                          12

as friendly offers because of the necessity to bribe entrenched managers. It

does not, however, explain a higher incidence of total acquisitions among

high ownership firms that we find in the data, table 2k presents the numbers

and probabilities of various types of acquisitions for firms with special

ownership structures, and Table 2B provides some hypothesis tests. Table 2k

shows that, whereas the probability of a non-MBO acquisition within five

years is 14.5% in the sample, it is 19.7% if the officer stake exceeds 15%.

If tthOs   are   included, the probability that a firm   with   over 15% officer

ownership gets acquired exceeds that for a firm with under 15% ownership by

11%, with a t-statistic of 2.11. That large stakes invite bids suggests that

the managers' incentive to sell is probably an operative factor in the

observed pattern of takeover activity.

     The reason why companies with very large officer ownership have a higher

likelihood of being acquired is that they have a much higher likelihood of a

friendly bid. The probability that a firm with at least 15% top officer

ownership was acquired in a friendly non-NBO transaction is 15.2% versus 6.2%

for firms with officer ownership below 15%. This difference between high and

tow ownership firms is significant at the 1% level (t—2.57). On the other

hand, the probability of a non-MED acquisition initiated in a hostile manner

is 4.5% for high ownership firms versus 7.4% for firms with less than 15% top

officer ownership, wbich is not statistically significant.

     These results suggest the possibility that the ownership structure of

some firms makes them especially attractive targets of friendly takeovers.

For example, if a top officer with a large equity stake wants to retire and

simultaneously take some of his wealth out of the firm, he would probably

prefer selling out at a premium to a diversification-minded acquiror to the
                           TABLE   2*:   Acquisition Activity by Ownership Category


                                                                                                 Probability
                   Total                                Number of   Number QE   Probability of       of
                  Naber    of   Number of   Number of   Friendly    Hostile       Non-M8O         Hostile
                   Firms        Friendly    Hostile     Non—MW      Non-MOO     Acquisition       Non-MOO


Founding Pa.ijy     111             17          4          14          3              .153           .027
   Present


Founding Fa.ily     343            25          36          20         29              .143           .085
   Absent


Top Officers'        66            15           3          10         3               .197           .045
Stake Greater
Than 15 Percent


Entire Sample       454            42          40         34         33               .146          .010
     TABLE 2B: Differences Between Acquisition Probabilities For
                Various Ownership Categories. T-Statistics for Tests
                of EquaLity of Acquisition Probabilities in Parentheses



                                                      All          Non-MBO
                                                  Acauisitions   Acquisitions


Probability of         -
                           Probability   of          -   .0690      -   .0575
Hostile Acquisition        Hostile Acquisition       (-2.23)        (-2.06)
Founder — 1                Founder — 0


Probability of         -
                           Probability   of          .0803          .0678
Friendly Acquisition       Friendly Acquisition      (2.55)         (2.37)
Founder — 1                Founder — 0


Probability of         -
                           Probability of            .0114          .0103
My Acquisition             Any Acquisition           (.270)         (.27)
Founder — 1                Founder — 0


Probability of         -
                           Probability   of          -   .0499      -   .0293
Hostile Acquisition        Hostile Acquisition       (-1.32)        (- .858)
OFF > .15                  0FF S .15


Probability of         -
                           Probability of            .1571          .0896
Friendly Acquisition       Friendly Acquisition      (4.16)         (2.57)
OFF > .15                  0FF S .15


Probability of         -
                           Probability   of          .1078          .0604
Any Acquisition            Any Acquisition           (2.11)         (1.29)
OFF > .15                  OFFS .15
                                        13

option of selling his shares on the open market. Life-cycle decisions of the

officers might provide a stimulus for friendly bids.

       Further evidence on this point comes from the results on founders.

Table 2A shows that the probability of any acquisition of a firm run by the

founding family is not much different from that of an average company in the

sample. The likelihood of a friendly bid, however, is much higher for

founders' firms, and that of a hostile bid is much lower. For the entire

sample, the probability of a hostile non-MBO acquisition is 7.0% and the

probability of a friendly non-MBO acquisition is 7.5%. For firms run by

founding families, in contrast the likelihood of a friendly bid is 12.6% and

that of a hostile bid is 2.7%. The probability of a friendly bid is

statistically significantly higher for firms with founding families than for

firms without (t—2.37), and the probability of a hostile bid is significantly

lower (t—-2.06). If founders can effectively deter hostile bids, and end up

selling their firms when they intend to leave the business, such results

might be expected.

       A final piece of statistical evidence that corroborates the top

management exit story concerns the age of the chairman. While the average

chairman in our sample is 58.4 years old, and the average chairman of a firm

with   a founding family at the helm is 59.7 the average chairman in firms
                                             •


that   are run by the founding family     are sold to a friendly acquiror is

62.6 years old. These findings are consistent with the notion that founders

selling off their finns before retirement should on average be older.

       Ax examination of the stories of individual companies confirms the

statistical evidence. A coimnon story C   e.g.,   ABC, Becaoan Instruments, Clark

Oil, and others) is an elderly founder wishing to sell the business before he
                                     14

retires. In fact, of the fourteen founder firms that were acquired by another

party in a friendly transaction, one was the case of bankruptcy, one of need

to get money to pay inheritance taxes, one of a super-manager merging into a

larger firm to get a bigger job, and the rest of founders or of their

families wishing to get out.

      If an important part of friendly acquisitions is just a personal hf e-

cycle decision of top management, then it is natural to ask how can high

takeover premia be paid in such transactions. One possibility is

mismanagement under the founder's reign; e.g., insufficient risk-taking,

insufficient expansion in order to maintain high fractional equity ownership,

or just poor decision-making. In this case, the founder's exit is

accompanied by a disciplinary takeover. An alternative possibility is that

the takeover is synergistic, but that the desire of managers to run their own

show often precludes such cDuibinations. The founder's wish to get out

provides the impetus for realizing the already available gains. Some

evidence shedding light on these two possibilities is presented in Section 3.



     3. Financial Characteristics of the Targets.

     The financial motivation of target management is unlikely to be the only

factor entering into the decision to oppose a tender offer. Some

acquisitions might be done for reasons that management particularly dislikes,

such as its own replacement or the liquidation of the firm. In this section,

we pursue such possible heterogeneity of acquisition targets.

     The starting point of our analysis is Tobin's Q. As the ratio of the

market value of the finn to the replacement cost of its tanRible assets,

Tobin's Q can be viewed as measuring the intangible assets of the firm.
                                          15

These may include future growth opportunities, monopoly power, quality of

management, goodwill, rents appropriated away from unions, etc. Since we are

looking at the measured Q, this interpretation can be problematic. The

replacement cost of assets could be overstated, for example, if the firm

bought its assets a long time ago and their value depreciated significantly

due to technological progress, foreign competition, or other changes. In

these cases, the inflation-adjusted historical cost is a poor guide to the

true replacement cost, but a very low Q is probably still a reliable

indicator of a declining firm.

       Alternatively, Q might just capture the mispricing by the stock market

of the firm's physical assets in their current use. If, however, a low Q

genuinely measures the low valuation of tangible assets in their current use,

it may pay to sell off assets when Q is low because those assets have a

higher value in another firm or sector. Even when the firm's capital is

highly firm- or sector-specific, it may pay to just abandon the unprofitable

capacity or insist on a reduction in union wages that were set under more

profitable conditions.

       A related measure of profitability relative to the value of physical

assets is the deviation of a firm's Q from the average Q of its 3-digit SIC

code   industry. The market might   attach low value to assets of the whole

industry, and it could attach an even lower value to the assets of a
particular firm within tbat industry. If it does the latter, then we must
look   at the firm's idiosyncratic characteristics, such as its management, as

a source of potential acquisition gains.

       Tobin's Q can shed light on the hypothesis that hostile acquisitions are

essentially purchases of old physical assets that can be redeployed more
                                        16

profitably either from an efficiency or tax   viewpoint.   If a low Q reflects

low valuation of physical assets relative to their potential, then acquiring

this finn might be a cost-effective way to buy and redeploy its physical

capital. In the same vein, we look at the age of the firm, which might give

us an idea of the age of its capital. Apart from serving as an indicator of

a declining firm, the age of the capital stock is a proxy for the potential

for a step up in the basis from which this capital can be redepreciated.

From the tax viewpoint, acquiring older assets is more advantageous; Shlelfer

and Vishny (1986) show how such tax considerations can be important in t4BOs.

     Since Tobin's Q might be mismeasured, we are also interested in other

potential measures of the firm's performance. In particular, we look at a

10-year growth rate of the firms labor force, GL. If Q and CL are

simultaneously low, we feel more confident in attributing low valuation to

past or current troubles rather than to mismeasurement or market mispricing.

      In two effective papers, Michael Jensen (1986a, l986b) has proposed a

free cash flow theory of low stock market valuation of targets of hostile

takeovers. On his theory, because some firms waste shareholders' wealth on

unprofitable investments and managerial perquisites, eliminating this waste

can create shareholder value. An example of wasted free cash flows, proposed

by Jensen and by Jacobs (1986), is exploration activity in the oil industry

that did not slow down in the face of declining oil prices. Jensen suggests

that interest and dividend payments alleviate the problem of free cash flow.

In this regard, he points to the role of debt as a means to commit future

corporate revenues to being paid out.

     Strictly speaking Jensen's theory requires controlling for a variety of

aspects of the firm's opportunity set to be properly tested. We nevertheless
                                        17

check what fraction of their earnings non-targets, hostile targets, and

friendly   targets allocate to dividends, interest payments and investment. The
question is whether higher payouts and lower investment preclude hostile
action.
      Another important strand in the discussion of corporate acquisitions
argues that capital market imperfections can deter otherwise feasible
transactions. A firm with a large market value could be difficult to
acquire, especially without the    cooperation of   its management, because
financial markets might be unable to supply the credit necessary for the
acquisition. This view attributes the lively hostile takeover activity of
the   19&Os at least in part to the appearance of junk bond financing. Looking

at market values of acquired firms should thus enable us to appraise the

extent to which capital market imperfections matter. Not surprisingly, all.

types of targets have fewer assets and lower market values than do firms that

are not acquired, indicating that capital market imperfections might deter

some corporate control transactions. Because market value is correlated both

with Q and management ownership, we defer more discussion of this issue to

the multivariate analysis section.

      The means and   medians of the variables of   interest by the type   of   firm

are presented in Table 3A, with the t-tests of differences of means in Table

38. Recall that all the variables are measured at the beginning of 1980.

The average Q of the sample is .848, which is the standard result of the low

valuation of corporate assets by the stock market in 1980. The average

Tobin's Q of a friendly target is .796, which   is   not significantly below the

sample average. In contrast, the average tobins Q of a hostile target is

only .524. which is significantly below .848 (t—-2.84). A similar pattern
                  TABLE 3k: 1980 Asset and Financial Characteristics
                            oE Sample and Acquired       Fins

                                                                             Friendly      Hostile
                                    Sanle        Friendly Hostile            Non-MB0       Non-MBa

Q                        Mean            .848          .796          .524          .774          .545
                         Median          .645          .617          .452          .624          .461



Q-Industry Q             Mean             0           .0163      -   .113     -   .0368      -   .119
                         Median     -   .0304     -   .0662      -   .112     -   .0794      -   .115


Replacement Cost         Mean       2772.6        1372.0        1947.5        1534.6        2237.1
                         Median          1055      747.7         791.4         843.1         960.6


Growth Rate of           Mean           .0272         .0258      .0137            .0270      .0140
  Labor Force            Median         .0199         .0183      .00948           .0232      .00948


Year of Incorporation Mean              1918.3        1924.6    1911.9            1924.6    1914.9
                      Median             1920          1925      1913              1925          1916


Total Market Value       Mean           2092.6         969.8    1009.1            1028.4    1181.1
                         Median          808.2         683.2     384.2             732.0     387.8


Investment/Income        Mean             .704          .651         .576           .687          .588
                         Median           .640          .522         .579           .629          .609



Dividends/Income         Mean             .183          .158          .178          .162          .176
                         Median           .175          .151          .176          .151          .172



Interest/Income          Mean             .193          .246          .219          .254          .232
                         Median           .175          .261          .211          .269          .223


Value of                 Mean             .248          .285         .330           .269         .335
Long-Term/Total          Median           .208          .228         .267           .213         .299
 Debt     Market Value
             TABLE 35: T-Statistics For Tots of Equality of Means of
                        Asset and Financial Variables by Acquisition Type



                                          Friendly Hostile
                    Friendly    Hostile Non-MW Non-MW Hostile               Hostile Non-MW
                          vs.    vs.            vs.        vs.       vs.                 vs.
                     Snole      Samole Samole         Samole Friendly       Friendly Ron-MBO


Q                    -   .360    -2.84     -.664      -2.36      -2.66           -2.19

Q-Industry Q             .163    -1.43     - .337     -1.34      -1.72           -1.39

Replacement Cost     -1.13       - .840    -   .914   - .485         .641            .656

Growth Rate of       -   .148    -1.54     - .0191    -1.37      -1.02           -   .985
Labor   Force


Year of                  1.97    -1.92         1.78   -   .922   -2.78           -2.02
Incorporation


Total Mkt. Value     -1.19      -1.46      -1.04      -1.09      .0866               .285


Investment/Income - .701        -1.86      -.204      -1.57      -   .818            -   .96


Dividends/Income     -1.26      -.318      -   .938   -   .354       .966            .624


Interest/Income          2.07    1.14          2.18       1.56   -   .804       -    .622


Value of            .864         2.45          .460       2.31       .646            .859
Long-Term/Total Mkt.
 Debt      Value
                                        18

emerges   in the medians.

     Unfortunately, a variety of interpretations are consistent with this

result. The first possibility is that hostile targets are mismanaged and

therefore have low Tobin's Qs. The result of such mismanagement is the

inefficient utilization of the fixed assets of the firm, and the resulting

low valuation of these assets by the market. Removing such management might

Justify the takeover premium, although the managers would probably resist

since they do not want to lose control or to have their incompetence

revealed. Managers of friendly targets, in contrast, are safe, and do not

need to worry about being removed.

     Mismanagement   can come in two forms.   It can be a firm-specific or an

industry-wide   phenomenon. In the former case, what should matter for
hostility is the extent by   which the firm underperforms similar firms. To

some extent, this difference is measured     by Q   -
                                                        Industry Q.   In   fact, the
mean of Q - Industry Q is positive for friendly targets and negative for

hostile ones, with the difference significant at the 10% level (t—l.72). On

the other hand, the differences are much smaller in the medians. To ascertain

whether the industry or the firm effect is more important in predicting

hostile activity, the next section presents some probits.

     An alternative interpretation of extremely low Tobin Qs of hostile firms

is that, while the assets are managed properly, they simply are not

particularly valuable. For example, if hostile targets have invested a long

time ago when their industry was growing, but now the fortunes of their

industry have turned around, they will be stuck with a lot of capital. Under

this scenario, hostile targets might be smokestacks ruined by technological

progress and foreign competition.
                                          19

     Consistent with this view, hostile targets are older and slower growing

than the average firm in the sample. The difference in year of incorporation

between hostile targets and other firms is over six years, and is significant

at the 6% level. The difference in the growth rates of the labor force is

1.4% (or almost twofold), which is significant at the 12% level.        Friendly

targets, in contrast, are younger than the average firm and are growing at

roughly   the same rate.
     Although this view suggests why firms with a lot of old fixed capital
would have low Qs, it does not explain why these firms are attractive
candidates for hostile acquisitions. One explanation is the free cash flow

theory. If low Q industries are in decline, managers may be too slow to

close down or sell-off plants1 abort investment, and trim down operations.

There is some evidence that hostile targets are investing a smaller fraction

of earnings than the average firm in the sample (t—-l.86).

     If managers' dedication to the survival of organizations, stressed by

Donaldson and Lorsch (1983), keeps them from shrinking their operations

sufficiently fast, then acquirors can increase value by speeding up the

decline   of the target company.   Our numbers   on growth of the labor force,
incorporation year. investment, and Q are all consistent with the version of
the free cash flow theory that stresses management's tendency to disinvest
too slowly.

     Another reason why old tangible assets could attract acquirors has to do

with taxes. An important feature of the (old) US tax code is        the General
Utilities   doctrine, according to which if a firm's assets are sold in a

liquidation, then capital gains taxes can be avoided at the corporate level.

After such an acquisition, the target's assets can be redepreciated,
                                     20

presumably using the accelerated schedules of the 1980's. The step-up in

basis could have been an important tax motivation for acquiring old capital.

In addition of course, there are tax gains in acquisitions due to leverage.

While these apply equally to firms without too much fixed capital, it may be

more costly for such firms to obtain debt financing. If managers oppose a

loss of control to an acquiror, they can lever up and step up the basis by

doing an IthO or finding a white knight. These in fact have been common

responses to hostile pressure.

     One final explanation for hostile offers that is consistent with our

findings is underpricing by the market. If the stock market does not value

some firms properly, an acquiror who understands their intrinsic value may be

able to buy assets more cheaply on the stock market than on the new or used

capital goods market. Managers reluctant to give up assets at below their

intrinsic worth would resist such acquisitions. One problem with this

explanation of hostile bids is that it says nothing as to why older, slower

growing companies with mostly tangible assets are the only ones undervalued

on the stock market. Moreover, since once a company is in play the corporate

control market becomes very competitive and a lot of information is revealed,

there definitely are limitations on the ability of acquirors to profit in

this way.

     In summary, hostile targets appear to have sharply distinguishable asset

characteristics. Relative to the market value of the firm, they appear to

have a lot of old tangible capital. They are growing slowly and have a lot

of debt. While this suggests that hostile acquisitions might be related to

the desire to purchase these fixed assets, there are a variety of

explanations consistent with this general story. In particular, incompetent
                                           21

management, asset redeployment, free cash flow, taxes and underpricing of the
firm's assets by the market could all invite takeover bids. At the same
time,   think that the evidence is supportive of the notion that hostile
         we

takeovers are motivated by the need of disciplinary action against the target
management.
        The analysis of this section said virtually nothing about the targets of

friendly bids. Except for the fact that they are on average smaller and six

years younger than the rest of the sample (t-statistics of -1.13 and -1.97

respectively), friendly targets are very similar to the average firm in the

sample. Most notably, their Q is not statistically or substantively

different from that of the average fins in the sample, and is significantly

higher than Q of an average hostile target (t—2.66). In a sense, this is

consistent with the view that friendly targets are just regular firms, and

their acquisition derives from some idiosyncratic circumstances such as a

life cycle decision of a top officer with a large stake, or a match-specific

synergy ( e.g. •     the desire of the acquiring management to enter a particular
new business). One interesting feature of friendly targets is that they

appear to have higher interest payouts and lower dividend payouts than an

average    firm             perhaps indicating that they are starved for
                  in the sample,

capital. Their total outside payouts are very similar to those of an average
firm.
        The results of this section provide the basic evidence in support of the

notion that disciplinary takeovers are more often hostile, while synergistic

takeovers are more often friendly. The evidence indicates that hostile

targets   are older, poorly performing firms, possibly with a lot of old plants
or equipment that should be abandoned or more profitably deployed elsewhere.
                                           22

This   is exactly what one would expect of targets of disciplinary   takeovers.
In   contrast, financial characteristics of friendly targets do not   appear   to

be very different from those of an average firm in the sample. If what

attracts acquirors to such targets are match-specific synergies (as well as

the target manager's interest in selling), we would not expect     to see any
real   differences in the basic financial variables. In short, the results

suggest that the motive for a takeover might well determine its mood.

Treating hostile and friendly acquisitions as reflecting the same underlying

fundamentals     might be very   misleading indeed.



       4.    Probits.
       The   previous section has offered evidence suggesting that the motives
for hostile and friendly acquisitions might be different. In this section,
we perform some further statistical tests of what makes a firm the target of

a friendly takeover and what makes a firm the target of a hostile takeover.

This is different from asking what makes the mood of a takeover of an already

selected target hostile or friendly, since the latter question presumes that

characteristics that make firms targets in the first place are the same

acrossmoods. If hostile and friendly takeovers typically reflect different
motives, it is misleading to think of a firm becoming a general target.
Rather,     separate considerations are appropriate for predicting which firms

are subject to hostile (i.e., disciplinary) takeovers and which are subject

to friendly (i.e., synergistic) ones.

       Accordingly, this section presents probits estimated on the whole sample

of 1980 Fortune 500 firms, that separately predict hostile and friendly

acquisitions. The models are either prob(hostile vs anything else) —
                                          23

f(characteristics), or prob(friendly vs anything else) —     g(characteristics).
In short, we    separately   compare hostile and friendly targets to the rest of
the   Fortune 500 sample.
       We do a multivariate analysis because many of the    company
characteristics    we look at are correlated with each other. For example, the

growth rate of the finn's labor force is so closely correlated with Q that it

becomes dominated by Q in the regressions. While we have run several

additional probits to identify the separate sources of influence of firm

characteristics on the probability of a friendly acquisition and the

probability of a hostile acquisition, the results presented below reflect our

main findings.

      Table 4A presents the four probits estimating the likelihood that a

Fortune 500 firm goes through a successful friendly acquisition. Mimicking

ourearlier finding that friendly targets are just like the sample as a
whole, the probits do not reveal particularly strong correlations.
Specifically,    the probability of a friendly acquisition is not clearly

related to the log of the firm's market value, the presence of a founder, or

Tobin's Q. That high market value does not deter friendly acquisitions is

inconsistent    with the preliminary indications from Table 3A. This could be
because size is negatively correlated with officer     ownership which is, in

turn, positively related to     friendly bids. In this case, the finding in Table
3A is spurious. Given that friendly bids are often made by large, cash-rich

companies and sometimes for stock, it is not entirely surprising that capital

market constraints are not particularly binding.

      When friendly laOs are included among acquired firms, there is some

evidence that large officer ownership promotes friendly acquisitions. This
               TABLE 4k:   Probit Regressions of Friendly Acquisition
                           Dummies on Ownership and Financial Variables


                                                       Dependent Variable


                                                                Friendly                   Friendly
                      Friendly        —   Friendly         —
                                                                Non-th0            —   1   Non-MBO       —1
                      Acquisition         Acquisition           Acquisition                Acquisition


Intercept                   -1.33             -1.29                    -1.57                 -1.60
                           (-1.81)           (-1.70)               (-1.86)                  (-1.90)

Log of Total               - .0583           -   .0632             -   .0195                - .0213
Market Value               (-.490)           (- .561)              (- .150)                 (- .170)

Founding Family             - .130              .129
                                                 -                     -   .155              -   .162
Present — 1                (- .339)          (- .337)              (-      .361)            (-   .373)


Proportion of                1.54                 1.51                     1.18                  1.20
Equity Owned                (1.60)               (1.48)                (1.09)                (1.09)
by Top Officers


Q                          .00289                                  - .0574
                           (.0103)                                 (- .187)




Q-Industry Q                                     .0556                                       -   .102
                                                 (.140)                                     (-.158)



Number of Firms               371                    371                    371                  371
in Regression




Note:   t-statistics in parentheses
                                           24

result gets weaker when NBOs are excluded, since, as we show in the next

section,   firms   going through friendly MBOs often have dominant management

ownership. We should also point out, however, that the ownership results are
generally   weaker in   the probits than in the earlier tables,   because we lose a

substantial number of observations due to missing values for Q. We        have Q
for only 20 friendly targets and 31 hostile targets.

       The result that as far as assets and performance go, friendly targets

are Just like other firms, is confirmed using both Q and Q -       Industry   Q.

Neither Q nor Q -     Industry   Q mattered for predicting friendly acquisitions.

These negative results are consistent with the notion that friendly takeovers

are   motivated by synergy.
        The story is very different with hostile acquisitions, the probits for
which   are presented in Table 4B. For the sample including hostile MBOs, the

likelihood of a hostile acquisition is negatively related to the log of

value, negatively related to Q, and negatively related (at the 15% confidence

level) to the presence of a founder. Surprisingly, the negative effect of

officer ownership on the probability of a hostile acquisition is not

statistically   significant.
      The result that, controlling for Q' high market value deters hostile

acquisitions, seems likely to reflect capital market imperfections. It

suggests that some firms are too large to be acquired through a hostile bid,

even when fundamentals dictate that they should be. This result becomes

substantially weaker when hostile MBOs are excluded from the sample of

hostile targets, since these are very small firms. In fact, MZOs are

probably the best case for the argument that poor capital markets limit large

transactions.      The results in Table 4B also confirm our earlier finding that
            TABLE 43: Probit tegrsssions of Hostils Acquisition
                      Dummies on Otmsrship and Financial Variable.

                                                   Dependent Variable


                                                                 Hostile               Hostile
                     Hostile         —   Hostile         —   1   Non-MBO       —   1   Non-MW —      1
                     Acquisition         Acquisition             Acquisition           Acquisition




Intercept                   .506               .511                 -   .123             -   .147
                        (.864)                (.882)               (-.195)              (-.231)



Log of Total            -   .182              -   .269              -   .115             -   .188
Market Value           (-1.91)               (-3.11)               (-1.17)              (-2.03)



Founding Family             - .751            - .748                -   .606             -   .623
Present — 1             (-1.56)              (-1.72)               (-1.28)              (-1.46)

Proportion of               -1.31             -1.29                - .878                - .843
Equity Owned            (-   .816)           (- .843)             (- .555)              (- .556)
by Top Officers


Q                           -.827                                  -.722
                        (-1.96)                                   (-1.66)



Q-Industry Q                                  - .219                                     -   .268
                                             (- .492)                                   (- .557)




Number of Firms               371                 371                   371                  371
in Regression




Note: t-statistics in parentheses
                                               25

hostile targets have low market valuations relative to tangible assets, and
that the presence of a founder discourages hostile action, holdint officer
stake azid valuation constant. This suggests that founders or their families
fight hostile bids more effectively, either because they value control more
or    because they command shareholders' or directors' support.

        One impørtant question that we could not answer by simply comparing

means is whether industry-specific or firm-specific components of Tobin's Q

are attracting hostile activity. In our estimated probits, Tobin's Q has a

significant negative effect on the likelihood of a hostile acquisition,

whereas Q -       Industry   Q has an insignificant negative effect. The log

likelihoods for the two equations are also quite different, with the Q

equation higher by 3.37. Furthermore, when Q and Q -            Industry   Q are

simultaneously included in the probit, Q remains significant while

Q -    Industry   Q hardly has any additional effect on the probability of a

hostile acqusition. It appears that industry-specific rather than firm

specific problems attract hostile bids.

        Viewed in the context of the mismanagement story, this finding says that

hostile activity is stimulated by industry wide and not company specific

mismanagement. For example, it would suggest that the whole oil industry

fell into the exploration trap, and not so much that Gulf Oil was a

particularly overzealous explorer. The finding that, in predicting hostile

action, Q matters while Q -         Industry   Q does not, may indicate the existence

of entire industries whose assets can be profitably redeployed either for

efficiency or tax reasons. As further examples, many steel and textile firms

might be in need of shutdowns and selloffs that do violence to the

preferences of existing managers. Such managers are not necessarily Just
                                         26

trying to shirk or save empires. They may just be opposed to changes that

enrich shareholders at the expense of employees. The point is that hostile

acquisitions can be a way to move large quantities of fixed capital into more

profitable (and possibly also more productive) uses, as one would expect of

disciplinary takeovers.

      While the statistical evidence is fairly weak, it is consistent with our

observation that the motive for friendly acquisitions is more likely to be

synergistic whereas for hostile ones it is more likely to be disciplinary.

Specifically, friendly acquisitions seem to be related to high officer

ownership, which suggests that an important impetus for such acquisitions

might be a life-cycle decision of a large shareholder. Furthermore, all

other basic firm characteristics we have looked at appear to be irrelevant

for predicting friendly acquisitions. We might expect this of synergistic or

diversification-oriented takeovers. Hostile bids, in contrast, seem to be

targeted at firms located in low Q    industries.   One interpretation of the low

Q   finding   is that hostile acquisitions are a way to redeploy tangible assets

in a more profitable way. Many of these redeployments can either be

unacceptable to managers (e.g., liquidation, employee dismissals), or can be

more painlessly replicated by a white knight or in an 1(50 (    e.g.,   step-up in

depreciable basis, increases in leverage). This, of course, is the story of

the disciplinary motive for hostile takeovers.




       5. Management Buyouts.

      Management buyouts are important to think about since we know that the

motive behind them cannot be synergistic. Whatever gains realized by MEO

organizers must come eitber from a more profitable exploitation of the fino's
                                         27

own resources,   including its managerial talent, or from the ability of

organizers to buy the firm's assets for less than their intrinsic worth under

the existing operating strategy.

       Schipper and Smith (1986), Shleifer and Vishny (1986). and Kaplan (1987)

discuss the sources of gains in management buyouts. All of these authors

found that tax   considerations,   especially leveraging up and step up in the

basis, could justify a large part of the takeover premium. Kaplan estimates

that   80% of the takeover preuitwn can come from the tax savings. Other
important candidates for the source of gains include buying underpriced
assets, improved incentives from higtter management ownership and leverage,
and   the restructuring of declining companies along the lines sought by

raiders.

       Hence, it is important to distinguish between two types of management

buyouts. The first are the buyouts that respond to hostile pressure on the

target's management. Such pressure can either take the form of An outside

bid, or simply of an acquisition of a beachhead along with a 13-D filing to

the   effect that control might be   sought. The fact that     managers   and their

investment   banker partners can win the bidding for the finn in such
situations   suggests that the gains from     an   acquisition can be realized by

them as well as by outside bidders. If these gains come from tax          savings   or

buying underpriced assets, this result is not surprising. But it also seems

likely that after an I4BO managers redeploy the target's assets in better

uses. Managers may   have   been unwilling to implement these changes before

being forced to make a defensive bid for the firm at a large premium.

       Besides these hostile management buyouts, there are transactions

initiated by the management without any apparent outsidethreat. We call
                                           28

them friendly $JOs. One of the motives for friendly MBOs may be the exit

story we developed for friendly deals more generally. In this case, the MW

can be a way for a dominant CEO to pass the leadership to the next generation

of managers without     dissipating   control. Another motive for friendly MBOs

may Just be to realize tax gains from leverage and stepping up the

depreciable basis of the firm's assets. While another oft-cited motive for

MEOs is   to improve incentives through increased management ownership, this
seems less plausible for our sample of friendly MBOs given that management
ownership is already quite high.
   A final motive for friendly MEOs that may be inportant, is for
management to buy the share of the firm's assets they do not already own for
less than its true value (either under the existing operating strategy or
under   a new one). Of course, this story requires that management have some

ability to freeze out minority shareholders once it takes over, so that it

can get shareholders to tender for less than the true value of their shares.

Also, the story presumes that competitive bidding from third parties will            not
drive   the profit from this strategy to zero. But both of these requirements
seem likely to be met in many     cases where managers have much better

information      than outsiders about the true value of the firm and management
already owns a good deal of the stock (as in our sample of friendly MBOs).
        Of the   sixteen MBOs in our sample of 82 acquisitions. S   are   hostile in
the sense described above and the other 8 are friendly. Table S           presents

ownership    and financial characteristics of   these   MEOs. Comparing this table
with    Tables là and 3A, we see that hostile fiGs share many of the features of

other hostile transactions. They have very low Qs, low growth rates, low

investment, large amounts of debt, and relatively low board and officer
              TABLE 5:   Ownership and Financial   Characteristics
                         for Management Buyouts

                               Samole     Friendly NW        Hostile MBO


Founding Family Present          .244         .375                   .125
Present On top
Management Team —    1

Fractional Equity               .0636         .170                  .0135
Ownership By Top
Two Officers
Fractional Equity               .0454         .131                  .0517
Ownership By The
Rest of the Board
Age   of Cbinn.                 58.4          59.8                   62.5


Q                                .848         .916                   .436



Q-Industry Q                        0         .318              -   .0873


Replacement Cost               2772.6        450.3                  740.5


Growth Rate of                  .0272        .0205                  .0119
 Labor Force

Year of Incorporation         1918.3        1924.3             1898.4


Total Market Value             2092.6        638.1                  292.1


Investment/Income                .704         .456                   .499



Dividends/Income                 .183         .136                   .185


Interest/Income                  .193         .204                   .135


Value of
Long-Term/total Market           .248         .373                   .310
 Debt        Value
                                         29

ownership. The average year of incorporation for a hostile MBO target is a

strikingly low 1898. These companies are much smaller than run of the mill

hostile targets, and have lower incidence of a founder's presence. Our

examination   of particular instances of hostile MBOs confirms the observation
that   they are often acquisitions of old tangible assets, that can be

subsequently redeployed more profitably or redepreciated. The picture of

hostile MBOs that emerges is consistent with their being a defensive response

to the threat of a disciplinary takeover.

       Friendly MBOs are a very different type of transaction, and it is much

less clear how they compare with other friendly deals. Friendly ZIBOs are

management-initiated deals that are not foiled by higher third party bids.

Not surprisingly, 37.5% of these firms are run by the founding family, and

the average pre-PthO board stake is over 30%.

       Given that officers in friendly MBOs often have virtually complete

cQntrol of the company, their motives for the transaction may     be   suspect.

Purchasing undervalued shares in the presence of coercion and disadvantaged

competitive bidders seems like a distinct possibility. Consider two cases in

our sample. One is an 1430 of Metromedia at a 100% premium, which was

followed   by the sale   of the parts of the company (previously dictatorially

run by the same boss for 30 years) for more than double the acquisition price

within 18 months. Another is the MBO of Beatrice foods, followed by the sale

of several divisions that paid for the whole acquisition (Beatrice, however,

did not have dominant insider ownership). There are other companies where

management initiated an MB0 when its voting control was already effectively

absolute, such as Levi-Strauss and Questor.

       In sum, while we do not have a clear idea of how friendly MBOs relate to
                                           30

other friendly acquisitions, our consolidation of hostile l1EOs with other

hostile acquisitions does not seem to do too much violence to the data.

Firms going through MBOs in response to hostile threats resemble other

hostile targets quite closely. In fact, we can use our kiiowledge of hostile

MBOs to make inferences about hostile takeovers more generally.



       6. Concluding Comments.

       The notion developed in this paper is that the motive for a takeover can

have a large influence on its mood. Disciplinary takeovers are more likely

to be hostile, whereas synergistic takeovers are more likely to be friendly.

       Compared to the universe of Fortune 500 firms, hostile targets are

smaller,    older, more slowly growing,   have lower 'lobin's Qs, more debt, and

invest less of their income. The low Q      seems   to be an industry specific
rather than a firm     specific   effect. In addition, hostile targets are less
likely    to be run by   the founding family, and have lower officer ownership,
than   the average firm. Low Q,     low market value, low growth and investment,
and   the absence of a founder    are the characteristics of a firm that   are most
likely to make    it  the target of a hostile bid.
       Compared   to the universe of Fortune 500 firms, friendly targets are
smaller and younger, but     have comparable Tobin's Qs and growth rates.

Friendly   targets are more likely to be run by a member of the founding
family, and   have   higher officer ownership, than the average firm.    The

decision of a CEO with a large stake and/or with a relationship to the
founder    to retire often precipitates a friendly acquisition. High officer

ownership is the most important attribute in predicting friendly

acquisitions.
                                       31

    We conclude that differences between synergistic and     disciplinary

takeovers, captured in part by differences in their moods,   should   be

recognized in empirical work. Specifically, studies that fail to adequately
distinguish acquisitions with different motives can be misleading. First,
difficulties can arise when disciplinary and synergistic takeovers are
analyzed   together, presenting the researcher with a mix that may have few

canon characteristics. Our results suggest that, as a first cut, separating

hostile and friendly takeovers can help deal with this problem. A second

difficulty can occur when facts about one type of acquisition are used to

draw inferences about another. An example of a good study that could be

misread is Brown and Medoff's 1987 paper. The authors find that in a large

sample of small Michigan companies, employment and wages rise after they are

acquired. Since most of their sample seems to consist of friendly

acquisitions of very small firms with high management ownership, one cannot

conclude from their work that employment and wages do not fall on average

after a firm is acquired in a disciplinary takeover. To get at the latter

question, one would have to look at hostile targets. A key implication of

our study for future work, therefore, is that results for friendly bids may

have little to say about hostile bids, and vice versa.
                                          32

                                    References

Brown, Charles and James Medoff, "The Effects of Firm Acquisitions on Labor

     Demand," forthcoming in A.J. Auerbach, ed., Corporate Takeovers: Causes

    and Consequences, 1987.

Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn, "The Structure of Corporate Ownership:

     Causes and Consequences," Journal of Political Economy, December 1985,

     pp. 1155-1177.

Donaldson, Cordon and Jay W. Lorsch, Decision Makinz at the Too, New York:

     Basic   Books, 1983.

Jacobs, E. Allen, "The Agency Costs of Corporate Control," MIT

     Working Paper, 1986.

Jensen, Michael C., "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and

     Takeovers1" Merican Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1986,

     pp. 323-329.

Jensen, Michael C., "The Takeover Controversy: Analysis and Evidence,"

     Harvard Business School Working Paper 9-786-001. october 1986.

Kaplan, Steven, "Management Buyouts: Thoughts and Evidence," Mimeo, 1987.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, "Management Ownership

     and Market Valuation: An Empirical Analysis," Mimeo, 1986.

Murphy,   Kevin .1.,   "Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An

     Empirical    Analysis," Journal of Accountin2 and Economics, April 1985,
     pp. 11-42.
Palepu, Krishna C.,      "Predicting Takeover Targets: A Methodological and

   Empirical   Analysis." Journal of Accountinc   and Economics, Vol. 8,
     1986,   pp. 3-35.

Schipper, Katharine and Abbie Smith, "Corporate Income Tax Effects of
                                         33

     Management Buyouts,' Mimeo, Univ. of Chicago, July, 1986.
Shleifer, Andrei and   Robert   V. Vishny, "Management Buyouts as a Response to

     Market Pressure," in Alan 3. Auerbach, ed., MerRers and Acquisitions,

     Chicago: University Press, 1987.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, "Value Maximization and the

   Acquisition Process," Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming,

     1987.

Walkling, Ralph A. and Michael S. Long, "Agency Theory, Managerial Welfare,

     and Takeover Bid Resistance," Rand Journal of Economics, Spring 1984,

     pp. 54-68.
