                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ENERGY EFFICIENCY STANDARDS ARE MORE REGRESSIVE THAN ENERGY TAXES:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                        Arik Levinson

                                      Working Paper 22956
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22956


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




I am grateful to the Sloan Foundation for financial support, to Duncan Hobbs, Grady Killeen, and
Mark Noll for research assistance, and to Sarah Aldy, Axel Anderson, Karen Palmer, Hilary
Sigman, and members of the NBER Environment and Energy Economics group for especially
helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Energy Efficiency Standards Are More Regressive Than Energy Taxes: Theory and Evidence
Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 22956
December 2016
JEL No. H23

                                          ABSTRACT

Economists promote energy taxes as cost-effective. But policymakers raise concerns about their
regressivity, or disproportional burden on poorer families, preferring to set energy efficiency
standards instead. I first show that in theory, regulations targeting energy efficiency are more
regressive than energy taxes, not less. I then provide an example in the context of automotive fuel
consumption in the United States: taxing gas would be less regressive than regulating the fuel
economy of cars if the two policies are compared on a revenue-equivalent basis.


Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
aml6@georgetown.edu
           Energy Efficiency Standards Are More Regressive Than Energy Taxes:
                                        Theory and Evidence


        For nearly 100 years, economists have been explaining that a pollution tax would reduce
environmental damage in the least costly way.1 But that advice is almost never followed. Instead,
environmental regulations typically rely on technology or performance standards. In the United
States, rather than a cost-effective carbon tax to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, we rely on
energy efficiency standards. Rather than a gasoline tax, we set fuel economy standards for cars.
       A recurring concern about pollution taxes is that they would be regressive. Lower-income
households spend a relatively larger proportion of their incomes on energy and goods whose
production uses energy, and as a result they would pay a disproportionate share of any tax on the
carbon content of electricity or fuel.2
        That basic argument can be seen in Figure 1, which plots annual household gasoline use
by income, from the 2009 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS).3 The poorest 5 percent of
households use 247 gallons of gas per year, on average. The richest 22 percent, with incomes
over ten times higher, each use about four times as much. A $0.29 per gallon gas tax—one
estimate of the monetized climate damage from gasoline—would cost poor households $71
dollars per year and rich households $286. (This assumes no change in behavior in response to
the tax, which is typical of these analyses but defeats its purpose.) Families with more than ten
times the income would pay only four times the tax, and thus a gas tax would be regressive. So
even though an energy tax would reduce energy use in the most cost-effective way, opponents
raise distributional concerns.
        But until now, no studies have asked the obvious follow-up question. Would an energy
tax be more or less regressive than the energy efficiency standards used instead? If an energy tax
would be more regressive, a case might be made to forgo the tax’s cost-effectiveness in exchange
for the efficiency standard’s distributional benefits. But if the energy tax would be less
regressive, that case collapses.
        After making a few preliminary points in Section 1, I begin in Section 2 by describing the
tradeoff between taxes and standards in theory, in a static, two-good model, with no uncertainty

1
  The idea dates to Pigou (1920). There is now even a “Pigou Club” Wikipedia page listing economists
and politicians who support the idea (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pigou_Club).
2
  For bipartisan examples see Bill Chameides, “Is the conservative-friendly carbon tax a regressive flat
tax in disguise?” The Huffington Post, May 25, 2011; and “Who pays for cap and trade?” The Wall Street
Journal, March 9, 2009. For recent examples see Mark Paul, Anders Fremsted, and James K. Boyce,
“Can markets solve climate change?” The Nation, April 12, 2016; and Dan Wilson and Kyle England,
“Initiative 732’s Carbon Tax Hurts Families,” The Spokesman-Review September 24, 2016. For a more
academic example see Grainger and Kolstad (2010), which documents the regressivity of a broad-based
carbon tax.
3
  The 2009 NHTS is the latest survey available. The 2016 NHTS is being collected now. For details see
http://nhts.ornl.gov.
                                                   1
or discounting, where consumers differ only by income. Perhaps surprisingly, even this simple
framework generates a stark result: an energy tax would be both more cost-effective and less
regressive.
        I then turn in Section 3 to an empirical application using automobiles and corporate
average fuel economy (CAFE) standards, with data from the 2009 NHTS. The choice of
automobiles as an example stems from the fact that cars are the one energy-using durable with
readily available data on energy input, gallons of gasoline used. I show that in practice the
theoretical result from Section 2 is borne out: a gasoline tax would be less regressive than a
revenue-equivalent efficiency regulation. Moreover, the footprint-based CAFE standards adopted
by the United States in 2011 have exacerbated the regressivity of US fuel economy standards,
making them approximately as regressive as an equal-sized lump-sum tax per household.
        Pieces of these results have been noted by others. Since economists first began studying
energy efficiency, researchers have observed that lower-income households purchase less
efficient appliances and vehicles, sacrificing higher future energy costs for lower current
appliance costs. Hausman (1979) attributed that choice to liquidity constraints. Others have
described behavioral explanations, such as present bias (Allcott and Mullainathan, 2010) and
heterogeneity in discount rates (Newell and Siikamäki, 2015). But in the model I outline, even
rational consumers differing only in their incomes choose energy-using appliances and vehicles
with different levels of fixed costs and efficiency, and poorer households choose the low-fixed-
cost, high-variable-cost models. As a consequence, either of the two policies under
consideration—taxes or standards—make poor households worse off. But the burden of energy
taxes falls relatively less on poor households than the burden of efficiency standards.
        Researchers also have compared CAFE standards to gas taxes on efficiency grounds.
Austin and Dinan (2005) estimate that a gas tax would cost 58 to 71 percent less than the CAFE
standards, per gallon of fuel saved. More recently Jacobsen (2013) finds that the CAFE standards
cost three to ten times as much as a gasoline tax, per ton of carbon dioxide avoided. So efficiency
standards are, ironically, inefficient. That is easy to show in my simpler model as well.
        A few researchers have analyzed CAFE standards on distributional grounds. Jacobsen
(2013) shows that in the long run, welfare losses for the poorest households are twice that of the
wealthiest, per dollar of income, and that therefore the CAFE standards are regressive. Davis and
Knittel (2016) use nationally representative data on car registrations to show the same thing:
CAFE standards disproportionately burden lower-income households.
        Existing work by others has thus demonstrated three things: energy taxes like carbon and
gas taxes are regressive; energy taxes are more cost-effective than energy efficiency standards;
and efficiency standards are also regressive. Until now what has not been shown is whether
energy efficiency standards are less or more regressive than an energy tax would be. If efficiency
standards are less regressive, their extra costs might be worth the distributional benefits. If
efficiency standards are more regressive, then energy taxes are both more efficient and more
equitable. Answering that question is the goal of this paper: which policy is more regressive,
energy taxes or efficiency standards?

                                                2
        One other current paper does pose a question similar to the one I pose here, though it’s
not the main focus: Davis and Knittel (2016). That paper has one major advantage over the
approach I take, in that it uses comprehensive data on all vehicle registrations in the United
States in 2012, including rich data about those cars’ characteristics. The tradeoff is vehicles can
only be matched with demographic information at the level of the US census tract in which the
vehicle was registered, not at the level of the individual house. In particular, that paper cannot
measure two key inputs necessary to compare the distributional effects of gas taxes and CAFE
standards: how many cars each household owns, and how much gas those households use. For
that reason, I rely on the NHTS. Though it is only a survey, and only covers one year, 2009, it
does contain all the necessary information: household income, characteristics of the vehicles
owned by the household, and gasoline consumption.
        Before describing the model and empirics, I need to be clear about four points. First, I
focus on the “static” incidence of taxes throughout, ignoring the demand response that is the
intended result of the policies. Second, critical to any calculation of tax incidence is what
happens to the tax revenue. Third, energy efficiency standards can be treated analytically as
equivalent to a tax on inefficient appliances or vehicles; and fourth, to study the incidence of
energy efficiency, I need to take sides in the “energy paradox” debate. Readers not concerned
about those clarifications can skip to the theoretical model in Section 2, and readers who only
want the main empirical results can go straight to Section 3.


1. Preliminary Points
       Energy efficiency regulations come in two broad categories. Most, like appliance
standards and building codes, set minimum thresholds for efficiency. Underperforming
appliances cannot be sold and substandard buildings cannot be constructed. The distributional
consequences of these bans on inefficient products seems self-evident. If rich people buy the
banned inefficient products the ban is progressive; if poor people buy them the ban is regressive.
Those distributional outcomes are simple to show empirically, and I will return to them in the
empirical analysis in Section 3.
        A second type of efficiency regulation raises the price of inefficient goods. One example
is the CAFE standards that have regulated automobiles in the United States since 1978 and in
Europe since 2009. These types of price-based standards can be compared directly to energy
taxes using graphs like Figure 1. To make the comparison, I need to raise four preliminary
points.
Static Incidence
         First, the distributional effect that I describe here is the “static” incidence of the energy
tax, a straightforward calculation based on pre-tax consumption. Figure 1 provides an example:
poor households spend a larger fraction of their incomes on gasoline and therefore are assumed
to bear a larger fraction of the economic burden of a tax on gasoline. To know the true economic
incidence—measured by equivalent or compensating variation—we would need to know the

                                                  3
price and income elasticities of demand for energy by each income group, and the supply
elasticities of energy and energy efficient cars and appliances. If the welfare loss to each group
from a tax on a particular good is proportional to the group’s pre-tax consumption of that good,
then this static incidence will be a good measure of the true economic incidence. Grainger and
Kolstad (2010) call this a “first-order” estimate of the incidence.
Revenue Matters
        Second, critical to the distributional effects of either an energy tax or an efficiency
standard is whether it raises revenue and how that revenue is spent. To see why that matters, take
the $0.29 gas tax as an example.4 The key to the tax’s cost-effectiveness is the $0.29 per gallon
opportunity cost of driving. But that $0.29 per gallon cost could be achieved by nearly identical
policies with vastly different distributional consequences, merely by changing the fiscal policy
associated with the tax revenues.
        On the simplest level, from examining Figure 1, a $0.29 per gallon gasoline tax would be
regressive, costing poor families $71 dollars per year and rich families $286, a $215 difference.
Rich families pay four times the gas tax even as they earn over ten times the income.
       But suppose we divided up the the total tax revenue evenly among all households, as a
lump-sum rebate. If Figure 1 represents all US households, each would receive a check for $212.
The poorest group would pay $71 each in gas taxes and come out ahead by $141. The richest
group would pay $286 each in gas taxes for a net loss of $74. Unlike the tax alone, this rebate
policy would be progressive.
        Or consider the alternative of subsidizing gas conservation at $0.29 per gallon. Give
every household an imaginary allotment of, say, 991 gallons of gasoline per year, the amount
used by the richest 23 percent of households in 2009. Then pay each household a $0.29 subsidy
for each of those 991 gallons not consumed. Looking again at Figure 1, with no change in
behavior, rich families would get nothing, while the poorest families would receive a check for
$215.5
        From a cost-effectiveness perspective, the three policies are the same. Drivers would face
the same $0.29 opportunity cost per gallon, providing exactly the same cost-effective incentive
to conserve.6 But the policies have very different distributional consequences for reasons
unrelated to their cost-effectiveness or environmental efficacy. While the $0.29 gas tax raises
revenue, disproportionately from poor households, the $0.29 the subsidy disburses funds,

4
  The official US social cost of carbon is $36 per ton in 2015, with future damages discounted at 3
percent. Because burning one gallon of gasoline releases 17.68 pounds of carbon, the carbon tax on
gasoline would be about $0.29 per gallon ($36/ton × 1/2204.6 tons/lb × 17.68 lbs/gallon). See
https://www3.epa.gov/climatechange/EPAactivities/economics/scc.html for the social cost of carbon, and
http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=307&t=11 for carbon per gallon of gasoline. This ignores other
externalities from driving: local air pollution, congestion, and accidents. The exact tax rate doesn’t matter,
however, as it only serves as an example here.
5
  $215= $0.29×(991-247).
6
  This ignores income effects on driving and on the decision to own a car.
                                                      4
disproportionately to poor households. Unless we know how the tax revenues will be spent or the
subsidy funds raised, we cannot assess their distributional consequences. In my theorectical and
empirical examples to follow, I take care to compare taxes and standards with equivalent
financing.
Efficiency Standards Are Equivalent to Inefficiency Taxes
        A related point is that energy efficiency standards are economically equivalent to a tax on
inefficient appliances or vehicles. For example, an equivalent tax on air conditioners would be
levied on the unit’s watt-hours of electric power used to create one British thermal unit (BTU) of
cooling. For vehicles, a tax would be levied on the car’s gallons per mile (gpm), the inverse of
the common miles per gallon (mpg) measure of efficiency.
        In the case of automobiles, CAFE has the same cost-effectiveness at the margin as an
outright tax on inefficient cars with high gpm or a pure subsidy to low-gpm cars (setting aside
the revenue consequences, per the previous section). Appendix 1 demonstrates that result in a
partial equilibrium model based on Kwoka (1983). Anderson and Sallee (2016) and Gillingham
(2013) similarly model the CAFE standard as a “feebate”—a set of taxes and subsidies based on
the fuel economy of the vehicle rather than on actual gas consumption.
         Framing efficiency standards as taxes on inefficient appliances or vehicles makes them
easier to compare to an energy tax. Both raise revenue. The energy tax targets fuel consumption
directly. The inefficiency tax targets appliance or vehicle characteristics and could be paid either
at the time of purchase or annually as part of registration. As with an energy tax, the
distributional effects of an inefficiency tax would depend on the collection and disbursement of
the revenues. And again, it will be important to compare taxes and standards with equivalent
financing.
The Energy Paradox
        Finally, note that by describing efficiency standards as a tax on inefficient appliances or
vehicles, I am implicitly taking sides in the “energy paradox” debate. Some policy advocates
support efficiency standards on the grounds that market failures or consumer errors lead to the
purchase of less efficient appliances and vehicles than would be privately optimal. In that view,
an efficiency standard improves private welfare, even without considering the environmental
benefits. The US Department of Energy estimated that its 2011 energy efficiency standards for
refrigerators would save owners $200 over the life of the appliance.7 Similarly, the US




7
 US Department of Energy, “Department of Energy joins with manufacturers, environmentalists to
announce new efficiency standards for home refrigerators,” press release, August 26, 2011,
www.energy.gov/articles/department-energy-joins-manufacturers-environmentalists-announce-new-
efficiency-standards.
                                                 5
Department of Transportation (DOT) says that that its 2016 CAFE standards will save drivers
over $4,000 in gasoline costs, more than offsetting the higher up-front vehicle costs.8
        The case of the privately beneficial standard raises a natural question: if more energy
efficient cars would make consumers better off, why don’t consumers demand them and
manufacturers sell them without being regulated? This “energy paradox” applies to cars,
appliances, and home construction and forms the basis for an enormous amount of research.
Greene (2010) summarized that body of work for the US Environmental Protection Agency,
suggesting that for automotive fuel economy, the empirical literature is evenly divided between
studies showing that consumers do undervalue fuel savings and that they do not. Allcott and
Greenstone (2012) conclude from the literature that “it is difficult to substantiate claims” that
consumers and firms “fail to make investments that would increase utility or profits.” Recently,
several papers have added to the ranks of those finding they do not (Allcott, 2013; Busse,
Knittel, and Zettelmeyer, 2013).
        More importantly for this paper, if the regulation makes consumers better off even
ignoring the environmental benefits, then the distributional comparison with a gasoline or energy
tax becomes moot. Thus, in what follows I focus on the case where both the tax and the standard
reduce welfare. That is what recent empirical work seems to suggest, and the question of the gas
tax’s regressivity is otherwise irrelevant.


2. Energy Taxes Versus Efficiency Standards in Theory
         The model I present in this section has two aims. First, it describes the framework I use to
compare revenue-equivalent energy taxes and efficiency standards. And second, the model
shows theoretically, with the fewest possible assumptions, the result I find empirically in Section
3: efficiency standards are more regressive than energy taxes.
        Start with a representative consumer or household, with utility over two goods, x, a
numeraire good with a price of 1, and s, energy services, such as cooling, heating, refrigeration,
lighting, or miles driven. Denote efficiency as μ, energy services per unit of energy, which for
cars would be mpg. Energy services (s) are then the product of energy consumption (e) and
efficiency (μ): s=eμ.
                                        𝑈(𝑠, 𝑥) = 𝑈(𝑒𝜇, 𝑥) .                                          (1)
For air conditioners this means cooling equals kilowatt hours of electricity used times BTU per
kilowatt hour. For cars, miles is gas consumption times mpg.
       Households have income (Y) to spend on the numeraire and energy services. Rather than
purchase energy services directly, they purchase it indirectly through the cost of energy and the


8
  US Environmental Protection Agency Office of Transportation and Air Quality, “EPA and NHTSA
finalize historic national program to reduce greenhouse gases and improve fuel economy for cars and
trucks,” regulatory announcement, April 2010.
                                                   6
energy efficiency of the appliance or vehicle. More efficient appliances and cars are more
expensive, and the price of that extra efficiency is pμ.9 The household budget is
                                         𝑌 = 𝑥 + 𝑝𝑒 𝑒 + 𝑝𝜇 𝜇 .                                        (2)

For now assume that the cost of energy efficiency (𝜇) has a constant price (pμ), but I will relax
that assumption shortly.
        Figure 2 depicts the setup for two appliances. A household can purchase no energy
services and spend its entire income (Y) on the numeraire. Or it can purchase an inefficient
appliance for 𝑝𝜇 𝜇𝑖 . In that case, the cost of one unit of the energy service will be pe/𝜇𝑖 , the slope
of the solid budget line in Figure 2. Or third, the household can purchase a more expensive and
efficient appliance (𝜇 e). Then its budget in Figure 2 has a lower intercept (Y–𝑝𝜇 𝜇𝑒 ) and the
correspondingly shallower, dashed budget line with slope pe/𝜇𝑒 .
        Figure 2 transforms an intertemporal decision (pay more up front, save fuel costs later)
into a one-shot, static decision. Think of 𝑝𝑒 𝑒 as the present discounted cost of purchased energy
over the life of the durable and 𝑝𝜇 𝜇 as the up-front fixed cost of its efficiency. Alternatively,
think of 𝑝𝑒 𝑒 as annual costs and 𝑝𝜇 𝜇 as the annual amortized fixed cost of efficiency. Or even
more simply, consider the energy-using durable to be something that is leased for one period
with fixed rental cost 𝑝𝜇 𝜇 and variable costs 𝑝𝑒 𝑒.

       The household chooses e and μ to maximize utility in (1) with respect to the budget
constraint in (2), leading to two familiar looking first-order conditions:
                                                 𝑈𝑠    𝑝
                                        (i)        ⁄𝑈 = 𝑒⁄𝜇
                                                     𝑥

                                                𝑈𝑠    𝑝                                               (3)
                                       (ii)       ⁄𝑈 = 𝜇⁄𝑒 .
                                                    𝑥

The first comes from maximizing with respect to e. It just says that the marginal rate of
substitution between energy services and the numeraire should equal the cost of energy services
from purchasing more energy, for a given quantity of efficiency (μ), which is the price of energy
(pe) divided by output per unit of energy (μ). The second condition in (3) comes from
maximizing with respect to μ and indicates that same marginal rate of substitution equals the cost
of energy services from purchasing more efficiency, for a given quantity of energy (e), which is
the price of efficiency (pμ) divided by energy. Basically there are two ways to purchase an extra
unit of energy services (s). With given efficiency, μ, you can buy some more energy at price pe,
or with a given amount of energy, you can buy a more efficient appliance at price pμ.
        Now add public policies to the mix. First, a tax on energy, te raises the price of energy to
pe(1+te). That tax in turn raises the cost per unit of energy services to pe(1+te)/μ, rotating the
budget lines in Figure 2 down. Panel (a) of Figure 3 depicts such a tax.

9
 The US Department of Transportation estimates that fuel economy standards add nearly $1,000 to the
cost of a typical vehicle.
                                                    7
        Next consider an energy efficiency standard. To put the standard on the same revenue
basis as the tax, imagine the efficiency standard as an “inefficiency tax” tμ or tax on μ below
some regulated amount, 𝜇̅ . The new budget line with both taxes te and tμ added is

                               𝑌 = 𝑥 + (𝑝𝑒 + 𝑡𝑒 )𝑒 + 𝑝𝜇 𝜇 + 𝑡𝜇 (𝜇̅ − 𝜇).                             (4)
Each unit of energy efficiency, μ, costs pμ–tμ. Note that the tax on inefficiency is effectively a
subsidy for efficiency. It shifts the budget constraints down, but shifts the efficient ones down
less because they have higher μ. Panel (b) of Figure 3 depicts that inefficiency tax.
        To see how taxes on energy and inefficiency would be borne differentially by rich and
poor households, turn back to the first-order conditions in equations (3). Cross multiplying, the
two equations imply that 𝑝𝑒 𝑒 = 𝑝𝜇 𝜇. Expenditures on energy equal expenditures on efficiency,
and the ratio of e to μ is fixed at 𝑝𝜇 /𝑝𝑒 . Why? No matter the utility function in (1), energy
services are a function of the product of e and μ. This is like having a subutility function over e
and μ that is Cobb Douglas. However it decides between the two goods s and x, the household
will divide expenditures on s evenly between its two components, e and μ.
        What does that imply for the relative regressivity of energy and inefficiency taxes?
Assume energy services s is a normal good. As income increases s increases, which means the
product eμ increases. Since the ratio e/μ remains constant (from the first-order conditions in (3)),
both e and μ increase proportionately. Richer households use more energy e and purchase more
efficient appliances μ. Tax payments on energy tee will increase with income, whereas tax
payments on inefficiency 𝑡𝜇 (𝜇̅ − 𝜇) will decrease with income. An energy tax will be less
regressive than an efficiency standard.
        As an aside, note that the energy tax is also more cost-effective than the inefficiency tax,
meaning that it generates less energy savings for the same revenue and welfare change. Figure 4
depicts the scenario. An energy tax, with revenues refunded in lump sums to balance the budget,
leads to a steepening of the slope of the budget constraint and a reduction in energy services to
sA, at point A on Figure 4. An inefficiency tax with refunded revenues leads to a shallower
budget constraint and increased services sB, at point B.
        Because the budget balances at points A and B and expenditures on energy and energy
efficiency will be equal under each scenario,

                               𝑌 = 𝑥 𝐴 + 2(𝑝𝑒 + 𝑡𝑒 )𝑒 𝐴 = 𝑥 𝐵 + 2𝑝𝑒 𝑒 𝐵 ,                            (5)
where in each case I have replaced expenditures on the sum of energy and energy efficiency with
twice the expenditures on energy. Rewriting (5),

                                 𝑥 𝐴 − 𝑥 𝐵 = 2[𝑝𝑒 𝑒 𝐵 − (𝑝𝑒 + 𝑡𝑒 )𝑒 𝐴 ].                             (6)
We know that 𝑥 𝐴 > 𝑥 𝐵 because preferences are convex. As a result, the term in square brackets
on the right side of (6) is positive, or

                                        𝑝𝑒 (𝑒 𝐵 − 𝑒 𝐴 ) > 𝑡𝑒 𝑒 𝐴 ,                                   (7)


                                                    8
which means in turn that 𝑒 𝐵 > 𝑒 𝐴 so long as te>0. In other words, an energy tax reduces energy
demand more than a revenue-equivalent subsidy for efficient appliances. In theory, energy taxes
are both more cost-effective and less regressive.
       One strong assumption so far has been that the cost of energy efficiency is linear: pμμ.
That can easily be relaxed. Suppose the fixed cost of the energy-using durable is some general
function of efficiency, c(μ). Then the second first-order condition in (3) becomes
                                               𝑈𝑠     𝑐′(𝜇)⁄
                                      (ii)       ⁄𝑈 =       𝑒.                                        (8)
                                                   𝑥

Putting it together with (i) in equation (3) gives

                                             𝑝𝑒 𝑒 = 𝑐′(𝜇)𝜇 .                                          (9)

Differentiating with respect to income, Y,
                                       𝜕𝑒    𝜕𝜇
                                    𝑝𝑒 𝜕𝑌 = 𝜕𝑌 [𝑐 ′ (𝜇) + 𝑐′′(𝜇)𝜇] .                                (10)

        If 𝜕𝑒⁄𝜕𝑌 and 𝜕𝜇⁄𝜕𝑌 are both positive, then richer households consume more energy (e)
and more efficiency (μ). A tax on energy te will be less regressive than a tax on inefficient
appliances or cars tμ. Are 𝜕𝑒⁄𝜕𝑌 and 𝜕𝜇⁄𝜕𝑌 both positive? They will be if the term in brackets
in equation (10) is positive. The first term in the brackets, 𝑐′(𝜇), is positive by assumption.
(More efficient appliances cost more.) So a sufficient condition for the whole term in brackets to
be positive is that 𝑐′′(𝜇) > 0, which just means that the cost of energy efficiency is increasing in
efficiency, or convex.10 That seems intuitive. The more energy efficient an air conditioner or
vehicle, the costlier it is to make it even more efficient.
        In sum, even a simple model with few assumptions predicts that an energy tax will be
both more efficient and less regressive than an efficiency standard. All it requires is that energy
services be normal, the cost of energy efficiency be convex (or not too concave), and the
efficiency standard be framed as a revenue-equivalent tax on inefficient appliances or cars.
       The benefit of this simplification is a clear demonstration of how fuel economy choices
vary with income. Richer people spend more on fuel efficiency, face a lower cost of energy
services, and use more energy to generate those services.
       Although it is simple—simplistic even—this framework lends itself to empirical
corroboration. In practice richer households should purchase more efficient air conditioners and
vehicles, and use more electricity for air conditioning and gasoline for travel. In the next two
sections I look for those empirical patterns in the data.




10
  Technically all we really need is for 𝑐′′(𝜇)𝜇⁄𝑐′(𝜇) > −1—that is, the cost of efficiency can be concave
but not too concave.
                                                     9
3. Comparing Energy Taxes and Efficiency Standards in Practice
        The logic of Section 2 applies to any energy-using durable: cars, air conditioners,
lightbulbs, washing machines, and even entire houses. In each case, Section 2 predicts that richer
households will purchase more energy efficiency and more energy. Documenting the first is
relatively easy, but obtaining household data on energy use is difficult for most energy-using
appliances. The one exception is vehicles. The NHTS data contain information about household
incomes, the characteristics of those households’ vehicles, and how much gasoline they use
annually. So for this empirical application I focus mainly on cars and light trucks, returning to
other appliances and building codes briefly at the end.
Fuel Economy and Fuel Use in the NHTS
        The 2009 National Household Travel Survey contains demographic information for about
150,000 households and their vehicles. I drop the households with more than five vehicles or
missing incomes, and I drop cars or light trucks with missing characteristics, such as size. That
leaves 101,232 households, which own 74,348 cars and 71,246 light trucks. Descriptive statistics
about those households and their vehicles can be found in Table 1.
        Gasoline taxes do exist in the United States, but they are not designed to reduce pollution
and thus do not incorporate externalities such as the social cost of carbon. The federal gas tax has
been $0.184 per gallon since 1993, and state gas taxes vary from $0.12 to $0.52 per gallon. The
tax revenues mostly fund road construction and maintenance, so they serve more as user fees
than a deterrent to gasoline consumption or driving.
       Fuel economy regulations in the United States take the form of CAFE standards. Each
carmaker has to ensure that the sales-weighted average of the vehicles it sells in the United States
exceeds a minimum threshold mpg to avoid paying fines. Carmakers can sell cars with lower fuel
economy but only if they are offset by sales of more efficient cars so that the carmakers’ overall
averages meet the minimum. For cars, that minimum started at 18 mpg in 1978 and rose to 27.5
mpg by 1989, where it remained for the next two decades before rising again to 37.8 mpg in
2016. For light trucks like pickups and SUVs, the standards started at 17 mpg in 1979 and rose to
20 mpg by 1984. They stayed roughly constant until 2005, when they began rising to 28.8 mpg
in 2016.11
        As noted, economists have observed that the gas tax is too low and the CAFE regulations
inefficient, but distributional concerns are raised about increasing the gas tax. To compare the
distributional consequences of the two policies, we can think of the fuel economy standard as a
tax on the gpm of the vehicles owned by each household and see how its static incidence stacks
up against that of the gas tax.12


11
   The 2016 standards are averages, based on projected sales. See NHTSA, “NHTSA and EPA establish
new national program to improve fuel economy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions for passenger cars
and light trucks,” http://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/cafe/CAFE-GHG_Fact_Sheet.pdf.
12
   The model in Section 2 subsidizes mpg, or μ. Here I tax the inverse, gpm, or 1/μ, because the actual US
CAFE regulations target gpm rather than mpg. The US CAFE standards are expressed as miles per gallon
                                                    10
        Consider again the $0.29 per gallon carbon tax. Multiplying the $0.29 tax by the gallons
consumed per household in each income group, from column (3) of Table 1, yields the static
incidence of the tax, ranging from $71 per year for the poorest households to $286 for the
richest. Those figure are listed in column (1) of Table 2 and plotted as the leftmost darkly shaded
columns in Figure 5.
        To make the comparison fair, the equivalent gpm tax has to raise the same revenue as the
gas tax. That works out to $0.39 per gpm per year, or $39 per gallon per hundred miles (gphm)
to make the units simpler. The resulting static incidence of that tax is listed in column (2) of
Table 2, and plotted as the middle gray columns in Figure 5.13
       Like the gas tax, a gphm tax would be regressive. The explanation can be seen in Table 1.
Column (5) shows that cars owned by richer households tend to use more gas per mile driven.14
What’s more, column (2) shows that richer households own more cars, and fuel economy
standards impose a cost on each car owned. The total gphm per household across all cars is listed
in column (6) of Table 1. The richest households have more than ten times the income as poor
households but would pay less than three times as much in a gphm tax.
        Which is more regressive, the gas tax or the gphm tax? In this static framework, the
answer depends on whether gasoline or gphm increases more with income. Column (3) of Table
1 shows that rich households use four times more gasoline than poor households. Column (6)
shows that rich households’ cars use three times the gas per mile (in total, accounting for the fact
that they have more cars). So a gas tax would increase faster with income than a gphm tax and
would therefore be less regressive. Because the gphm tax is equivalent at the margin to the
CAFE standards, in the United States a gas tax would be less regressive than existing fuel
economy standards.
         Of course, the CAFE standard is not exactly the same as a gphm tax. An important caveat
is that as currently configured, the CAFE standard taxes inefficient cars and subsidizes efficient
ones, while a gas tax would tax all drivers. A gas tax that refunded its revenue in some way
would be fiscally equivalent to CAFE and less regressive (or more progressive).
       To see that, compare a gas tax and a gphm tax that both refund their revenues in a lump
sum. The resulting figure would look exactly like Figure 5, but each column would be shifted
down by $215, the amount of the refund check. The poorest households would end up ahead
$141 under the gas tax, but only $121 under the gphm tax. The richest households would end up
behind $74 under the gas tax, but only $47 under the gphm tax. Both policies would be

(mpg) rather than gallons per mile, so the actual standard is a harmonic average. That complicates things
needlessly. Since gpm is the inverse of mpg, the Department of Transportation takes an average of the
inverse of gpm, and then inverts the average (Fischer, 2009).
13
   Using the households in Table 1, I first calculate the revenue that would be raised by the $0.29 gas tax.
Then I divide that total revenue by the sum of all the gphm for all the vehicles, yielding the dollar tax per
gphm that would raise the same revenue, again assuming no change in behavior. The average vehicle in
the sample uses 3.98 gphm (25 mpg). A $39 per gphm tax would cost $155 per year for that vehicle.
14
   Column (5) of Table 1 reports the total gphm across all cars owned, which would be the tax base for a
gpm tax. Columns (2) and (3) report the gpm for the average car.
                                                     11
progressive, but a gas tax would be more progressive than a fuel economy standard. No matter
how we compare the two, the gas tax is less regressive or more progressive than the gphm tax, so
long as they are compared on a revenue-equivalent basis.
        But that’s not the end of the story because in 2011 the US DOT made an important
change to the CAFE regulations with significant distributional implications: adjusting for the
size, or “footprint,” of vehicles.
Footprint-Based CAFE Standards
        Before 2011, the fuel economy targets were simple averages. Each manufacturer could
meet those targets by selling more small cars, which tend to consume less gasoline per mile, and
fewer large cars, which consume more. Starting in 2011, the CAFE regulations shifted to
footprint-based standards. A vehicle’s footprint is the area under its four tires, measured in
square feet.
         The new footprint-based standards give larger cars a more lenient gphm target. A
carmaker that sells only small cars in 2016, with footprints of 41 square feet or less, must meet a
target of 2.43 gphm (41.09 mpg). A carmaker selling large cars with footprints over 56 square
feet needs only to achieve 3.23 gphm (30.96 mpg). Cars between those two extremes face a
sliding scale, with an average of 2.65 gphm (37.8 mpg) based on projected sales.15 That formula
is illustrated in Figure 6.
        Ito and Sallee (2015) suggest that the switch to footprint-based CAFE standards “might
be justified by distributional considerations.” But as can be seen in Figure 6, that depends on the
shape of the footprint formula and who buys the larger cars. The dotted line in Figure 6 plots the
projected average fuel economy for cars (not light trucks) in 2016, 2.65 gphm. Under the simple
CAFE rule that prevailed before 2011, carmakers could sell a mix of vehicles, illustrated by the
top 50 bestselling cars on the graph. But the weighted average of sales would have to equal or
fall below 2.65 gphm. As an example, General Motors could sell more Cadillacs, which cost
more than $50,000, but they would have to be offset by sales of cars like Chevrolet Sonics,
which cost under $20,000. Expensive Cadillacs would face an implicit tax (λR in Appendix 1),
and cheaper Sonics an implicit subsidy (λ).
        The solid line in Figure 6 plots the 2016 gphm target by footprint. Now large Cadillacs
meet the standard, while smaller Sonics do not. GM can now sell more noncompliant Sonics, but
they must be offset by sales of Cadillacs. The inexpensive Sonics now face the implicit tax,
while the expensive Cadillacs receive the subsidy.
         The example in Figure 6 illustrates the potential for the footprint-based standard to alter
the regressivity of the CAFE rules. If poor people disproportionately purchase cars that are
relatively inefficient for their size, like Sonics, the switch to footprint-based standards has
exacerbated the regressivity of the fuel economy standards. To see whether the example in


15
  The average is 32.7 mpg for combined cars and light trucks (US EPA and NHTSA, 2010, Table IV.E.2-
1).
                                                 12
Figure 6 applies in general, and whether the switch to footprint-based standards has in fact made
the CAFE rules more regressive, turn back to Table 1.
        Table 1 lists the average vehicle footprint by household income in column (7).16 Richer
households tend to own larger cars. Column (5) shows that those cars use more gas per mile.17
Under the old CAFE standard, all that mattered for fuel economy was column (5). Under the new
footprint-based standard, what matters is column (5) relative to column (7), which is higher for
poor households than for rich households.
       Another way to see that the Sonic–Cadillac example in Figure 6 represents a general
result—and that the 2011 switch to footprint-based standards was therefore regressive—is in
Figure 7. The typical car driven by a household in the poorest income group is both smaller and
more fuel efficient than the typical car driven by richer households.

        The next task is to measure how this switch affects the regressivity of the CAFE rules by
translating the footprint-based rule into a tax, so it can be compared on a revenue-neutral basis to
the gas tax and gphm tax in Figure 5. I start with the actual formula used by the CAFE rules for
model years 2012–16.

     Cars:                Target gphm = 𝐴 + footprint × 0.05308
                                                                                                     (11)
     Light trucks:        Target gphm = 𝐴 + footprint × 0.04546
For each square foot in a vehicle’s footprint, required fuel consumption is allowed to increase by
0.053 gphm for cars and 0.045 for light trucks. The constant, A, decreases each year as the
regulation tightens, from 0.5842 in 2012 to 0.2406 in 2016 for cars, and from 1.46 to 1.0413 for
light trucks.18
        To calculate the tax base for each vehicle, I use the difference between its fuel economy
and the target for a vehicle with its footprint. I then sum that number across all vehicles in the
2009 NHTS to find the economy-wide tax base. The units of this tax base are gphm in excess of
the target, where larger cars and light trucks have higher gphm targets. To ensure the gphm tax
raises the same revenue as the $0.29 gas tax, I divide the gas tax revenues calculated earlier by
the economy-wide footprint-based gphm tax base. That division yields a per-unit gphm tax rate
that I apply to each household.
       Tax revenues by income class for this footprint-based gphm tax are in column (3) of
Table 2. The poorest households pay more than under either the gas tax or the straight gphm tax,

16
   The CarQuery data contain cars’ wheelbase (length from front to rear tires) but not track width
(distance between left and right tires). I approximate track width based on regression estimates from the
top 100 bestselling cars and trucks. The estimates are track width (in millimeters) = 911.2 + 0.365 × width
for cars, and 799.1 + 0.502 × width for light trucks. Footprint is track width times wheelbase.
17
   In the theoretical model in Section 2, rich households purchase more energy efficiency, but here rich
households purchase less efficient cars. The difference is that in Section 2, energy-using durables differ
only in their efficiency and price. In practice, cars differ along multiple dimensions correlated with both
price and efficiency. Richer families purchase larger, faster-accelerating cars. I control for those other
vehicle features in Section 4.
18
   US EPA and NHTSA, 2010, 25612–15.
                                                    13
and the richest households pay less. To show the distinction visually, Figure 5 plots those
revenues as the third and lightest-shaded set of columns.
A Lorenz-Like Curve Comparing Energy Taxes and Efficiency Standards
        For another visual representation of the distributional consequences, see Figure 8, where I
plot lines similar to Lorenz curves but for tax revenues rather than incomes. The bottom axis
plots the share of all households, from 0 to 1, and the left axis plots the share of taxes. The 45-
degree line represents a per-household tax. Each household pays the same amount regardless of
income, so that x percent of households always pay x percent of total taxes. The 45-degree line is
the household equivalent of a head tax.
       The bottom line (with open square markers), denotes the tax shares paid by each
household under the $0.29 gas tax from Table 2 and Figure 5. It is bowed downward because
poor households pay less in gas taxes than rich households. But it still denotes a regressive tax
because a proportional income tax would be even more bowed below the 45 degree line.
        The second line (with solid circles) denotes the gphm tax from column 2 of Table 2. It is
closer to the 45-degree line, thus more regressive. The third line (with open diamonds), the
footprint-based gphm tax, essentially mirrors the 45-degree line. The footprint-based gphm tax is
as regressive as a household-level head tax.
Vehicle Age
        As Jacobsen (2013) points out, CAFE standards apply to new cars, and poor households
tend to buy used cars. As a result, poor households do bear some of the burden of the CAFE
standards but only after those new cars trickle into the used car market—and only to a
depreciated extent relative to rich households that purchase new cars. So it is worth considering
the distributional consequences of a gphm tax that is disproportionately borne by owners of
newer vehicles, even though a true gphm tax could be levied on all cars, new and used.
        I begin by assuming that the burden of the CAFE standard declines proportionally to the
price of used cars, from the National Automobile Dealers Association (NADA).19 I regress the
used car price on age and age squared and calculate weights equal to the ratio of predicted prices
for cars of each vintage to the price of new cars. The weights vary from 1.0 for new vehicles
down to 0.49 for 21-year-old vehicles.20 I then scale the gphm tax so that total tax revenues equal
those collected from a $0.29 gas tax, but where owners of older cars pay less than owners of
newer cars, proportional to the weights from the vehicle age regression. For comparison, I also
calculate a footprint-based version of that depreciation-adjusted gphm tax, again ensuring equal
total revenues.



19
  www.nada.com.
20
  I also tried assuming the gpm tax declines linearly with the age of the car, from 100 percent down to
zero for the oldest cars in the sample. That straight-line depreciation yields nearly identical results to the
price-based depreciation.
                                                      14
        The results are plotted in Figure 9. For reference, the gas tax from Figure 8 is plotted as
the dashed line with open square markers. The depreciation-adjusted gphm tax lies almost on top
of the gas tax, suggesting that even if we account for the fact that CAFE standards fall
disproportionately on largely wealthier owners of new cars, the CAFE standards are just as
regressive as the gas tax. Moreover, the footprint-based version (denoted by open diamonds) is
more regressive than the gas tax, appearing about halfway between the gas tax and a household-
level head tax represented by the 45-degree line.
        On a revenue-neutral basis, a gasoline tax would be regressive, fuel economy standards
more regressive, and the new footprint-based fuel economy standards that the United States
switched to in 2011 the most regressive of the three. Even if we skew the fuel economy standards
toward new cars, the gas tax is no more regressive than the older standards and is less regressive
than footprint-based standards. Economic theory tells us that the gas tax would be the most cost-
effective policy. This analysis suggests that it would also be the least regressive.
      The next section ties up an important loose end from the theoretical model in Section 2:
demonstrating that richer people buy more efficient vehicles, appliances, and houses.


4. Richer Households Buy More Efficient Vehicles, Appliances, and Houses
        Section 2 showed that in a simple household model, an energy tax would be less
regressive than a revenue-equivalent energy efficiency standard. That results follows from the
model because richer households purchase more energy efficient products and use them more.
Section 3 showed that in the case of cars, a gas tax would be less regressive than a flat gphm tax,
which would in turn be less regressive than a footprint-based gphm tax. This final section shows
that these results are more general, for vehicles, household appliances, and building construction.
Automobiles
        The model in Section 2 predicted that richer households would purchase more energy
efficient appliances and vehicles. But Table 1 shows that rich households drive cars that are less
fuel efficient, not more. The apparent contradiction hinges on the fact that in the theoretical
model in Section 2, appliances or vehicles differ only in their energy efficiency (μ). But in
practice, rich households’ cars are larger, heavier, accelerate faster, and differ from poor
households’ cars in many other ways that sacrifice fuel economy.
        To control for those other vehicle characteristics correlated with income and fuel
economy, I take two approaches. First, I control for all other vehicle characteristics by examining
models that come in two versions: an ordinary gasoline-powered version and a hybrid battery-
powered version. There are 5,211 such vehicles in the 2009 NHTS, in 8 different model pairs.
They are listed in Table 3. If the hybrid and gasoline versions of the vehicles are otherwise
identical, then we can compare the two without concern about other car characteristics that may
affect fuel economy.



                                                15
        Table 4 describes the differences between the hybrid and non-hybrid cars and the
households that own them. As predicted by the theory in Section 2, the hybrids are owned by
households with higher incomes. And, consistent with the model, they get better gas mileage, are
driven further each year, and cost more.
        Table 5 takes a different approach, using all the vehicles in the NHTS that could be
matched with CarQuery data on vehicle characteristics.21 I regress fuel economy (in gallons per
thousand miles to make the units sensible) on vehicle characteristics and household income.
Column (2) regresses fuel economy on just the log of household income, taken as the midpoint
of the categorical variables in the NHTS. The coefficient on income (6.78) means that richer
households’ cars consume more gasoline per mile, as noted in Table 1 and in contradiction to the
theoretical prediction. Column (3) of Table 5 regresses fuel economy on four vehicle
characteristics: engine power, length, width, and height. Each adds statistically significantly to
gallons of gas consumed per mile.
        Column (4) of Table 5 includes income and vehicle characteristics together. The
coefficient on the log of household income suggests that households with 10 percent higher
income own cars that use 0.38 fewer gallons of gasoline per thousand miles. If the car is driven
10,000 miles in a year, that adds up to only 3.8 fewer gallons of gasoline, or about $1 in
payments for a $0.29 gasoline tax.22 Richer households drive cars that are statistically
significantly more fuel efficient, but that difference is tiny.
        So although the conclusion supports the results from Section 2, the difference in
efficiency does not by itself explain the fact that a fuel economy standard would be so much
more regressive than a gasoline tax. Rather, the difference in regressivity between taxes and
standards stems from car ownership increasing less steeply with income than miles driven.
Appliances and Buildings
        The model in Section 2 has the same predictions for appliances and buildings as it has for
cars. Richer households will own more energy efficient appliances and homes and use more
energy to run them.
        Demonstrating the first part of that prediction is straightforward. Table 6 reports the
average incomes of households surveyed in the 2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey
(RECS).23 Each row lists a different household energy-efficiency characteristic, and the average
incomes and numbers of houses with and without those characteristics. For example, the average
incomes for households reporting that their homes had double or triple-paned windows” was 30
percent higher than the incomes for homes without that energy-saving feature. A mandate
requiring all homes to have double-paned windows, or a tax on homes that do not, would be
borne disproportionately by low-income households. For every one of the seven energy


21
   http://www.carqueryapi.com/
22
   A version using income categories rather than the log of income yields the same result.
23
   The RECS is collected by the US Energy Information Administration. See
www.eia.gov/consumption/residential.
                                                    16
efficiency features listed in Table 6, households with the feature have significantly higher
incomes. As predicted, income and energy efficiency are positively associated.
        The second part of the theory—that richer households will use more energy in those
appliances and homes—is more difficult to assess. No data tell us how many loads of laundry or
dishes were washed by the Energy Star appliances, or how much light was cast by the compact
fluorescent bulbs, let alone the energy services (s in the model) provided by the double-paned
windows. So although we can tell from Table 6 that an energy efficiency mandate or tax would
be regressive, directly comparing that to an energy tax is not possible without data on appliance-
specific energy use.


5. Discussion
       Pigou demonstrated in 1920 that a pollution tax would be the most cost-effective means
of reducing pollution. That attribute—cost-effectiveness—should appeal to environmentalists
worried about climate change. And it should also appeal to those concerned about the costs
associated with tackling climate change. But in the nearly 100 years since Pigou, there have been
almost no examples of pollution taxes.
        Arguments against carbon taxes to combat climate change often invoke their
distributional consequences. In the United States, we have mostly relied on energy efficiency
standards rather than energy taxes, without ever making the direct distributional comparison. We
know energy or pollution taxes are cost-effective and regressive, and we know energy efficiency
standards are less cost-effective. But are efficiency standards also less regressive? If they are,
some might view that efficiency-equity tradeoff as worthwhile.
        To answer this question, I demonstrate three ideas. First, it is easy to write down a
simple, static, two-good, representative household model in which an energy tax is less
regressive than an energy efficiency standard. The only underlying assumptions are that energy
services are normal, the efficiency standard is representable by a tax on inefficient vehicles or
appliances, and the cost of efficiency is convex, or at least not too concave. As a consequence,
we should not be surprised to learn that empirically, energy taxes are both more cost-effective
and more progressive than efficiency standards. There is no efficiency–equity tradeoff.
        Second, in the particular case of the US automobile market, a gasoline tax would be less
regressive than a revenue-equivalent fuel economy standard empirically. The key is the phrase
“revenue equivalent.” Current CAFE standards do not raise government revenue and are not
directly comparable to a gasoline tax. To evaluate the two, I compare a gasoline tax to a tax on
inefficient vehicles that raises the same revenue. The gas tax is less regressive. A plausible
counterargument might claim that redistribution is politically feasible through fuel economy
standards, where the transfers are hidden in the prices of efficient and inefficient cars sold to rich
and poor households. But that argument lies in the realm of politics, outside of economics.
        The relative regressivity of US CAFE standards was exacerbated by the 2011 change to
footprint-based targets. The change reduced the advantage poorer households had as a

                                                 17
consequence of their purchasing smaller cars. So not only would a gasoline tax be less regressive
than a revenue-equivalent fuel economy regulation, both would be less regressive than the
footprint-based fuel economy regulations promulgated since 2011.

        The third idea I demonstrate is that the simple model outlined in Section 2, in which an
energy tax would be less regressive than an energy efficiency standard, is supported across a
wide array of home appliances and home building construction. A regulation that targets
inefficient appliances and homes will cost rich households less because they are already
purchasing the efficient versions of those goods.

        In sum, it is true that an energy tax would be regressive, in a static model like Figure 1, if
the tax would be borne by income groups in proportion to their pre-tax consumption levels, and
if we ignore what happens to the revenue. But it is also true that a revenue-equivalent energy
efficiency standard would be even more regressive. So the fact that carbon taxes are regressive
does not stand up as a coherent argument for supporting energy efficiency standards in their
place.




                                                  18
References
Allcott, Hunt. 2011. Consumers’ perceptions and misperceptions of energy costs. American
       Economic Review 101(3): 98–104.
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. The welfare effects of misperceived product costs: data and calibrations
       from the automobile market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(3): 30–66.
Allcott, Hunt, and Michael Greenstone. 2012. Is there an energy efficiency gap? Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 26(1): 3–28.
Allcott, Hunt, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. Behavior and energy policy. Science 327(5970)
       (March 5): 1204–1205.
Anderson, Soren, and James Sallee. 2016. Designing policies to make cars greener. Working
       Paper No. 22242. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Austin, David, and Terry Dinan. 2005. Clearing the air: the costs and consequences of higher
       CAFE standards and increased gasoline taxes. Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 50: 562–82.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. Are consumers
       myopic? Evidence from new and used car purchases. American Economic Review 103(1):
       220–56.
Davis, Lucas W. 2012. Are Renters Less Likely to Have Energy Efficient Appliances? In Design
       and implementation of US climate policy, ed. Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Davis, Lucas, and Christopher Knittel. 2016. Are fuel economy standards regressive? Working
       Paper No. 22925. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2009. Let’s turn CAFE regulation on its head. Issue Brief No. 09-06.
       Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry. 2007. Do market failures justify tightening
       Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards? Energy Journal 28(4).
Fullerton, Don, and Sarah West. 2010. Tax and subsidy combinations for the control of car
       pollution. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 10(1).
Gillingham, Kenneth. 2013. The economics of fuel economy standards versus feebates. Working
       paper. Tulsa, OK: National Energy Policy Institute.



                                               19
Gillingham, Kenneth, David Rapson, and Gernot Wagner. 2016. The rebound effect and energy
       efficiency policy. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 10(1): 68–88.
Goldberg, Pinelopi. 1998. The effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards in the
       US. Journal of Industrial Economics 46(1): 1–33.
Grainger, Corbett A., and Charles D. Kolstad. 2010. Who pays a price on carbon? Environmental
       and Resource Economics 46: 359–376.
Greene, David L. 2010. How consumers value fuel economy: a literature review. EPA-420-R-10-
       008. Washington DC: US Environmental Protection Agency.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. Individual discount rates and the purchase and utilization of energy-
       using durables. The Bell Journal of Economics 10(1):33–54.
Ito, Koichiro, and James Sallee. 2014. The economics of attribute-based regulation: theory and
       evidence from fuel-economy standards. Working Paper No. 20500. Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. Evaluating US fuel economy standards in a model with producer and
       household heterogeneity. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(2): 148–87.
Jacobsen, Mark, and Arthur van Bentham. 2015. Vehicle scrappage and gasoline policy.
       American Economic Review 105(3): 1312–38.
Kleit, Andrew. 1988. The impact of automobile fuel economy standards. Working Paper No.
       160. Washington, DC: Federal Trade Commission Bureau of Economics.
Knittel, Christopher R. 2011. Automobiles on steroids: product attribute trade-offs and
       technological progress in the automobile sector. American Economic Review 101(7):
       3368–99.
Kwoka, John. 1983. The limits of market-oriented regulatory techniques: the case of automotive
       fuel economy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(4): 695–704.
Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Virginia McConnell. 2016. Fuel prices, new vehicle fuel
       economy, and implications for attribute-based standards. Discussion Paper No. 16-04.
       Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger. 2014. Gasoline taxes and consumer behavior.
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4): 302–42.
Liu, Yizao. 2014. Household demand and willingness to pay for hybrid vehicles. Energy
       Economics 44: 191–97.

                                               20
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan and Co.
Newell, Richard G., and Juha V. Siikamäki. 2015. Individual time preferences and energy
       efficiency. Working Paper No. 20969. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
       Research.
Sallee, James. 2011. The taxation of fuel economy. Tax Policy and the Economy 25: 1–37.
Sallee, James, Sara West, and Wei Fan. 2016. Do consumers recognize the value of fuel
       economy? Evidence from used car prices and gasoline price fluctuations. Journal of
       Public Economics 135: 61–73.
US Environmental Protection Agency and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
       2010. Light-duty vehicle greenhouse gas emission standards and Corporate Average Fuel
       Economy standards; final rule. Federal Register 75(88): 25324–728.
       www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/cafe/CAFE-GHG_MY_2012-
       2016_Final_Rule_FR.pdf.
Williams, Roberton III, Hal Gordon, Dallas Burtraw, Jared Carbone, and Richard Morgenstern.
       2015. The initial incidence of a carbon tax across income groups. National Tax Journal
       68(1): 195–214.




                                              21
Table 1. Household and Vehicle Characteristics
                                                                                 Gallons per hundred
                                                                                     miles (gphm)
Household                              Number of       Gallons     Miles        Average                Footprint    Car age
income (2009 $)        Households       vehicles       gasoline    driven         car          Total    (sq. ft.)   (years)
                          (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)
<$10,000                  4,763            0.84          247            5,198    3.86          2.32      47.75        9.3
$10,000–$19,999           8,960            1.30          371            7,857    3.84          3.48      47.85        8.3
$20,000–$29,999           10,362           1.70          507           10,703    3.88          4.44      48.29        7.5
$30,000–$39,999           10,110           1.95          613           12,931    3.92          4.97      48.66        7.0
$40,000–$49,999           9,719            2.10          679           14,366    3.94          5.27      48.78        6.7
$50,000–$59,999           9,030            2.25          754           16,005    3.96          5.61      48.96        6.6
$60,000–$69,999           7,592            2.34          816           17,310    3.97          5.88      49.08        6.4
$70,000–$79,999           7,535            2.43          869           18,413    3.98          6.07      49.11        6.2
$80,000–$99,999           10,302           2.48          921           19,548    4.00          6.28      49.29        6.0
>=$100,000                22,859           2.58          991           20,972    4.02          6.59      49.23        5.6
Source: 2009 National Highway Transportation Survey.




                                                                  22
Table 2. Revenue per Household from Three Revenue-Equivalent Taxes
                                      Tax revenue per household
     Household income                                         Footprint-based
     (2009 $)           $0.29 gas tax         gphm tax           gphm tax
                             (1)                 (2)                (3)
     <$10,000               71                  91                 175
     $10,000–$19,999        107                 137                219
     $20,000–$29,999        146                 174                232
     $30,000–$39,999        177                 195                223
     $40,000–$49,999        196                 207                214
     $50,000–$59,999        218                 220                200
     $60,000–$69,999        236                 231                183
     $70,000–$79,999        251                 238                202
     $80,000–$99,999        266                 247                170
     >=$100,000             286                 259                237




                                      23
Table 3. Vehicles with Hybrid and Gasoline Versions
                                                       Proportion
             Make and model                         hybrid in NHTS    Number
             Chevrolet Blazer/Tahoe                           0.462        91
             Ford Escape                                      0.155       696
             Honda Civic/Crx/Del Sol                          0.167     2,058
             Mercury Mariner                                  0.286        42
             Nissan Altima                                    0.075       226
             Saturn Vue                                       0.105       124
             Toyota Camry                                     0.183     1,408
             Toyota Highlander                                0.276       566
             Totals                                           0.182     5,211



Table 4. Hybrid and Gasoline Characteristics
                                           Non-hybrids                 Hybrids
                                               (1)                       (2)
       Gallons per hundred miles               3.02                       2.26
                                              (0.59)                     (0.52)

              MPG equivalent                    33.1                     44.2

       Annual miles driven                12,664                      14,178
                                          (7,462)                     (7,915)

       Car price                          19,301                      20,158
                                          (4,469)                     (5,279)

       Gasoline price                            3.07                      3.09
                                                (0.14)                    (0.19)

       Household income                        76,098                   90,746
                                              (35,008)                 (32,987)
       Number of observations                   4,262                      949
       Note: All five differences are statistically significant at 5%.
       Source: Car characteristics from CarQuery, car prices from National
       Automobile Dealers Association, and household characteristics from the 2009
       National Highway Transporation Survey.




                                           24
Table 5. Fuel Economy, Controlling for Car Characteristics

   Dependent variable: gallons per                   Income                    Car and
   thousand miles                       Means          only       Car only     Income
                                          (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)
   ln(Income)                            10.97*       6.66*                     -3.869*
                                         (0.002)     (0.36)                     (0.223)
   Engine power (metric                167.6*                       0.363*       0.371*
       horsepower)                       (0.16)                    (0.004)      (0.004)
   Wheelbase (length in mm)           2,766.7*                      0.063*       0.062*
                                         (0.62)                    (0.001)      (0.001)
   Width (mm)                         1,830*                        0.054*       0.051*
                                         (0.32)                    (0.002)      (0.002)
   Height (mm)                        1,590*                        0.225*       0.227*
                                         (0.53)                    (0.001)      (0.001)
   Constant                                         325.0*       -292.6*      -247.4*
                                                     (3.9)          (3.0)        (4.0)


   Observations                         130,007      130,007     130,007       130,007
   R-squared                                          0.003       0.621          0.622
   Source: Car characteristics from CarQuery and household characteristics from the 2009
   National Highway Transportation Survey.
   *p<0.05.




                                            25
Table 6. Home Energy Efficiency and Household Income
                                                           Average household income
                                                                  (2010 US$)
     Energy efficiency feature                         No             Yes         Difference
     Average (std. dev) [no. obs.]                     (1)            (2)             (3)
     Double or triple-paned windows                 $45,063          $61,964        $16,901
                                                    (32,859)         (37,300)          (641)
                                                     [5,071]          [7,012]
     Compact fluorescent bulbs installed             52,783           59,657          6,874
                                                    (35,185)         (36,643)        (1,287)
                                                       [853]          [6,567]
     Energy Star clothes washer                      52,176           65,955         13,779
                                                    (35,093)         (36,310)          (925)
                                                     [2,197]          [4,476]
     Frontloading washer                             55,471           76,189         20,718
                                                    (35,324)         (36,218)          (911)
                                                     [8,092]          [1,941]
     Energy Star dishwasher                          57,920           75,121         17,201
                                                    (35,088)         (35,859)        (1,083)
                                                     [1,642]          [3,042]
     Energy Star fridge                              46,497           63,198         16,701
                                                    (33,692)         (37,178)          (824)
                                                     [2,981]          [4,645]
     Energy Star air conditioner                     40,904           53,332         12,428
                                                    (32,088)         (36,335)        (1,625)
                                                       [679]          [1,176]

     Source: 2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey.




                                                       26
Figure 1. Annual Household Gasoline Use by Income, 2009




                       Source: 2009 National Household Travel Survey.

Figure 2. Energy Use versus Efficiency




                                         27
Figure 3. Energy and Inefficiency Taxes




Figure 4. A Revenue-Equivalent Efficiency Subsidy Saves Less Gas




                                     28
Figure 5. Revenue-Equivalent Gas Taxes and Fuel Economy Standards




Figure 6. Footprint-Based Standard for Cars




                                    29
Figure 7. Fuel Economy by Car Size, By Household Income




Figure 8. Tax Regressivity




                                   30
Figure 9. Depreciation-Adjusted Tax Regressivity




                                    31
                                           APPENDICES
Appendix 1. CAFE as a Combination Tax/Subsidy on Cars
        Kwoka (1983) shows that a fuel economy standard has the same effect on vehicle prices
as a tax on inefficient cars. I summarize and discuss that result here. Suppose there are two types
of cars, efficient (subscript e) and inefficient (subscript i). Each has a different fuel economy,
measured in gallons per mile (γ) and cost function to manufacture. Gallons per mile is just
“inefficiency,” measured as the inverse of efficiency, which in this case would be miles per
gallon: 𝛾 = 1⁄𝜇 .

                       Car type         Gallons per mile        Cost
                       Efficient               𝛾𝑒              𝐶(𝑞𝑒 )
                       Inefficient             𝛾𝑖               𝐶(𝑞𝑖 )
Each car manufacturers sells both types and has to meet a maximum average fuel economy in
gallons per mile, 𝛾̅ :
                                         𝑞𝑒 𝛾𝑒 + 𝑞𝑖 𝛾𝑖
                                                       ≤ 𝛾̅ .                                      (12)
                                           𝑞𝑒 + 𝑞𝑖
This is a simple average of the gallons per mile (γ) of all vehicles sold.24
        If the only way to meet the fuel economy standard is to change the mix of vehicles sold—
more efficient cars and fewer inefficient ones—then following Kwoka, it is convenient to rewrite
this regulatory standard as
                                                 𝑞𝑒 ≥ 𝑅𝑞𝑖 ,                                        (13)
where
                                                   (𝛾𝑖 − 𝛾̅ )
                                            𝑅=                .
                                                   (𝛾̅ − 𝛾𝑒 )
This just says the ratio of efficient to inefficient cars sold must be greater than R. As 𝛾̅ gets closer
to the efficient car’s fuel economy, 𝛾𝑒 , the standard gets harder to meet.
          Now consider a firm that maximizes profits:
                                 𝜋 = 𝑝𝑒 𝑞𝑒 + 𝑝𝑖 𝑞𝑖 − 𝐶(𝑞𝑒 ) − 𝐶(𝑞𝑖 ),
subject to constraint (13). The first-order conditions are
                  (i)      𝑝𝑖 = 𝐶 ′ (𝑞𝑖 ) + 𝜆𝑅

                  (ii)     𝑝𝑒 = 𝐶 ′ (𝑞𝑒 ) − 𝜆                                                      (14)

                  (iii)    𝑞𝑒 = 𝑅𝑞𝑖 .

24
     See footnote 12.
                                                    32
Lambda (λ) is the Lagrange multiplier on the binding constraint (13) from the firm’s profit
maximization. The first condition (i) just says that a price-taking firm produces inefficient cars
(𝑞0 ) until the market price equals the marginal cost plus an implicit tax (λR). The second (ii) says
the automaker produces efficient cars (𝑞𝐸 ) until the price equals marginal cost less an implicit
subsidy (λ). And the third says the constraint binds. Regulated automakers will produce more
efficient cars at higher cost and lower prices, and fewer inefficient ones at lower cost and higher
prices. So a fuel economy standard amounts to an implicit tax on inefficient cars, collected by
the carmakers themselves and used to subsidize efficient cars.
       What happens to the total number of cars sold (𝑞𝑒 + 𝑞𝑖 )? In its 2010 analysis of
upcoming CAFE standards, DOT concluded that consumers would find the fuel efficient cars
more desirable on average, causing total sales to rise. But that is not obvious a priori. As shown
by Kleit (1988), total cars sold will increase if

                                                     𝛽𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖
                                               𝑅<            ,                                            (15)
                                                     𝛽𝑒 + 𝐵𝑒


where 𝛽𝑖 is the slope of the demand curve for car type i (𝛽𝑖 = 𝜕𝑝𝑖 ⁄𝜕𝑄𝑖 ), 𝐵𝑖 is the slope of the
supply curve, and 𝛽𝑒 and Be are the slopes of the demand and supply curves for car type e.
According to Equation (15), the sum of the slopes of the supply and demand curves for the
inefficient car market (𝛽𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖 ) has to be sufficiently larger than the sum of the slopes of the
supply and demand curves for efficient cars (𝛽𝑒 + 𝐵𝑒 ).25
        This all makes intuitive sense. If inefficient cars are inelastically supplied or demanded,
then the tax/subsidy combination will have to meet the regulatory standard by selling more
efficient cars, increasing total car sales. If efficient cars are the ones inelastically supplied or
demanded, the tax/subsidy combination will have to work by selling fewer inefficient cars,
reducing total car sales.
        When DOT analyzed the proposed 2012 CAFE rules change, the agency assumed no
change in total cars. And when it retrospectively analyzed the results of those changes in 2016,
DOT wrote “[i]t is difficult, if not impossible, to separate the effects of the standards on vehicle
sales.”26 Following their lead, I assume no change in total sales.




25
   See Appendix 2 for a derivation of (15). In fact, Kleit (1988) points out that the regulation can act as a
cartel, reducing sales and increasing profits on inefficient cars in a way that more than offsets profits lost
selling efficient ones.
26
   US Department of Transportation, Draft Technical Assessment Report: Midterm Evaluation of Light-
Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards for
Model Years 2022-2025, Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, 2016, 6-1,
https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100OXEO.PDF?Dockey=P100OXEO.PDF.
                                                      33
Appendix 2. Effect of a Fuel Economy Standard on Total Cars Sold
        Kleit (1988) showed that a fuel economy standard could increase or decrease vehicle
sales, depending on the relative supply and demand elasticities for efficient and inefficient cars.
Suppose each firm maximizing profits in (14) has quadratic costs for each type (t) of car:
                              𝐶(𝑞𝑡 ) = 𝑎𝑡 𝑞𝑡 + 0.5𝑏𝑡 𝑞𝑡2        t={i,e} .                           (16)
Then the marginal costs, including the implicit taxes and subsides from (14) are
                                      𝐶 ′ (𝑞𝑖 ) = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑏𝑖 𝑞𝑖 + 𝜆𝑅
                                                                                                    (17)
                                     𝐶 ′ (𝑞𝑒 ) = 𝑎𝑒 + 𝑏𝑒 𝑞𝑒 − 𝜆 .
And suppose there are N firms, each selling both types of cars, so that 𝑄𝑖 = 𝑁𝑞𝑖 and 𝑄𝑒 = 𝑁𝑞𝑒 .
Sum the marginal cost curves in (16) horizontally and invert to get the industry supply curves
                                     𝐶 ′ (𝑄𝑖 ) = 𝑎𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖 𝑄𝑖 + 𝜆𝑅
                                                                                                    (18)
                                     𝐶 ′ (𝑄𝑒 ) = 𝑎𝑒 + 𝐵𝑒 𝑄𝑒 − 𝜆 ,
where 𝐵𝑡 = 𝑏𝑡 ⁄𝑁 for each car type t.
Finally, suppose each car type has linear inverse demand

                                 𝑃𝑡 (𝑄𝑡 ) = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛽𝑡 𝑄𝑡       i={i,e}.                               (19)
Then, solving for Qi, Qe, and λ, Kleit shows that

                                (𝛼𝑖 − 𝑎𝑖 ) (𝛼𝑒 − 𝑎𝑒 )              1          𝑅
                   𝑄𝑖 + 𝑄𝑒 =                +             +𝜆[            −         ].             (20)
                                (𝛽𝑖 − 𝐵𝑖 ) (𝛽𝑒 − 𝐵𝑒 )           𝛽𝑒 + 𝐵𝑒 𝛽𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖
Industry output, on the left of (20), rises as a result of the implicit tax/subsidy combination, so
long as the term in square brackets on the right is positive, or

                                                  𝛽 +𝐵
                                             𝑅 < 𝛽 𝑖 +𝐵𝑖 .                                          (21)
                                                   𝑒     𝑒

Equation (21) just says that the sum of the slopes of the supply and demand curves for the
inefficient car market (𝛽𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖 ) has to be sufficiently larger than the sum of the slopes of the
supply and demand curves for efficient cars (𝛽𝑒 + 𝐵𝑒 ).




                                                  34
