                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      AGRICULTURAL FIRES AND INFANT HEALTH

                                       Marcos A. Rangel
                                          Tom Vogl

                                      Working Paper 22955
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22955


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




We thank seminar and conference participants at CPC/DuPRI, Duke Economics, Duke's Sanford
School of Public Policy, Fordham, IFPRI, Princeton, PAA for helpful comments. Rangel
gratefully acknowledges pilot funding from the Duke Population Research Center under NIH
award number 2P2CHD065563, as well as Princeton University's Research Program in
Development Studies and Program in Latin American Studies for hospitality in the early phases
of this research. Vogl gratefully acknowledges funding from the Health Grand Challenge at
Princeton University. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health, nor of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marcos A. Rangel and Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Agricultural Fires and Infant Health
Marcos A. Rangel and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 22955
December 2016
JEL No. H23,I15,O13,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

Fire has long served as a tool in agriculture, but this practice's human capital consequences have
proved difficult to study. Drawing on data from satellites, air monitors, and vital records, we
study how smoke from sugarcane harvest fires affects infant health in the Brazilian state that
produces one-fifth of the world's sugarcane. Because fires track economic activity, we exploit
wind for identification, finding that late-pregnancy exposure to upwind fires decreases birth
weight, gestational length, and in utero survival, but not early neonatal survival. Other fires
positively predict health, highlighting the importance of disentangling pollution from economic
activities that drive it.


Marcos A. Rangel
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
194 Rubenstein Hall
302 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
marcos.rangel@duke.edu

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1    Introduction

Human use of fire predates the Neolithic Revolution, and controlled burns have played an impor-

tant role in agriculture throughout its history (Pyne 1997; Scott et al. 2013). To this day, farmers use

fire to clear forest and brush land, control weeds, regenerate soil nutrients, and dispose of agri-

cultural waste (Andreae 1991), generating negative externalities for their own and neighboring

communities in the form of smoke (Crutzen and Andreae 1990). Yet the health consequences of

this pre-industrial source of air pollution have proved difficult to study. Given the widespread his-

torical and current use of these techniques, an understanding of their effects on health offers a lens

onto the determinants of human capital accumulation in the past, the public health dimensions

of present-day rural economic development, and even sustainable development more generally.

This article contributes on these fronts by estimating the effects of pollution from agricultural field

fires on health at birth.

    Although large literatures in both epidemiology and economics study the health burden of

air pollution (Lacasana et al. 2005; Olmo et al. 2011; Bernstein et al. 2004; Currie et al. 2011;

Graff Zivin and Neidell 2013), this research focuses heavily on pollution from industry, motorized

travel, and other modern sources in developed countries, with only a recent growth in attention

to the same pollution sources in developing countries (Bharadwaj et al. 2014; Hanna and Oliva

2015; Arceo et al. 2016). While these studies find broadly negative effects on health among both

adults and children, their implications for moderate but chronic air pollution generated by tradi-

tional farming techniques remain unclear for at least two reasons. First, emissions from biomass

burning are different in chemical composition from those generated by the burning of fossil fuels.

Second, even when studies focus on the former, they tend to concentrate either on massive pollu-

tion shocks, as in the case of major forest fires (Sastry 2002; Jayachandran 2009; Frankenberg et al.

2005; Tan-Soo and Pattanayak 2016), or on settings with extremely low air quality, as in the case of

indoor air pollution from traditional cookstoves (Smith 2000; Ezzati and Kammen 2001; Pitt et al.

2010; Smith et al. 2011; Mobarak et al. 2012; Jeuland et al. 2015; Duflo et al. 2016). Our analyses

fill this gap in the literature.

    To estimate the infant health effects of exposure to smoke from agricultural fires, we study

sugarcane harvest fires in the Brazilian state of São Paulo, a major producer of sugarcane, ac-

                                                   1
counting for roughly one fifth of the tonnage produced annually across the globe (FAO 2016;

UNICA 2016). In Brazil as elsewhere, traditional sugarcane cultivators burn their fields before

harvest, eliminating debris and creating plumes of smoke that potentially elevate nearby air pol-

lutant concentrations. Controlled fires are an integral part of the traditional harvesting process

since they increase the productivity of labor (cane cutters) with minimal loss in the produce’s

glucose content. Field burning is continuously paced to optimize processing capacity utilization

in sugar mills, with the harvest/milling period lasting up to six months. Though potentially

harmful to health, the pollution from these fires does not reach levels considered dangerous by

present-day industrial standards. Hence, this setting provides an opportunity to measure the

health burden of repeated exposure to moderate-scale pollution from traditional sources.

    Part of the past difficulty in studying these effects stems from the low quality of administra-

tive data in many developing countries. São Paulo offers high-quality vital registration, as well as

sophisticated, high-frequency monitoring systems for pollution, climate, and wind. We combine

these sources with satellite remote sensing data on fires. The richness and completeness of São

Paulo’s birth records also allow us to consider outcomes less extreme than death, which is impor-

tant given the setting’s low mortality rates among the very young.1 In using these data, we join

a growing literature in development economics that studies the determinants of early-life health

using vital statistics microdata from Latin America, where the concerns about representativeness

that typically shroud developing country vital registration systems no longer apply in many parts

of the region (Bharadwaj et al. 2013; Arceo et al. 2016; Amarante et al. 2016; Bharadwaj et al.

forthcoming). We use these data to relate smoke exposure in utero to broad measures of health at

birth (birth weight and prematurity), perinatal morbidity (hospital admission and APGAR scores),

and perinatal mortality (stillbirth and death just after birth).2 All data sources have detailed ge-

ographic information, allowing careful linkage with nearby fires. The air monitoring data and

the satellite remote sensing data are especially granular, with hourly pollution and wind direc-

tion measurements from air monitoring stations and bi-daily fire measurements on a 1km-by-1km

grid. This temporal and geographic granularity is essential to our empirical strategy.
   1 The  state of São Paulo has an infant mortality rate of 11 per 1000 live births, while the municipalities in the study
area range from 7 to 12 (SEADE 2016). The US rate is 6 per 1000 live births (Kochanek 2016).
   2 We focus on pre-birth exposure and perinatal outcomes rather than post-birth exposure and infant death mainly for

statistical power. Low birth weight and prematurity are ten times more common than infant mortality in our setting.

                                                            2
    Our empirical strategy exploits wind on the day of each fire to resolve two main identification

challenges emerging from the connection between fires and agricultural production (and between

pollution and economic activity more generally). First, São Paulo’s sugarcane is harvested in

winter, so seasonality       in disease, temperature, or relative humidity, among other factors                 may

generate spurious relationships between fires and health. Even within winter, potentially health-

related atmospheric conditions affect ignition decisions, with cultivators avoiding days that are

too wet (preventing ignition) or too dry (raising the risk that the fire becomes uncontrollable). Sec-

ond, local employment and local economic activity are higher during harvests with many fires, so

any income or liquidity effects on health outcomes may confound estimation.3 Estimation strate-

gies based solely on cross-section, time-series, or even panel variation in fires cannot distinguish

their effects from the effects of other health determinants that vary with sugarcane production.

    Concerns like these bedevil existing research on the topic in Brazil, which examines spatial

and temporal variation in sugarcane production, pollution, asthma hospitalizations, and inhala-

tion therapy usage (Arbex et al. 2000; Arbex et al. 2004; Cançado et al. 2006; Arbex et al. 2007;

Ribeiro 2008; Uriarte et al. 2009; Chagas et al. 2014). While this research has tended to find positive

relationships among these variables, the effect of fires per se has proved elusive, even for a prox-

imate outcome like respiratory hospitalization. For more general measures of health as human

capital like the ones we study, causality would be even more difficult to assess. Concerns about

the effects of economic correlates of pollution may also apply to prominent research on pollution

and child health in industrialized contexts, such as Chay and Greenstone’s (2003) seminal study of

recession-induced pollution variation in the United States; Greenstone and Hanna’s (2014) study

of environmental regulations in India; and Cesur et al.’s (forthcoming) study of natural gas infras-

tructure expansion in Turkey. While our identification strategy is novel for a developing country,

we join a growing literature that exploits pollution variation from wind direction in the United

States (Schlenker and Walker 2016; Anderson 2016; Deryugina et al. 2016).4 Our context is set

apart, however, by frequent changes in both wind and exact pollution source locations, allowing

us to carefully decompose pollution impacts from economic impacts.
   3 See Hoynes et al. (2015) and Amarante et al. (2016) on the infant health effects of household income. See Dehejia
and Lleras-Muney (2004); Miller and Urdinola (2010); Baird et al. (2011); and Bozzoli and Quintana-Domeque (2014)
on the infant health effects of local or aggregate economic conditions.
   4 In a related approach, Knittel et al. (2016) use pollution variation stemming from the interaction of automobile

congestion with weather conditions.
                                                          3
   Using daily measurements of fires, prevailing wind direction, and air pollution, we first show

that fires upwind from a pollution monitor (that is to say, fires with smoke that would blow to-

wards the pollution monitor) raise pollution significantly more than fires at other angles to the

wind or fires taking place during periods of calm. Our estimates indicate particulate matter (PM10 )

concentrations increasing approximately 5% during the week an additional upwind fire occurs

within 50 kilometers of an air quality station (holding constant the total number of fires). We also

find modest but significant effects on concentrations of ozone (O3 ) but none on concentrations of

nitrogen oxides (NOx ). Smoke does result from the fires captured in our satellite pictures, in a way

consistent with expected atmospheric dispersion.

   These air pollution patterns allow us to use fires that are not upwind from the mother’s place

of residence to control for confounders, under the assumption that upwind and other fires are

equally correlated with other determinants of health (particularly the business cycle). In essence,

we use the differential association of upwind fires with health, relative to the association of other

fires with health, to identify the reduced-form effect of smoke exposure net of economic impacts.

Our models include location and time fixed effects, so the empirical approach amounts to asking

whether, within a locality, a reallocation of fires to upwind locations is negatively associated with

infant health. The outcomes of interest reflect health at birth, so we count fires over relevant expo-

sure periods during gestation. We find that increased in utero exposure to smoke from sugarcane

fires reduces birth weight, both on average and at the lower tail of the distribution (low and very

low birth weight). During the last three months of gestation, an additional upwind fire per week

(within 50 kilometers of the population center) raises the prevalence of low birth weight by 8 per

1000. Upwind fires also significantly reduce gestational age at birth (with significant increases in

very preterm birth) and birth cohort size (with insignificant increases in reported stillbirths), but

we detect no effects on early-life mortality or measured morbidity outside the womb. We also

do not find effects of exposure in earlier gestational periods, although we note that estimates for

these periods may suffer from selection bias due to our retrospective dating of exposure from the

date of birth, rather than prospective dating from the (unknown) date of conception. Addition-

ally, using auxiliary data, we document marginally significant increases in hospitalizations in two

relevant groups of women—women of childbearing age (15-45) and prenatal care patients in the

public health care system—during periods with more upwind fires.
                                             4
      Consistent with the potential confounding effects of the agricultural business cycle, counts of

fires close to but not upwind from the mother’s municipality of residence have a mild but signifi-

cant positive relationship with birth weight. Therefore, without considering the differential impact

of upwind fires, we would not have fully uncovered the detrimental health effects of fires. Our

results are robust to alternative catchment areas, the inclusion of mother and child characteristics

as covariates, and flexible controls for location-specific seasonality and trends.

      Common but moderate pollution exposure in utero thus influences overall measures of health

in early life. Given the strong connection between these measures and long-term outcomes,

our results suggest lasting benefits from adoption of mechanized harvesting methods, which do

not require fires. Our estimates are relevant to policy efforts aimed at finding renewable and

environment-friendly alternative energy sources (Chu and Majumdar 2012). Based on proximate

measures of economic costs, energy balances, and carbon savings, sugarcane-based ethanol stands

out as an attractive renewable energy source (Goldemberg 2007). Demand for sugarcane has

surged both inside Brazil, with the government requiring automobile fuel to be at least one-fifth

ethanol, and globally, leading to rising production in São Paulo. But negative production external-

ities pose distributional questions, with non-producing areas disproportionally benefitting from

cheaper fuel or reduced emissions even as producing areas may suffer. To combat this pollution,

the state government and the sugarcane industry have been collaborating on policies to encourage

adoption of mechanized harvesting methods. While fires have not kept up with a recent expan-

sion of sugarcane production in São Paulo, neither have they declined in number (Aguiar et al.

2011). Our results suggest infant health gains from redoubling these efforts.



2     Background: Harvesting and Health

2.1     Sugarcane Harvesting in Brazil

Brazil is the world’s leader in sugarcane production (FAO 2016), and the state of São Paulo ac-

counts for more than two-thirds of the country’s harvest (UNICA 2016). In recent years, rising

global demand for biofuels and sugar has triggered a rapid expansion in production (McConnell

et al. 2010). The share of São Paulo’s land area devoted to sugarcane more than doubled in

2000-2014, from 10% to 23%, displacing other crops and cattle production. Sugarcane cultivation
                                               5
expanded over the plateau northwest of the Serra do Mar mountain range on both extensive and

the intensive margins, with more municipalities planting sugarcane and more area devoted to the

crop in municipalities already producing it. These trends are confirmed in Appendix Figure A1,

which maps the spatial distribution of municipality-level sugarcane land shares in the 1990s and

our study period, 2009-2014. Sugarcane was initially concentrated around the city of Ribeirão

Preto, roughly 200 miles north of the city of São Paulo, but has expanded 300 miles westward to

cover the northern swath of the state.

   From April to November, sugarcane farms and plantations in São Paulo harvest their crop

using either traditional manual methods or modern mechanical methods. To carry out a manual

harvest, cultivators burn the field before cutting the stalk of the cane with a cane knife or machete.

The fire burns off straw and other extraneous materials, leaving only the harvestable part of the

cane and its roots (which will later rattoon, or sprout new harvestable stems). The use of fires is

believed to increase the productivity of laborers by a factor of 10 relative to the manual harvesting

of unburned fields (Fernandes 1988; Marinho and Kirchhoff 1991). While the fire by itself does

not lead to significant glucose loss, the crop starts degrading once cut, due to evaporation and

bacterial growth (Salassi et al. 2004; Saska et al. 2009; Saxena et al. 2010). As a result, fires are used

throughout the harvesting season, depending on transport logistics and the operational capacity

of the mills processing the cane. In fact, Lamsal et al. (2013) report that a conservative estimate

of cut-to-crush time is approximately three hours, with harvest being conducted 24 hours a day

during peak season.

   With modern methods, a mechanical combine harvester or sugarcane harvester cuts the stalk

at the base, removes the straw, and then chops the cane into pieces. No fire is necessary. São

Paulo’s sugarcane industry is undergoing widespread mechanization, due in part to economic

trends but also to laws, state-industry agreements, credit access to purchase machinery, and fa-

vorable exchange rates for importing machinery. By state law, pre-harvest burning will become

illegal in most parts of the state in 2021; until then, an agreement between the industry and the

state government set non-binding, interim goals for reductions in burning starting in 2007 (the

so-called Green Ethanol Protocol). While the agreement may have curtailed the growth of fires,

the area undergoing burn harvesting has not appreciably declined (Aguiar et al. 2011).


                                                    6
2.2     Potential Environment and Health Impacts

Despite increased attention to sugarcane fires in the environmental literature, specific informa-

tion about emission factors remains relatively scarce.5 In the laboratory, França et al. (2012) find

that burning sugarcane straw raises particulate matter, thought to be central to respiratory disease

risk, as well as unburned hydrocarbons and trace gases like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,

and nitrogen oxides. Particulate matter emissions may be higher outside the laboratory, where

objects larger than straw also burn. Ozone (O3 ) concentrations are also likely to increase from

open-area burning, since it results from the exposure of NOx to sunlight and hydrocarbons. This

process is more rapid under stagnant high pressure, which commonly accompanies the weather

conditions that prevail in São Paulo during harvest: low humidity, moderate to high temperature,

and sunshine (Logan 1989; Vukovich 1995). Based on these findings, one would expect increased

pollution during sugarcane harvests that employ fire. Observational studies do document asso-

ciations between harvest fires and pollution over time and across space (Marinho and Kirchhoff

1996; Cançado et al. 2006; Martinelli and Filoso 2008; Tsao et al. 2012).

      Existing research on the health impact of this pollution focuses on respiratory health (Arbex

et al. 2000; Arbex et al. 2004; Cançado et al. 2006; Arbex et al. 2007; Ribeiro 2008; Uriarte et

al. 2009, Chagas et al. 2014). We depart from this tradition by using birth outcomes, which

measure health (at the start of life) more comprehensively. Low birth weight results from two

intertwined elements: preterm birth and intrauterine growth restriction. Both are associated with

infant mortality, myriad morbidities both early and late in life, and poor socioeconomic outcomes

in adulthood (Black et al. 2007; Currie 2009; Currie 2011; Currie and Almond 2011; Currie and

Vogl, 2013; Bharadwaj et al. 2014). Perinatal conditions are influenced by multiple factors, from

genetics to nutrition, physiological stressors, and environmental conditions.

      Epidemiological evidence indicates that particulate matter concentrations correlate with sev-

eral perinatal outcomes, and economic research suggests these correlations in part reflect causal

effects of pollution.6 The mechanism biologically relating particulate matter to perinatal outcomes
   5 Andreae et al. (2001) review the literature on emission from biomass fires, finding few published studies about

sugarcane emissions. Our own review includes Marinho and Kirchhoff (1991), Le Canut (1996), Yokelson et al. (2008),
Lopes de Carvalho (2009), and França et al. (2012).
   6 Reviews of the epidemiology literature can be found in Glinianaia et al. (2004); Sram et al. (2005), Kannan et al.

(2006), Ritz and Wilhelm (2008), and Stieb et al. (2012). Examples of economic research include Currie and Neidell
(2005), Currie and Walker (2011), Currie et al. (2014), and Knittel et al. (2016).

                                                          7
is not precisely known, but the respiratory and cardiovascular health of pregnant women likely

plays an important role. Particulate matter exposure could contribute to systemic oxidative stress,

affecting the embryo in the earliest phases of growth, although this channel is more likely in urban

areas, due to the transition-metal composition of air pollution in those locations. Both particulate

matter and ozone could also decrease fetal-placental exchange of oxygen and nutrients, which is

key to fetal growth. These impacts of exposure would operate via pulmonary and placental (aller-

gic) inflammation, and would result from maternal infection, especially during the last trimester

of pregnancy, potentially resulting in premature contractions and rupture of membranes. It is also

possible that exposure to air pollution alters blood viscosity and coagulability, which could change

hemoglobin, platelets, and white blood cells in ways that contribute to adverse fetal growth or in-

crease the risk of maternal cardiovascular events, leading to pre-eclampsia and preterm deliveries.



3     Fires: Understanding Variation over Time And Space

To motivate our study design, we provide a descriptive analysis of fire variation in São Paulo.

We first introduce the satellite-based dataset that we use to track fires, both in this section and in

the main analysis. With these data, we describe the spatial and temporal distributions of fire and

sugarcane harvesting. We then document longitudinal relationships among sugarcane harvesting,

local economic activity, and fires.


3.1   Satellite Remote-Sensing Data

Satellite remote sensing technology allows researchers and policymakers to study patterns of fires

over time and across space. To this end, we assemble panel data on fires from a Brazilian space

agency (Instituto Nacional the Pesquisas Espaciais - INPE) database based on pictures of the Brazilian

territory by US-based satellites. Data from 3 satellites, NOAA-15 (orbiting at 800km and launched

by the US Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Agency), TERRA, and AQUA (both orbiting at 730

km and launched by the US space agency NASA), are employed.7 Each satellites passes over the

Brazilian territory twice per day, covering mornings, afternoons, evenings, and late nights.
   7 NOAA satellites use Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) sensors, while TERRA and AQUA use

Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) sensors. For descriptive analyses, we extend the data back
further in time using NOAA-12, the predecessor of NOAA-15.

                                                       8
      Detection algorithms are applied to each picture, with AVHRR detection implemented by

INPE and MODIS implemented by researchers at the University of Maryland. The resulting data

consist of binary information about the existence of a potential fire in a given time and location

as a function of pixels within specific thermal ranges (luminosity). The two sensors/algorithms

can detect fires as small as 30m × 1m, but data output is at the pixel level, representing a 1km

× 1km area.8 Each potential fire is assigned a confidence index reflecting the probability that a
fire occurred, varying from 0% to 100%, based on meteorological conditions and vegetation at the

time of potential fire detection (Setzer and Sismanoglu 2007). Most of our empirical investigation,

both in this section and after, weights fires by their confidence. Since pre-harvest burns take place

at all times of day, we average the three data series to reduce noise in the daily count of fires.


3.2     Time Series and Spatial Patterns

We report temporal and seasonal patterns of fires and production in Figure 1. Panel A presents

the rolling cumulative count of fires for every fortnight between January 2004 and December 2014,

revealing no obvious time trend in the occurrence of fires but a clear seasonal pattern. Panel

B details this seasonal pattern further by plotting the log of average monthly counts over our

main study period, which runs from 2009 to 2014. Starting from their trough in January, fires

climb through the year until peaking in August or September. The peak-to-trough difference in

monthly fires is approximately 2.5 log-points, corresponding to a 35% increase. This pattern is

even more dramatic if we focus on the confidence-weighted counts, yielding a 73% increase in

fire activity between January and September. The seasonality of fires also matches the agricultural

cycle, further suggesting a link to sugarcane harvesting. To illustrate this link, Panel B of Figure 1

also reports seasonal patterns in the tonnage of cane processed monthly by São Paulo mills from

the National Union of Sugarcane Producers (UNICA) during our main study period, 2009-2014.

Milling activity is lowest in the summer months, from December to March, and highest in the

winter months, peaking in August.

      For added confirmation of the production-fires link, Appendix Figure A2 maps the spatial dis-

tribution of yearly confidence-weighted fires in São Paulo between 2009 and 2014. For each of the
   8 We geocode the centroid of each pixel. In validation exercises, INPE reports location errors of 400m on average,
with a 3km standard deviation; 80% of the fires are correctly placed within the pixel.

                                                         9
state’s municipalities, we sum confidence-weighted counts of fires over the year, normalizing by

the number of pixels in the municipality, and then map each municipality’s percentile in the distri-

bution of average fire intensity. The spatial distribution is similar to that of sugarcane production

in Appendix Figure A1. Fires are concentrated in the sugarcane belt that spans the northern half

of São Paulo state. In the city of São Paulo, which is located in the southeast of the state, sugarcane

is absent and fires rare.


3.3     Sugarcane, Fires, and the Local Economy

The prevalence of field fires depends on both the extent of sugarcane production and the choice

of harvesting method, both of which change over time in ways that may be closely linked to the

local economy. This potential link poses a concern for identifying the health effects of field fires,

given that some health-relevant aspects of the local economy may go unmeasured. For motivating

evidence on this point, we assemble an annual panel of all 645 São Paulo municipalities covering

2004-2014, with data on fires, sugarcane production, and municipal GDP per capita. We use these

data to regress confidence-weighted fire intensity on measures of sugarcane harvesting and the lo-

cal economy. To measure fires for this analysis, we again combine data from three satellites, which

are intended to provide continuous tracking over the entire period; we sum confidence-weighted

fires (at the pixel-day level) within a municipality over the year and divide by the municipality’s

land area. Agricultural and economic data are from the Brazilian statistical agency IBGE (Instituto

Brasileiro de Geografía e Estatística). We fit linear models with municipality and year fixed effects;

the results reflect sugarcane-fire associations within a municipality over time.

      Table 1 presents the results, showing clear links among harvest area, GDP per capita, and fires.

In columns (1) and (2), which use the full 2004-2014 period, area harvested is significantly and

powerfully associated with fire. Having any harvest is associated with an increase of 0.4 annual

fires per 100km2 , more than 10% of mean fire intensity. The more area harvested, the stronger

the association. An expansion from no harvest to having at least three-quarters of the municipal

territory under harvest is associated with 2 more annual fires per 100km2 , more than two-thirds of

mean fire intensity. When we restrict the sample to period with available GDP data (2004-2012) in

column (3), these associations remain the same. Controlling for log GDP per capita in column (4)


                                                   10
negligibly alters the coefficients on harvest area. But GDP per capita is independently associated

with fires; a doubling of GDP per capita predicts one extra fire per 100km2 . Fires thus also reflect

broader economic activity.9

     Columns (1)-(4) of Table 1 provide evidence of annual relationships, but are fires related to eco-

nomic activity within the year as well? The final column of Table 1 considers intra-year variation,

which requires a new dataset and a new frequency. We use data from the Brazilian Ministry of

Labor CAGED database on the creation and destruction of formal sector jobs at the municipality-

month level for 2009-2014. After merging with summed confidence-weighted fires at the same

level, we regress the change in fires from the previous month on jobs created and destroyed, con-

trolling for month-year fixed effects. This first difference approach accommodates the explanatory

variables, which are in changes rather than levels, while remaining analogous to the annual fixed

effect specification we use in the first four columns of Table 1. Here again, the data show a clear

link between fires and economic activity. One job created per 1000 people is associated with an

increase of .9 fires per 100km2 ; one job destroyed per 1000 people is associated with a decrease of

1.5 fires per 100km2 .

     Expansions in sugarcane cultivation are significantly related to fires, as are per-capita income

and the strength of the labor market.10 These findings are relevant for the analysis of fires and

child health in at least two ways. On the one hand, they confirm a strong link between sugarcane

cultivation and the fires identified by satellite remote sensing, which we use in our main analysis.

On the other, they demonstrate that the drivers of fire variation are also related to other potential

determinants of health. In a naïve panel analysis of fires and infant health, even detailed controls

for seasonality and weather would not fully eliminate concerns about omitted variables.



4      Pollution and Health: Data and Methods

This concern motivates our strategy of leveraging the wind. We compare how infant health relates

to fires upwind from a population center, over and above its relation to nearby fires occurring

at other angles to the prevailing wind or on days that have no prevailing wind. Air pollution
    9 If
       we omit harvest shares from column (4), the coefficient on log GDP per capita rises to 1.28, implying that area
harvested accounts for one-quarter of the relationship between GDP per capita and fires.
  10 These associations suggest that in this context, tracking fires using satellite data is akin to tracking nighttime lights

for proxying economic growth (Henderson et al. 2012).
                                                             11
in the population center should be positively associated with the number of upwind fires but

unrelated or only weakly related to the number of other fires. Our identifying assumption is that

the association of fires with other determinants of child health, such as economic activity, does

not depend on the wind. In other words, we assume that fire locations interact with the wind to

influence the intensity of pollution exposure but not economic activity.


4.1     Data

Our research design depends on geographically granular and high-frequency data. In addition to

the satellite remote-sensing data introduced in Section 3, two other datasets satisfying this require-

ment form the core of our analysis: one containing pollution and weather data from state-run air

quality monitoring stations, the other containing birth and death certificate information from the

national vital statistics system.


4.1.1    Air Monitoring Station Data

Data on pollution concentrations and atmospheric conditions come from air monitoring stations

operated by the São Paulo’s environmental agency CETESB (Companhia Ambiental do Estado de

São Paulo). Although CETESB has been collecting data in metropolitan São Paulo for more than

two decades, monitoring in agricultural areas began only after 2008. Thirteen stations started

collecting data in sugar-growing areas between January 2008 and April 2009, with all but one in

operation at least through the end of 2014.11 Our study period thus runs from 2009 though 2014,

the years for which wind data are available for the prenatal exposure period in most locations.

      Data from CETESB stations are organized in hourly observations of pollution concentrations

and atmospheric conditions. All stations measure temperature, relative humidity, wind direc-

tion, particulate matter (under 10 µm, PM10 ), and ozone (O3 ) concentrations, while twelve also

measure the concentration of nitrogen oxides (NOx ). Pollution concentrations serve as outcomes,

while atmospheric conditions serve as covariates. For all variables except wind direction (dis-

cussed below), we convert these hourly observations into a daily mean for every day with at least
  11 To provide information on their spatial distribution, all maps in the Appendix are overlaid with the locations of the

thirteen stations. Despite including only a subset of producing areas, they nonetheless cover varied levels of production
intensity and traditional harvesting techniques.


                                                           12
8 hours of raw data. To further smooth the variability in the data, we compute rolling week aver-

ages, so that for each day t, we take the average daily reading between t − 6 and t if daily means

were available for at least three days. Depending on the outcome, our data contain approximately

26,000 location-date cells. Appendix Table A1 reports the share of rolling weeks with missing

data for each reading, while Appendix Table A2 reports their weekly averages and standard de-

viations. Missing data are rare for most stations, and average pollution readings are far below

current regulatory limits in the United States and São Paulo.12

    For winds, we similarly aggregate hourly measurements into a daily summary—the daily pre-

vailing wind—because we lack precise information on the start and end of each fire to build an

hourly model of pollution dispersion. Measurements are coded as angles in degrees, such that

0 corresponds to wind from due North, and 180 corresponds to wind from due South. To find

the daily prevailing wind, we search for the sector of the wind rose that contains the most hourly

measurements, starting from the sector centered at due north and then increasing in intervals of 10

degrees. In our analysis of the pollution effects of fires, which is akin to a first stage relationship,

we experiment with different central angles for this sector—30, 45, and 90 degrees—searching

for the angle that best trades off the benefits of wider angles (more fires) with those of narrower

angles (more precision in wind direction). We settle on the octant (45 degrees) as the sector that

best captures pollution dispersion, so we use octants throughout our analysis of health. To min-

imize noise, we require that the wind blow from the modal sector for at least eight hours of the

day; if this condition is not met, then we assign no prevailing wind for the day. This stringent

requirement allows us to avoid measurement error from days with extremely variable winds or

from calm days; in these cases, winds could blow from the modal direction for as little as a single

hour.13 Summarizing wind patterns across stations, Appendix Table A3 reports the share of hours

with wind blowing from each octant on the wind rose, as well as the share of hours with no wind

direction recorded. Winds are widely dispersed, with no octant ever accounting for more than

half of a station’s hourly measurements, and most accounting for between 5% and 20%. Stations

also record no wind in 5% to 20% of hours. Given this dispersion and prevalence of calm, each
  12 Seehttp://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants, http://ar.cetesb.sp.gov.br/padroes-de-qualidade-do-ar.
  13 Incases of ties, we choose the tied octant with lowest angle. Depending on the station, ties occur on 5-12% of days,
mostly coming from octants that overlap as we increase the base angle 10 degrees at a time. In cases where winds blow
from the opposing quadrant for more than two hours, we assign no daily prevailing wind. Results are not sensitive to
either choice.
                                                           13
station is coded as having no prevailing wind on one-quarter to one-half of all days.

   The interaction of wind direction with fire location is key to our research design. We organize

our working data file by first counting the daily number of 1km-by-1km grid cells containing

a fire within a 50km radius of a municipality’s population centroid (averaged across the three

satellites), omitting those within 5km because they are likely to be within the urbanized areas

and not related to agriculture. Fires occurring within the modal wind octant in a given day are

defined as upwind; those in the opposite octant are defined as downwind; and all those outside

the modal octant are defined as non-upwind. From these daily measures we compute rolling

week counts, capturing the total number of upwind, downwind, and non-upwind fires occurring

between day t − 6 and day t. The rolling week measures serve as the basis for all analyses. In

most analyses, we weight fires by the INPE confidence measure, with the weights varying from

0 for no confidence to 1 for certainty. Appendix Table A4 reports means and standard deviations

for these fire measures. On average, 2.77 fires are detected near each monitoring station per week;

weighted by confidence, this count falls to 1.75. Of these 1.75 confidence-weighted fires, 0.12 occur

upwind from the municipal population centroid on days with a prevailing wind.


4.1.2   Vital and Hospital Records

Data on birth and perinatal outcomes are drawn from individual-level vital records and hospital-

ization records in DATASUS, the Brazilian Ministry of Health’s Usage Information System. Al-

though vital registration systems in developing countries often have incomplete coverage, Brazil

has made great strides in this area, minimizing concerns about sample selectivity. According to

estimates from 2010, at least 99% of births and infant deaths were registered in the administrative

areas containing the study sample (IBGE 2011). All datasets include information on municipality

of residence, which is key to our research design. To guarantee correct wind measurement, we

restrict attention to mothers residing in the 13 sugar-growing municipalities with air monitoring

stations, leading to a sample of 287,506 live singleton births.

   Our primary outcomes are birth weight and gestational age at birth, drawn from the birth reg-

istry. Birth weight is measured continuously in grams or as an indicator for low (< 2,500 grams)

or very low (< 1,500 grams) birth weight. Brazilian birth records code gestational age at birth in


                                                 14
coarse categories, limiting our ability to analyze it as a continuous dependent variable and to esti-

mate the date of conception. We define indicators for preterm (< 37 weeks) and very preterm (< 32

weeks) births, and we also impute weeks of gestation, using the weekly gestational age distribu-

tion in the US to estimate the average gestational age at birth within each category.14 Secondary

outcomes from the natality data include 1- and 5-minute APGAR scores; reported stillbirths; the

number of births; hospital admission charged to the public health care system in the first full day

of life (the day following the birthdate); and mortality in the first full day of life.15 To reduce

computational demands and to link the birth, death, and hospitalization data without individual

identifiers, we collapse individual records by location and date of birth, leading to a dataset of

average birth outcomes in 26,100 location-date cells. We weight all analyses by cell size.

      Table 2 presents summary statistics for the births dataset, detailing how we reduce the individual-

level dataset to location-date cells. Column (1) presents the mean, column (2) the individual-level

standard deviation, and column (3) the cell-level standard deviation. The table highlights São

Paulo’s favorable performance on health and social metrics. Birth weight averages 3.2kg, with

80 per 1000 infants born low birth weight and 12 per 1000 born very low birth weight. Imputed

gestational age averages 39 weeks, with 97 infants per 1000 born preterm and 12 per 1000 born

very preterm. Maternal education is high, with 25% having at least completed high school.


4.2     Estimation

We carry out two estimations, one linking fires to air pollution, the other to health outcomes. In

all estimations, we cluster standard errors at the monitor (or municipality) level. Because our data

have few clusters, we compute two p-values for each estimate following recommendations by

Cameron et al. (2008). The first is based on the analytic t-statistic, using the critical value from a t-

distribution with degrees of freedom set to the number of clusters minus one. The second is based

on a wild cluster-bootstrap percentile-t procedure, imposing the null hypothesis. The stations are

dispersed across a large area, minimizing concerns about spatial dependence.
  14 The categories are 17-21, 22-27, 28-31, 32-36, 37-41, and 42-47 weeks. Births are distributed similarly across these
categories in São Paulo and the US, motivating our imputation. In US natality data for 2007-2014, gestational age within
each category averages to the midpoint of the category for term births, the next highest week from the midpoint for
pre-term births, and the next-lowest week for post-term births.
  15 A newborn is admitted to the hospital separately from the mother in cases of pronounced vulnerability, such as

admission to a neonatal intensive care unit.

                                                           15
   To test our research design’s assumption that upwind fires raise pollution more than down-

wind fires, we first analyze air monitoring station data on pollutant concentrations. Our primary

focus is particular matter, a byproduct of sugarcane burning with well-known health effects, but

we also examine the other pollutants (NOx and O3 ) tracked by the stations to shed light on the

composition of pollution from sugarcane burning. For the air monitoring station in municipality

j on date t, we run:


                       y jt = αU up f ires jt + α N nonup f ires jt + X jt0 β + µ j + τt + ε jt         (1)


µ j and τt are station and date fixed effects, respectively, so we only leverage within-station, within-

time variation. The dependent variable y jt is the average pollution concentration from date t − 6

to t. The central covariates for our research design are up f ires jt , the count of upwind fires, and

nonup f ires jt , the count of other fires, both during the same week-long period. For completeness,

we also report results from estimations that look at the effect of the total count of fires (up f ires jt +

nonup f ires jt ), as well as others that decompose non-upwind fires into downwind fires (in the

octant opposing the prevailing wind) and other fires. The vector of covariates X jt includes weekly

average temperature; weekly average relative humidity; the share of hours with no wind; the

share of hours with winds blowing from each octant of the wind rose; and the share of days with

no prevailing wind. We include temperature and humidity because they are associated with both

fire incidence and pollutant concentrations, but we note that they are not differentially associated

with fires by wind direction, so our research design does not depend on them. Similarly, we

control for wind direction and calm to assuage concerns about a long-term relationship between

fire placement and wind, although these covariates too are unnecessary for identification. In the

Appendix, we assess robustness to municipality-specific time and season effects, and we also

present results for alternative radii and wind angles to help justify our analytic choices. In this

setup, αU − α N captures the differential impact of upwind fires, relative to the overall association

between fires and pollution.

   Our infant health regression specification is similar to equation (1), except that the analysis

of in utero exposure requires many lags. We set the number of lags to 38 weeks, allowing for

unrestricted week-specific effects of fires over the course of the potential pregnancy. However,

                                                         16
backdating exposure in this way presents an estimation hurdle because the timing and length of

pregnancy are endogenous. Some premature infants were not yet conceived, and those exposed

to fires long before birth are positively selected precisely because they were not born prematurely.

Ideally, one could include counts of fires during every week of pregnancy, but because Brazilian

birth certificates record gestational age at birth coarsely, we cannot backdate conception. Because

the selection mechanism biases estimates of the effects of exposure to fires occurring long before

birth, we emphasize estimates pertaining to the last three months of pregnancy, although we do

report results for all 39 weeks.

   We thus employ a distributed lag model on grouped data, with births aggregated into municipality-

birthdate cells. For births in municipality j on date t, we run:

                    38                      38                           38
          ȳ jt =   ∑ αUs up f ires j,t−7s + ∑ αsN nonup f ires j,t−7s + ∑ X‘j,t−7s βs + µ j + τt + ε jt   (2)
                    s =0                    s =0                         s =0


where ȳ jt is an average birth outcome; µ j and τt are municipality and date fixed effects; and αU
                                                                                                  s ,

αsN , and β s are the distributed-lag versions of the coefficients from equation (1). Each independent

variable is an average or count for the week leading up to date t − 7s, where s is multiplied by 7

because t is measured in days, while s is measured in weeks. In robustness checks, we control for

average mother and infant characteristics in the cell, as well as for municipality-specific time and

season effects. We also conduct a number of falsification exercises, employing either in-sample

randomization of location and event timing or out-of-sample birth outcomes.

   The differential impact of an upwind fire occurring s weeks before birth is αU    N
                                                                                s − αs . Equa-

tion (2) yields many week-specific estimates that may be individually imprecise and unwieldy to

report, as would be expected for a models with many lags (Almon 1965; Sargan 1980). We thus fol-

low the literature on in utero exposure by focusing on three periods of gestation, akin to trimesters.

Specifically, we report 13-week sums of the coefficients, corresponding to the last, second-to-last,

and third-to-last periods before birth:

                                                           T
                                              α{T,T } ≡   ∑ αUs − αsN
                                                          s= T


where the periods { T, T } are {0, 12}, {13, 25}, and {26, 38}. These sums represent the impact

                                                          17
of increasing fires by one occurrence per week during periods of approximately three months.

Despite the similarity between these periods and pregnancy trimesters, we refrain from referring

to them as such because we count backward from the date of birth, rather than forward from the

date of conception. Given the aforementioned selection biases due to backdating, we view our

estimate of α{0,12} as being more interpretable than our estimates of α{13,25} and α{26,38} .

      By interpreting the differential association of upwind fires with health as a causal effect, we

assume that the interaction of fires and wind is exogenous to the causal system, conditional on

the covariates and fixed effects in our model. The nuance of this assumption merits further dis-

cussion. If we were comparing the associations of upwind and other fires with health in the cross

section, then sorting—in which mothers living downwind from high-burn areas were selected on

characteristics relevant to infant health—would pose an important concern. However, the munic-

ipality fixed effect in equation (2) allows us to eliminate this concern by focusing on differences in

exposure within the same municipality. One could also worry that some mothers time their preg-

nancies to avoid fetal smoke exposure, so that comparisons of infants born at different times of the

year are invalid. However, we show that our results are robust to the inclusion of municipality-

by-week-of-year fixed effects, which leads to a comparison of children born at the same time of

year in the same municipality, just in years with different fire intensity. A final matter is the de-

pendence of burn activity on wind. Sugar harvesters do pay attention to the wind, avoiding field

burning on days with high wind due to the risk of a fire becoming uncontained. But given our

flexible covariates for the presence and direction of wind, this relationship between wind and fire

poses no threat to identifying how their interaction affects health.



5     Pollution and Health: Results

5.1     Effects of Fires on Air Pollution

Table 3 reports estimations of equation (1), revealing that upwind fires differentially increase PM10

and O3 but not NOx . For now, we focus on our main choices for the central angle of the upwind

sector, 45 degrees, and the radius of the catchment area, 50km. We then discuss appendix results

on alternative angles and radii, which help explain our main choices.

      To build intuition, we start with an unsophisticated specification for PM10 and then gradually
                                                  18
refine it. Columns (1)-(2) report results for unweighted counts of fires, disregarding their orienta-

tion to the wind. In column (1), which does not control for atmospheric conditions, one additional

fire in the past week raises PM10 by 0.5 units in the same time frame. Controlling for atmospheric

conditions in column (2) does little to change this estimated effect. Because the fire counts are not

weighted by confidence, however, these estimates may understate the true impact of fires due to

errors in fire detection. To address this concern, column (3) uses confidence-weighted fire counts.

The coefficient grows, reaching 0.6 units of PM10 per confidence-weighted fire.

   In column (4), we decompose confidence-weighted fire counts into upwind fires, which are

located in the prevailing wind octant; downwind fires, which are located in the diametrically

opposing quadrant; and other fires, which include those at other angles to the prevailing wind and

those taking place on days without a prevailing wind. The effect of upwind fires on particulate

matter concentrations is 4-5 times larger than the effects of downwind or other fires, although

all three effects are statistically significant. An upwind fire raises PM10 by 2.5, or 0.16 standard

deviations, compared with effects of 0.6 and 0.5 for downwind and other fires, respectively.

   Because downwind and other fires have similar effects, our main regression specification,

equation (1), groups them together into non-upwind fires. We implement this specification in col-

umn (5) using confidence-weighted fire counts, with similar results: coefficients of 2.5 for upwind

fires and 0.5 for non-upwind fires. Our identifying variation for the rest of the analysis comes

from the difference between these effects, which at 2.0 is highly statistically significant based on

both asymptotic and bootstrap inference. Relative to non-upwind fires, upwind fires raise PM10

concentrations by 0.12 standard deviations. We apply the same model to measures of NOx and

O3 in columns (6) and (7), respectively. Both pollutants are byproducts of biomass burning but

may appear at different stages because sunlight interacts with some nitrogen oxides to produce

ozone. Column (7) reveals a significant differential upwind-fire impact on O3 of 0.7 units, or 0.05

standard deviations. Meanwhile, column (6) shows no evidence of a differential impact on NOx

by wind direction. These results are internally consistent because the exposure of NOx to sunlight

leads to a chemical reaction that produces O3 in a period shorter than one week.

   Appendix Table A5 further explores the results for the affected pollutants, PM10 and O3 , in

four ways. First, we consider alternative central angles of 30 and 90 degrees for the upwind

sector. Wider angles may either reduce noise by capturing more fires or increase noise by less pre-
                                               19
cisely capturing the wind. Although both alternative angles lead to coefficients of the same sign,

the coefficients and t-statistics are smaller than those in Table 3. Because the 45 degree definition

appears to best capture pollution dispersion, we use it henceforth. Second, we assess alternatives

to the 50km radius we use for our catchment area. At smaller radii, standard errors increase sub-

stantially, but coefficients do not change in any consistent way. Third, we investigate robustness

to alternative specifications of time effects and local-level seasonality by (1) replacing date fixed

effects with year and day-of-year fixed effects; (2) including station-by-year fixed effects; and (3)

including station-by-week-of-year fixed effects. Even these more demanding specifications, which

account for station-specific annual and seasonal trends, do not alter the magnitudes or signifi-

cance levels of the estimated pollution effects. Fourth, we re-estimate the models employing log-

transformations of the dependent variables in columns. Our results remain statistically significant

and are similar in magnitude to the level estimates, relative to the outcome means, with implied

upwind fire impacts of 4.2% for PM10 and 1.0% for O3 .


5.2     Effects of Fires on Infant Health

Tables 4-7 present the results for infant health. We begin with the outcomes most typically used

to reflect the cumulative impact of the in utero environment: birth weight and gestational age at

birth. Next, we consider perinatal mortality—including reported stillbirths, the daily number or

births (which we use as a proxy for fetal survival), and death in the first day and week of life—and

more acute measures of perinatal morbidity—including 1- and 5-minute APGAR scores, as well

as hospitalization admissions in the first full day of life. To conclude the section, we carry out

a number of robustness checks and falsification exercises for our main results relating to birth

weight and gestational age at birth. Throughout, we use confidence-weighted fire counts and

outcome data collapsed to the municipality-birthdate level.


5.2.1    Birth Weight and Gestational Age at Birth

Table 4 reports full-sample estimates of the 13-week sums of coefficients for our primary birth

outcomes, birth weight and gestational age at birth. Columns (1)-(5) build up the full model for

birth weight across three regressions, first disregarding wind and leaving out the atmospheric

                                                 20
condition covariates X jt , then adding X jt , and finally differentiating by wind direction. Columns

(6)-(10) then apply the full model to indicators for low and very low birth weight, the imputed

measure of gestational age, and indicators for preterm and very preterm.

   In columns (1)-(2), the results for all fires within 5-50 kilometers is positive and, in some cases,

even significant. For example, an extra fire per week occurring in the last 13 weeks of gestations

is associated with a 1.3-1.9 gram increase in birth weight, with p-values of roughly 0.1. Similar

associations are evident for weeks 13-25 but not weeks 26-38. A naive panel data analysis with

location and time fixed effects therefore leads to the conclusion that in utero exposure to fires has

marginally significant, positive effects on birth outcomes. Moreover, this result appears to be

robust to controlling for atmospheric conditions that covary with fire exposure.
   However, these positive associations appear to mostly reflect the child health benefits of in-

creased economic activity, which can be seen by contrasting the sums of coefficients for upwind

(column 3) and non-upwind fires (column 4), estimated in the a single regression. Here, an extra

upwind fire per week during the last 13 weeks of gestation is associated with a significant 20 gram

decrease in birth weight, consistent with a negative effect of fire-related air pollution. Meanwhile,

all other fires during this final period of gestation are associated with a significant 3 gram increase

in birth weight. For mothers not at risk for pollution exposure, the correlates of fire activity im-

prove the in utero environment. But for mothers living downwind of fires, the detrimental effects

of pollution exposure greatly outweigh these benefits. Column (5) reports the difference between

the upwind and non-upwind coefficients, revealing that in the last gestational period, the pol-

lution differentially generated by an additional upwind fire per week reduces birth weight by a

statistically significant 23 grams. This effect represents 0.14 standard deviations as reported at the

bottom of the table, reflecting variation across municipality-birthdate cells. Measured across in-

fants, the standard deviation of birth weight is 525, implying an effect of 0.04 standard deviations.

The other two gestational periods exhibit no significant effects, although they are more prone to

concerns about selection from prematurity. Consistent with these concerns, the differential effect

for weeks 13-25 is positive though insignificant.

   The remainder of Table 4 reports differential effects of upwind fires on the other outcomes.

Columns (6) and (7) show that the birth weight effects are felt at the lower tail of the birth weight

distribution. An additional fire per week in the last gestational period leads to a 10% increase
                                               21
in the incidence of low birth weight (< 2500 grams)—an effect of 8 per 1000 on a base risk of 81

per 1000—and a 41% increase in the incidence of very low birth weight (< 1500 grams)—an effect

of 5 per 1000 on a base risk of 12 per 1000. Some part of these reductions in birth weight may

be attributable to earlier birth. In column (8), we find that the average length of gestation—as

measured by our imputed gestational age variable—falls by a statistically significant 0.6 days for

an additional upwind fire per week in the final period of gestation. Rates of preterm birth (<37

weeks) rise insignificantly, while rates of very preterm births (<32 weeks) rise significantly, by 5

per 1000 on a base rate of 12 per 1000. We again find no evidence of detrimental effects of upwind

fires in the earlier gestational periods.


5.2.2   Perinatal Morbidity and Mortality

Besides birth weight and gestational age at birth, vital statistics and hospitalization data provide

other useful measures of health in the period immediately surrounding birth, the perinatal period.

Using the same approach as Table 4, Tables 5 and 6 analyze these data, focusing on fetal mortality

first, early neonatal mortality (first week of life) next, and morbidity among the living last.

   Table 5 presents estimates of the differential effects of upwind fires on the number of births and

the reported stillbirth rate. Because stillbirths are underreported, we use the number of births as

a broader proxy for in utero survival, a strategy similar to that employed by Jayachandran (2009).

This interpretation requires us to assume that the number of conceptions is unrelated to the rel-

ative incidence of upwind fires, which is again more reasonable for fire exposure during the last

period of gestation, 0-12 weeks before the (potential) birthdate. In column (1), we consider the

logarithm of the daily number of live births, which is the most relevant measure of in utero sur-

vival.16 An additional upwind fire per week in the final gestational period differentially decreases

the number of live births by 2.8%. If we bundle stillbirths with live births to count the overall num-

ber of births, we find an upwind-fire-related decline of 2.3%, as reported in column (2), suggesting

that in utero mortality is the dominant force. However, this result serves only as a robustness check

for a lower bound, as stillborns should be excluded from the measure of in utero survival. Column

(3) looks directly at reported stillbirths, finding a similar though statistically insignificant pattern

in which stillbirths rise by 6 per 1000 births with a t-statistic of 1.5.
 16 Less   than 1% of cells have zero births, so using logarithms does not meaningfully alter the sample.
                                                            22
    If stillborn babies are drawn from the lower tail of the underlying health distribution, then

by focusing exclusively on live births, Table 4 may underestimate the negative effects of upwind

fires. The remainder of Table 5 addresses this concern by adding stillborns to the sample and

repeating the analyses in Table 4. For birth weight, the differential effects of upwind fire exposure

in the final gestational period strengthen to 27 grams, with a 9.9-point increase in the incidence

of low birth weight and a 6.5-point increase in the incidence of very low birth weight. Upwind

fire exposure appears to increase death risk in smaller fetuses, biasing downward the estimates

in Table 4. Effects on preterm birth rates strengthen to 6.3 points, though still insignificant, while

effects on very preterm birth rates increase to 5.8 points.

    To conclude our main estimates, Table 6 presents results for early-life morbidity and mortality.

For mortality, we use the share of live infants in a municipality-birthdate cell that died within a

day or a week of birth. As displayed in columns (1)-(2), neither measure of newborn death shows

a significant effect from fire exposure late in gestation, although the point estimates are positive.17

However, it is worth noting that given the rarity of both outcomes, we lack the power to detect

meaningful effects; their means of 3 to 6 (per 1000 live births) are only 2-3 times the standard errors

of the effect estimates. For morbidity, we consider rates of hospital admissions (for all causes and

for causes related to fetal growth faltering and prematurity) charged to the public health care

system by the end of the first full day of life, as well as average 1- and 5-minute APGAR scores,

which are meant to reflect how well the newborn tolerates the delivery process and conditions

outside the womb, respectively. Results presented in columns (3)-(6) point to no significant effects

on these outcomes.


5.2.3   Robustness and Heterogeneity

The broad takeaways from Tables 4-6 are that pollution from sugarcane harvest fires causes smaller

babies, shorter pregnancies, and more in utero mortality, without statistically significant effects on

morbidity and mortality soon after birth. However, while equation (2) is an exacting regression

specification, it may still be subject to concerns about potential confounders like maternal charac-

teristics, location-specific time trends, and location-specific seasonality. In principle, these factors
  17 1-week mortality significantly increases from upwind fire exposure in the earliest gestational period, but we do not

emphasize this result because of concerns about selection and endogenous fertility.

                                                          23
should not be differentially associated with fires by wind direction, so they should not bias our

estimates, but we can confirm this claim empirically. For our primary birth outcomes, Table 7

takes two approaches to addressing these concerns. First, it investigates robustness to alternative

regression specifications that include additional covariates or interactions between location and

time fixed effects. Second, it carries out a series of falsification exercises designed to assess the

likelihood that our results would arise spuriously. To contain the size of the table, we focus on the

estimand we have emphasized throughout the discussion of the results, the differential effect of

upwind fires in the final gestational period. For the same purpose, we also report only coefficients

and standard errors (not p-values) for the robustness tests.

   After column (1) reprints the original estimate from Table 4, the next five columns of Table

7 focus on the alternative regression specifications. First, in column (2), we add municipality-

birthdate averages of maternal and infant characteristics as covariates in equation (2), finding no

substantive change in our main parameter estimates. We include averages of maternal age, educa-

tion level, marital status, parity, and number of past miscarriages, as well as infant race and sex, all

known determinants of infant health. The robustness of our results to these additional covariates

suggests that they may not be differentially associated with upwind fires, a finding that would

support our treatment of the interaction between wind and fires as exogenous. In Appendix Table

A6, we directly test our identifying assumption by using these variables as outcomes in equation

(2). We find no evidence that they are differentially associated with fires by wind direction.

   In our second set of robustness checks, which appear in columns (3)-(6), we experiment with

alternative specifications for annual and seasonal confounders. Column (3) replaces the date fixed

effects in equation (2) with year and day-of-year fixed effects; column (4) then replaces the year

fixed effects with station-by-year fixed effects, keeping the day-of-year fixed effects; column (5)

then reintroduces date fixed effects, keeping the station-by-year fixed effects; column (6) intro-

duces station-by-week-of-year fixed effects. Except for preterm birth (for which Table 4 did not

show a statistically significant effect), our results are broadly robust across these specifications.

   The remaining columns of Table 7 present three falsification exercises for our primary birth

outcomes. In column (7), we estimate the original model except with dependent variables (aver-

age birth outcomes in a municipality-birthdate cell) measured at a five-year lag. Implicitly, this

exercise checks whether season-location specific effects not captured by our model could explain
                                               24
the results. They do not; all but one of the 5-year lagged coefficients are of the wrong sign, and

all t-statistics are less than 1.6. In columns (8) and (9), we carry out an in-sample falsification ex-

ercise by reassigning fire counts from either a random year (for the same municipality and day

of the year) or a random location (for the same birthdate). We perform each randomization 100

times and report the proportion placebo samples in which the point estimate was less extreme

(i.e., closer to zero) than our main estimates in Table 4. In all cases except preterm birth (for which

Table 4 did not show a statistically significant effect), our main estimate is more extreme than 95%

of the placebo estimates.18

      To shed light on heterogeneity, Appendix Table A7 estimates differential effects of upwind

fires on our primary birth outcomes in subsamples defined by child sex, maternal age, and ma-

ternal education. For birth weight outcomes, these estimations suggest stronger effects among

more vulnerable groups, such as less-educated mothers and those in the early or late years of the

reproductive periods (younger than 25 or older than 35), although differences in effects across sub-

samples are not statistically significant. No clear patterns emerge across subsamples for outcomes

related to gestational age at birth, although measurement error may be more of a concern for more

vulnerable groups (e.g., the less-educated) if they are more prone to misreporting the date of the

last menstrual period.


5.3     Mechanism

The effects estimated in Section 5.2 are reduced-form, so they are limited their ability to speak to

mechanisms. Nonetheless, the negative effect of pollution exposure in the final gestational period

on both birth weight and gestational age at birth is consistent with inflammation in the mother

inducing preterm labor. This section explores further evidence on this mechanism.


5.3.1    Proximate Determinants of Low Birth Weight

One important question relating to this mechanism is the extent to which the shortening to gesta-

tion can explain the reduction in birth weight. Low birth weight has two proximate determinants,
   18 In unreported results, we also estimated equation (2) in enlarged samples that include municipalities within 10km,

15km, 17.5km, or 20km of the air monitoring stations. Consistent with increased measurement error in wind, the
estimated effect on birth weight shrinks as we include municipalities further from the stations. For these respective
samples, our point estimates (standard errors) for the final gestational period are -20.3 (6.2), -14.6 (7.3), -11.0 (5.6), and
-9.0 (6.0).
                                                             25
intrauterine growth restriction—which leads to babies that are small for gestational age—and

preterm delivery—in which babies who may have been developing healthily in the womb are

small because they are born early. A theory involving late-pregnancy inflammation would predict

an important role for the latter determinant.

   Practically, distinguishing intrauterine growth restriction from preterm delivery as the reason

for smallness at birth is difficult because we only have a noisy measure of gestational age at birth.

In our data, the most straightforward approach to studying this issue is to exclusively analyze

infants born at term (37-41) weeks. Fetal growth is slower during this period than at any point over

the previous 10 weeks (Olsen et al. 2010), when the vast majority of preterm infants are born, so

this approach minimizes (but does not eliminate) concerns about variations in the timing of birth

within the category. When we focus on this subsample, we estimate that an additional upwind

fire per week during the last three months of gestation differentially decreases birth weight by

4.5 grams, with a standard error of 6.5. The corresponding estimates for low and very low birth

weight are -2.3 (std. err. = 3.4) and 0.4 (std. err. = 1.2), respectively. Because these estimates are

much smaller than the effects we find in the full sample, they suggest that shorter gestation can

account for much of the full sample effect.

   At the same time, we cannot entirely rule out fetal growth restriction in the womb. Notably,

maternal inflammation could restrict fetal growth in addition to inducing preterm labor, so this

alternative mechanism is not inconsistent with the proposed theory. As mentioned above, growth

at the start of the final gestational period is rapid, leaving much scope for growth restriction from

placental inflammation before the fetus reaches term. Unfortunately, the course coding of gesta-

tional age limits us from investigating these issues more definitively.


5.3.2   Maternal Health

An effect of environmental conditions during gestation presumes a mechanism involving the

mother’s body, which may be verifiable in the data. A likely cause of pollution-related inflam-

mation in the mother is respiratory infection, which in severe cases leads to hospital admissions.

As such, we draw on DATASUS data on hospital admissions charged to the public health care

system, estimating the differential effects of upwind fires on hospitalizations among prenatal care


                                                 26
patients in the public system and among women of childbearing age (15-45). Unfortunately, we

lack the statistical power to detect effects by specific causes of hospitalization like respiratory in-

fection, so we analyze counts of all hospitalizations.19 To avoid introducing new methods, we use

equation (1), our pollution specification, for estimation. That is to say, we count hospitalizations

in the week leading up to date t and then regress the count on upwind fires, non-upwind fires,

and covariates, all measured during the same rolling week.

   We leave these data as counts because up-to-date estimates of the population at risk are not

available, especially for prenatal care patients in the public system. Although a Poisson fixed effect

model seems suitable for this application, the large number of date fixed effects introduces an

incidental parameters problem, so we use a linear model with three alternative transformations of

the dependent variable. First, we take the logarithm of the count, so that we measure proportional

changes in hospitalizations within a municipality. This approach works well for all women 15-45,

for whom 0 hospitalizations occur in fewer than 0.1% of rolling week cells, but less well for public

prenatal care patients, who have 0 hospitalizations in nearly one quarter of cells. As such, in a

second approach, we take the logarithm of the count plus one. This alternative avoids sample

selectivity but also somewhat obscures the proportional interpretation of the logarithm. In the

third approach, we move away from logarithms and standardize counts by their municipality-

specific means and standard deviations.

   Table 8 reports the results, revealing positive but only marginally significant differential effects

of upwind fires on hospitalizations. Unlike with the infant health outcomes, the analytic and boot-

strap p-valuaes differ substantially here. In the case of prenatal patients, each additional upwind

fire is associated with 3-4% more hospitalizations, or one-twentieth of a standard deviation, with

analytic p-values ranging from 0.046 to 0.13 and bootstrap p-values ranging from 0.13 to 0.24. In

the case of prenatal patients, each additional upwind fire is associated with 1.5% more hospital-

izations, or one-tenth of a standard deviation, with analytic p-values ranging from 0.04 to 0.09 and

bootstrap p-values ranging from 0.15 to 0.25. Overall, these estimates provide suggestive evidence

that maternal infection may explain the negative effects of pollution on birth outcomes.
 19 We   have verified that overnight stays after the delivery of a child do not account for our results.




                                                             27
6   Conclusions

Farmers have used fire as a tool in agriculture for thousands of years, but the health effects of this

source of moderate but repeated pollution are not fully understood. We use data from a major

sugar-producing state in Brazil to study the health effects of pollution from sugarcane harvest

fires. Using wind direction to untangle these health effects from confounding local business cycle

variation, we find a causal pathway running from smoke exposure in the last three months of

gestation to reduced birth weight, shorter gestation, and increased risk of fetal death. These effects

are strongly significant and robust to a range of alternative model specifications. Furthermore,

our reliance on wind direction is key for causal identification; by itself, panel variation in fires

leads to results of the wrong sign and magnitude, likely because harvest activities are so deeply

intertwined with the local economy.

    The fact that field fires in our setting increase pollution only moderately, starting from a mod-

erate base, distinguishes our study from much other research on air pollution and infant health,

which tends to focus either on more extreme pollution shocks or on settings with graver base-

line levels. Unfortunately, it is difficult to benchmark the magnitudes of our estimates against

this existing literature because of its extremely varied findings. Stieb et al. (2012) review the epi-

demiological literature on in utero pollution exposure and birth outcomes, finding a wide range

of positive to negative associations between PM10 exposure and birth weight, both over the en-

tire pregnancy and in specific trimesters. In their meta-analysis, the pooled estimate for PM10

exposure over the entire pregnancy is significantly negative but moderate, about one-tenth the

magnitude that would be implied by our final trimester fire effects if they were entirely driven by

PM10 . But in light of the wild variation in effect sizes across studies, this pooled estimate does

not provide a useful basis for comparison. In fact, this variation reinforces the motivation for our

research design: that cross-section, time-series, and panel variation in air pollution is highly cor-

related with other economic, ecological, and climatic determinants of health, confounding typical

estimation strategies.

    Our findings suggest that small increases in air pollution can damage early-life health even in

relatively unpolluted areas. One implication is that the relevant dose response relationship is steep

even at low pollution levels, so concerns about the health effects of air pollution should not stop at

                                                 28
the periphery of cities or industrial centers. The pollution levels in our study are virtually ignored

by environmental agencies across the globe, yet they appear to be a significant health threat. Our

estimates highlight the trade-off between economic activity and pollution externalities, which is

central to the study of sustainability in economic development (Dasgupta 2007).

   Another implication is that the health burden of anthropogenic air pollution is not a phe-

nomenon exclusive to the modern era. The use of fire to cook food and tend to fields long predates

the industrial revolution (Pyne 1997; Scott et al. 2013), and so too does the contamination of the

air by human activities. That said, the health burden of agricultural fires is likely becoming more

severe in the modern era, as increases in population density and market integration intensify use

of fire in rural areas, with spillovers to urban areas. Examples can by found in India, where field

fires in rural Punjab send a cloud of particulate matter to nearby Delhi every November (Pande

and Sugathan 2015), and in Indonesia, where land-clearing fires in the country’s peatlands export

haze to several Southeast Asian countries (Tacconi 2016).

   However, the modern era also brings a way to mitigate the intensification of fire activity. For

sugarcane as well as other crops, combines, mechanical harvesters, and ploughs eliminate the

need for fire, implying potentially large health gains from mechanization, ceteris paribus. In the

specific case of sugarcane, its potential as a path to energy sustainability makes a broad assess-

ment of its costs, with and without mechanization, imperative. Cost-benefit analyzes that ignore

either the health impacts of traditional harvesting methods or the costs of mechanization over-

state the benefits of sugar-based ethanol. While adoption of these pollution-reducing technologies

is proceeding rapidly in some settings, such as sugar plantations in Brazil, other settings are mech-

anizing more slowly. Smallholder sugar farms in Brazil are one example, as are smallholder farms

across sub-Saharan Africa, where slash-and-burn agriculture remains prevalent (Andreae 1991).

The transportability of our estimates to these varied settings is unclear, so policymakers would

benefit from a geographically broader assessment of the health impacts of agricultural fires. How

these impacts vary and persist over the lifecycle is another fruitful area for future research. On

both fronts, careful attention to both the observed and unobserved linkages between burning and

other forms of economic activity will be key to producing useful knowledge.




                                                 29
References

Aguiar, Daniel Alves, Bernardo Friedrich Theodor Rudorff, Wagner Fernando Silva, Marcos Adami,
  and Marcio Pupin Mello. (2011). “Remote Sensing Images in Support of Environmental Pro-
  tocol: Monitoring the Sugarcane Harvest in São Paulo State, Brazil.” Remote Sensing 3(12):
  2682-2703.

Almon, Shirley. (1965). “The Distributed Lag Between Capital Appropriations and Expenditures.”
   Econometrica 33(1): 178-196.

Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. (2011). “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 153-172.

Amarante, Verónica, Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. (2016). “Do Cash
  Transfers Improve Birth Outcomes? Evidence from Matched Vital Statistics, Program, and
  Social Security Data.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(2): 1-43.

Andreae, Meinrat O. (1991). “Biomass Burning: Its History, Use, and Distribution and its Impact
  on Environmental Quality and Global Climate.” in Joel S. Levine, ed., Global Biomass Burning:
  Atmospheric, Climatic and Biospheric Implications. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 3-21.

Andreae, Meinrat O., and P. Merlet. (2001). “Emission of Trace Gases and Aerosols from Biomass
  Burning.” Global Biogeochemical Cycles 14(4): 955-966.

Arbex, Marcos Abdo, Gyorgy M. Böhm, Paulo H.N. Saldiva, Gleice M.S. Conceiçao, Arden C. Pope
   III, and Alfesio L.F. Braga. (2000). “Assessment of the Effects of Sugar Cane Plantation Burning
   on Daily Counts of Inhalation Therapy.” Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association
   50(10): 1745-1749.

Arbex, Marcos Abdo, José Eduardo Delfini Cançado, Luiz Alberto Amador Pereira, Alfésio Luís
   Ferreira Braga, and Paulo Hilário do Nascimento Saldiva. (2004). “Biomass Burning and Its
   Effects on Health.” Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia 30(2): 158-75.

Arbex, Marcos Abdo, Lourdes Conceição Martins, Regiani Carvalho de Oliveira, Luiz Alberto
   Amador Pereira, Flávio Ferlin Arbex, José Eduardo Delfini Cançado, Paulo Hilário Nasci-
   mento Saldiva, and Alfésio Luís Ferreira Braga. (2007). “Air Pollution from Biomass Burn-
   ing and Asthma Hospital Admissions in a Sugar Cane Plantation Area in Brazil.” Journal of
   Epidemiology and Community Health 61(5): 395-400.

Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. (2016). “Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant
   Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City."
   Economic Journal 126(591): 257-280.

Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman, and Norbert Schady. (2011). “Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant
   Mortality in the Developing World.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 847-856.

Bernstein, Jonathan A., Neil Alexis, Charles Barnes, I. Leonard Bernstein, Andre Nel, David Peden,
   David Diaz-Sanchez, Susan M. Tarlo, and P. Brock Williams. (2004). “Health Effects of Air
   Pollution.” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 114(5): 1116-1123.

                                                30
Bharadwaj, Prashant, Juan Eberhard, and Christopher Neilson. (Forthcoming). “Health at Birth,
   Parental Investments and Academic Outcomes.” Journal of Labor Economics.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Matthew Gibson, Joshua Graff Zivin, and Christopher Neilson. (2014).
   “Gray Matters: Pollution and Human Capital Formation.” NBER Working Paper No. 20662.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Vellesen Løken, and Christopher Neilson. (2013). “Early Life Health
   Interventions and Academic Achievement.” American Economic Review 103(5): 1862-91.

Bitler, Marianne P., and Janet Currie. (2005). “Does WIC Work? The Effects of WIC on Pregnancy
    and Birth Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(1): 73-91.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes. (2007). “From the Cradle to the Labor
   Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1):
   409-439.

Cancado, José E.D., Paulo H.N. Saldiva, Luiz A.A. Pereira, Luciene B.L.S. Lara, Paulo Artaxo,
   Luiz A. Martinelli, Marcos A. Arbex, Antonella Zanobetti and Alfesio L.F. Braga. (2006). “The
   Impact of Sugar Cane-Burning Emissions on the Respiratory System of Children and The El-
   derly.” Environmental Health Perspectives 114(5): 725-729.

Cesur, Resul, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. (Forthcoming). “Air Pollution and Infant Mortal-
   ity: Evidence from the Expansion of Natural Gas Infrastructure.” Economic Journal.

Chagas, Andre Luis, Alexandre N. Almeida, and Carlos Roberto Azzoni. (2014). “Sugar Cane
   Burning and Human Health: An Analysis Using Spatial Difference in Difference.” FEA-USP
   Working Paper 2015-47.

Crutzen, P.J., and M.O. Andreae. (1990). “Biomass Burning in the Tropics: Impact on Atmospheric
   Chemestry and Biogeochemical Cycles.” Science 250(4988): 1669-1678.

Chu, Steven, and Arun Majumdar. (2012). “Opportunities and Challenges for a Sustainable En-
  ergy Future.” Nature 488(7411): 294-303.

Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. (2003). “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortal-
   ity: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics 118(3): 1121-1167.

Currie, Janet. (2009). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Child-
   hood, and Human Capital Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 47(1): 87-122.

Currie, Janet, and Matthew Neidell. (2005). “Air Pollution And Infant Health: What Can We
   Learn From California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1003-1030.

Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. (2013). “Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and Birth Out-
   comes.” Journal of Health Economics 32(3): 487-503.

Currie, Janet, and Reed Walker. (2011). “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
   E-ZPass.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(1): 65-90.


                                               31
Currie, Janet, and Tom Vogl. (2012). “Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing
   Countries.” Annual Review of Economics 5: 1-36.

Currie, Janet, Joshua Graff Zivin, Jamie Mullins, and Matthew Neidell. (2014). “What Do We
   Know About Short- and Long-Term Effects of Early-Life Exposure to Pollution?” Annual Re-
   view of Resource Economics 6(1): 217-247.

Dasgupta, Partha. (2007). “The Idea of Sustainable Development.” Sustainability Science 2(1): 5-11.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, and Rema Hanna. (2016). “Up in Smoke: The Influence of
   Household Behavior on the Long-Run Impact of Improved Cooking Stoves.” American Eco-
   nomic Journal: Economic Policy 8(1): 80-114.

Ezzati, Majid, and Daniel M. Kammen. (2001). “Quantifying the Effects of Exposure to Indoor
   Air Pollution from Biomass Combustion on Acute Respiratory Infections in Developing Coun-
   tries.” Environmental Health Perspectives 109(5): 481-488.

Fernandes, A.C. (1988). “A Utilizacão da Queimada na Colheita da Cana-de-Açúcar.” COPERSU-
   CAR CTAG-1: 1-17.

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). (2016). FAOSTAT. Online: http://faostat.fao.org/.

França, Daniela de Azeredo, Karla Maria Longo, Turibio Gomes Soares Neto, José Carlos Santos,
   Saulo R. Freitas, Bernardo Rudorff, Ely Vieira Cortez, Edson Anselmo, and João Andrade Car-
   valho. (2012). “Pre-Harvest Sugarcane Burning: Determination of Emission Factors Through
   Laboratory Measurements.” Atmosphere 3(1): 164-180.

Frankenberg, Elizabeth, Douglas McKee, and Duncan Thomas. (2005). “Health Consequences of
   Forest Fires in Indonesia.” Demography 42(1): 109-129.

Glinianaia, Svetlana V., Judith Rankin, Ruth Bell, Tanja Pless-Mulloli, and Denise Howel. (2004).
   “Particulate Air Pollution and Fetal Health: A Systematic Review of the Epidemiologic Evi-
   dence.” Epidemiology 15(1): 36-45.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell. (2013). “Environment, Health, and Human Capital.”
   Journal of Economic Literature 51(3): 689-730.

Greenstone, Michael, and Rema Hanna. (2014). “Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pol-
   lution, and Infant Mortality In India.” American Economic Review 104(10): 3038-3072.

Goldemberg, José. (2007). “Ethanol for a Sustainable Energy Future.” Science 315(5813): 808-810.

Hanna, Rema and Paulina Oliva. (2015). “The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from
  a Natural Experiment in Mexico City.” Journal of Public Economics 122: 68–79.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard and David N. Weil. (2012). “Measuring Economic
  Growth from Outer Space.” American Economic Review 102(2): 994-1028.

Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE). (2011). Estatísticas do Registro Civil (Vol. 37).
    Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística.

                                                   32
Jeuland, Marc, Subhrendu K. Pattanayak and Randall Bluffstone. (2015). “The Economics of
   Household Air Pollution.” Annual Reveiew of Resource Economics 7: 81-108.

Jayachandran, Seema. (2009). “Air Quality and Early-Life Mortality: Evidence from Indonesia’s
   Wildfires.” Journal of Human Resources 44(4): 916-954.

Kannan, Srimathi, Dawn P. Misra, J. Timothy Dvonch, and Ambika Krishnakumar. (2006). “Expo-
   sures to Airborne Particulate Matter and Adverse Perinatal Outcomes: A Biologically Plausible
   Mechanistic Framework for Exploring Potential Effect Modification by Nutrition.” Environ-
   mental Health Perspectives 114(11): 1636-1642.

Knittel, Christopher, Douglas L. Miller, and Nicholas J. Sanders. (2016). “Caution, Drivers! Chil-
   dren Present: Traffic, Pollution, and Infant Health.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(2):
   350–366.

Kochanek, Kenneth D., Sherry L. Murphy, Jiaquan Xu, Betzaida Tejada-Vera. (2016). “Deaths:
   Final Data for 2014.” National Vital Statistics Reports 65(4).

Lacasana, Marina, Ana Esplugues, and Ferran Ballester. (2005).“Exposure to Ambient Air Pollu-
   tion and Prenatal and Early Childhood Health Effects.” European Journal of Epidemiology 20(2):
   183-199.

Lamsal, Kamal, Philip Jones, and Barret Thomas. (2013). “Sugarcane Harvest Logistics in Brazil.”
  Tippie College of Business Working Paper 9-11-2013, University of Iowa.

LeCanut, P., M.O. Andreae, G.W. Harris, F.G. Wienhold, and T. Zenker. (1996). “Airborne Studies
   of Emissions from Savanna Fires In Southern Africa. 1. Aerosol Emissions Measured With A
   Laser Optical Particle Counter.” Journal of Geophysical Research 101(23): 615-23.

Logan, Jennifer A. (1989). “Ozone in Rural Areas of the United States.” Journal of Geophysical
   Research 94(D6): 8511–8532.

Lopes, M.L.A.; Carvalho, L.R.F. (2009). “Estimativas de Emissão de Gases Provenientes da Queima
   de cana-de-açúcar em Escala Regional.” In Proceedings of the 32a Reunião Anual da Sociedade
   Brasileira de Química, Fortaleza, Brazil.

Marinho, E., and V. Kirchhoff. (1991). “Projeto Fogo: Um experimento para avaliar efeitos das
  queimadas de cana-de-acucar na baixa atmosfera.” Revista Brasileira de Geofisica 9(2): 107-119.

Martinelli, Luiz, and Solange Filosos (2008). “Expansion of Sugarcane Ethanol Production in
  Brazil: Environmental and Social Challenges.” Ecological Applications 18(4): 885-898.

McConnel, M., E. Dohlman, and S. Haley (2010). “World Sugar Price Volatility Intensified by
  Market and Policy Factors.” Amber Waves 8(3): 28-35.

Michael L. Anderson. (2016). “As the Wind Blows: The Effects of Long-Term Exposure to Air
   Pollution on Mortality”. NBER Working Paper No. 21578.

Mobarak, Ahmed M., Puneet Dwivedi, Robert Bailis, Lynn Hildemann, and Grant Miller. (2012).
  “Low Demand for Nontraditional Cookstove Technologies.” Proceedings of the National Academy

                                               33
   of Sciences 109(27): 10815-10820.

Olmo, Neide Regina Simoes, Paulo Hilário do Nascimento Saldiva, Alfésio Luís Ferreira Braga,
   Chin An Lin, Ubiratan de Paula Santos, and Luiz Alberto Amador Pereira. (2011). “A Review
   of Low-level Air Pollution and Adverse Effects on Human Health: Implications for Epidemio-
   logical Studies and Public Policy.” Clinics 66(4): 681-690.

Olsen, Irene E., Sue A. Groveman, M. Louise Lawson, Reese H. Clark, and Babette S. Zemel. (2010).
   "New Intrauterine Growth Curves Based on United States Data." Pediatrics 125(2): e214-e244.

Pande, Rohini, and Anish Sugathan. (2015). “Delhi November Air Quality Threatened by Punjab
   Farm Fires.” Business Standard.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Nazmul Hassan. (2010). “Short- and Long-Term Health
    Effects of Burning Biomass in the Home in Low-Income Countries.” Unpublished Manuscript.

Pyne, Stephen J. (1997). World Fire: The Culture of Fire on Earth. Seattle: University of Washington
   Press.

Ribeiro, Helena. (2008). “Sugar Cane Burning in Brazil: Respiratory Health Effects.” Revista de
   Saúde Pública 42(2): 370-376.

Ritz, Beate and Michelle Wilhelm. (2008). “Ambient Air Pollution and Adverse Birth Outcomes:
    Methodologic Issues in an Emerging Field.” Basic & Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology 102(2):
    1742-7843.

Salassi, Michael, Mercedes Garcia, and Janis Breaux (2004). “Impact of Sugarcane Delivery Sched-
   ule on Product Value at Raw Sugar Factories.” Journal of Agribusiness 22(1): 61-75.

Sargan, J.D. (1980). “The Consumer Price Equation in the Post War British Economy: An Exercise
   in Equation Specification Testing.” Review of Economic Studies 47(1): 113-135.

Saska, M., S. Goudeau, and M. Marquette (2009). “Determination of Sucrose Lose in Clean Un-
   burnt Billet Cane.” Journal of the American Society of Sugar Cane Technologies 9: 53-77.

Sastry, Narayan. (2002). “Forest Fires, Air Pollution, and Mortality in Southeast Asia.” Demogra-
   phy 39(1): 1-23.

Saxena, Priyanka, R. Srivastava, and M. Sharma. (2010). “Impact of Cut to Crush Delay and
   Bio-Chemical Changes in Sugarcane.” Australian Journal of Crop Science 4(9): 692-699.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker. (2016). “Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous
   Health.” Review of Economic Studies 83(2): 768-809.

Scott, Andrew C., David M.J.S. Bowman, William J. Bond, Stephen J. Pyne, and Martin E. Alexan-
   der. (2013). Fire on Earth: An Introduction. Hoboken: Wiley.

SEADE. (2016). “Mortalidaded Infantil.” Online:
   http://www.seade.gov.br/produtos/mortalidade-infantil/.

Setzer, Alberto, and Raffi Sismanoglu (2007). “Risco de Fogo: Metodologia do Calculo.” Online:
                                               34
   http://sigma.cptec.inpe.br/queimadas/documentos/docRF2007.pdf.

Smith, Kirk R. (2000). “National Burden of Disease in India from Indoor Air Pollution.” Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences 97(24): 13286–13293.

Smith, Kirk R., John McCracken, Martin W. Weber, Alan Hubbard, Alisa Jenny, Lisa Thompson,
  John Balmes, Anaite Diaz, Byron Arana, and Nigel Bruce. (2011). “Effect of Reduction in
  Household Air Pollution on Childhood Pneumonia in Guatemala (RESPIRE): A Randomised
  Controlled Trial.” Lancet 378(9804): 1717-1726.

Šrám, Radim J., Blanka Binková, Jan Dejmek, and Martin Bobak. (2005). “Ambient Air Pollu-
   tion and Pregnancy Outcomes: A Review of the Literature.” Environmental Health Perspectives
   113(4): 375-382.

Stieb, David M., Li Chen, Maysoon Eshoul, Stan Judek. (2012). “Ambient Air Pollution, Birth
    Weight and Preterm Birth: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Environmental Research
    117: 100-111.

Tacconi, Luca. (2016). “Preventing Fires and Haze in Southeast Asia.” Nature Climate Change 6(7):
   640-643.

Tan-Soo, Jie-Sheng, and Subhrendu Pattanayak. (2016). “Health Irreversibility from Early-Life
   Exposure to Air Pollution: Evidence from Indonesian Longitudinal Survey.” Working Paper,
   Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University.

Tsao, C.C., J.E. Campbell, M. Mena-Carrasco, S.N. Spak, G.R. Carmichael, and Y. Chen,. (2012).
   “Increased Estimates of Air-Pollution Emissions From Brazilian Sugar-Cane Ethanol.” Nature
   Climate Change 2(1): 53-57.

União da Indústria de Cana-de-Açúcar (UNICA). (2016). UNICADATA. Online:
   http://www.unicadata.com.br/.

Uriarte, María, Charles B. Yackulic, Tamar Cooper, Dan Flynn, Marina Cortes, Tanja Crk, Georgina
   Cullman, Meghan McGinty, and Jason Sircely. (2009). “Expansion of Sugarcane Production
   in São Paulo, Brazil: Implications for Fire Occurrence and Respiratory Health.” Agriculture,
   Ecosystems and Environment 132(1): 48-56.

Vukovich, Fred M. (1995). “Regional-Scale Boundary Layer Ozone Variations in the Eastern United
   States And their Association with Meteorological Variations.” Atmospheric Environment 29(17):
   2259–2273.

Yokelson, Robert J., Ted J. Christian, T.G. Karl, and Alex Guenther (2008). “The Tropical Forest
   And Fire Emissions Experiment: Laboratory Fire Measurements And Synthesis Of Campaign
   Data.” Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 8(13): 3509-3527.




                                                35
                                                     A.  14-­‐‑day  rolling  count  of  ﬁres	                                                                                            B.  Log  count  of  ﬁres  per  calendar  month	
                                                                   2009-­‐‑2014	                                                                                                                           2009-­‐‑2014	
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500




                                                                                                                                                    6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                    Log Averrage Monthly Count of Fires
 Count of Fires (Rolling Fortnights)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Milled Cane (1000s of Tons)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                       5.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                          1   2      3    4   5       6    7     8    9   10      11    12
                                       4


                                                 5


                                                           6


                                                                     7


                                                                               8


                                                                                         9


                                                                                                   0


                                                                                                              1


                                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                                                 3


                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Calendar Month
                             00


                                             00


                                                       00


                                                                 00


                                                                           00


                                                                                     00


                                                                                               01




                                                                                                                   01


                                                                                                                             01


                                                                                                                                       01
                                                                                                        n2
               n2


                                            n2


                                                      n2


                                                                n2


                                                                          n2


                                                                                    n2


                                                                                              n2




                                                                                                                  n2


                                                                                                                            n2


                                                                                                                                      n2
                                                                                                       ja
     ja


                                        ja


                                                  ja


                                                            ja


                                                                      ja


                                                                                ja


                                                                                          ja




                                                                                                              ja


                                                                                                                        ja


                                                                                                                                  ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fires       Confidence-weighted fires        Milled cane
                                                                                                   01
01


                                       01


                                                 01


                                                           01


                                                                     01


                                                                               01


                                                                                         01




                                                                                                             01


                                                                                                                       01


                                                                                                                                 01




                                                      Figure  1:  Trends  and  Seasonality  in  Satellite-­‐‑Based  Fire  Counts,  State  of  São  Paulo  	




                                                                                                                                               36
Table  1:  Sugarcane  Production,  Economic  Activity,  and  Fires
Dependent  variable:  Fires  per  100km²
                                                                                     Muni-­‐‑year  panel                                     Muni-­‐‑month  panel
                                                                                       (Fixed  effect)                                        (First  difference)
                                                             [1]                  [2]                    [3]                 [4]                       [5]
1{Harvesting  sugarcane  in  year}                          0.37                 0.13                   0.18                0.16
                                                           (0.14)               (0.14)                 (0.14)              (0.14)
Share  of  area  harvested  (ref  <  5%)
      5%-­‐‑15%                                                                  0.57                  0.58                 0.53
                                                                                (0.15)                (0.16)               (0.15)
      15%-­‐‑25%                                                                 1.13                  1.06                 0.95
                                                                                (0.19)                (0.20)               (0.20)
      25%-­‐‑35%                                                                 1.78                  1.95                 1.82
                                                                                (0.25)                (0.27)               (0.26)
      35%-­‐‑50%                                                                 1.61                  1.70                 1.54
                                                                                (0.32)                (0.35)               (0.35)
      50%-­‐‑75%                                                                 1.53                  1.73                 1.54
                                                                                (0.42)                (0.48)               (0.47)
      >75%                                                                       1.96                  2.27                 2.07
                                                                                (0.75)                (1.06)               (1.06)
Log  municipal  GDP  per  capita                                                                                            0.98
                                                                                                                           (0.33)
Jobs  created  (per  1000  residents  in  2000)                                                                                                         0.91
                                                                                                                                                     (0.19)
Jobs  destroyed  (per  1000  residents  in  2000)                                                                                                     -­‐‑1.49
                                                                                                                                                     (0.36)
Mean  of  dependent  variable                               2.8                   2.8                   2.8                 2.8
SD  of  dependent  variable                                 3.8                   3.8                   3.8                 3.8
Municipality  FE                                             X                    X                     X                    X
Year  FE                                                     X                    X                     X                    X
Month  FE                                                                                                                                               X

Observations                                              7,095                 7,095                 5,805               5,805                    45,795
Municipalities                                             645                    645                  645                  645                       645
Years  covered                                         2004-­‐‑2014          2004-­‐‑2014          2004-­‐‑2012         2004-­‐‑2012            2009-­‐‑2014
Note:  Parentheses  contain  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  municipality  level.  All  columns  present  means  and  standard  deviations  in  levels  
rather  than  changes.




                                                                                37
Table  2:  Descriptive  Statistics,  Vital  and  Hospital  Records
                                                                                                                   Standard  deviations                       Sample  sizes
                                                                                                     Mean        Individual        Cell                 Individual         Cell
                                                                                                      [1]            [2]            [3]                     [4]             [5]
A.  Birth  ouctomes
      Birth  weight  (in  grams)                                                                     3,159.3        525.7             161.8                287,506            26,190
      Low  birth  weight  per  1,000                                                                  80.8           272.4             83.7                287,506            26,190
      Very  low  birth  weight  per  1,000                                                            12.4           110.7             34.2                287,506            26,190
      Imputed  gestational  age  (in  weeks)                                                          38.6            1.7               0.5                287,506            26,190
      Preterm  per  1,000                                                                             97.1           296.1             93.6                287,506            26,190
      Very  preterm  per  1,000                                                                       12.4           110.7             34.4                287,506            26,190
B.  Perinatal  Mortality  and  Morbidity
      Stillbirth  per  1,000                                                                           7.7           87.6              26.9                289,748            26,198
      Mortality  witin  1  day  of  birth  per  1,000                                                  2.6              .              18.0                    .              26,190
      Mortality  within  1  week  of  birth  per  1,000                                                5.7              .              26.8                    .              26,190
      Hospital  admissions  in  first  full  day  of  life  per  1,000                                36.7              .              63.2                    .              26,190
      Fetal-­‐‑growth-­‐‑related  hospital  admissions  in  first  full  day  of  life  per  1,000     1.1              .               9.5                    .              26,190
      APGAR  1  minute                                                                                 8.5           1.34               0.5                287,505            26,189
      APGAR  5  minut                                                                                  9.5            0.8               0.3                287,505            26,189
C.  Infant  and  Maternal  Demographics
      Male                                                                                            0.51           0.50              0.15                287,506            26,190
      White                                                                                           0.76           0.43              0.17                287,506            26,190
      Brown/Mullato                                                                                   0.18           0.38              0.14                287,506            26,190
      Mom  younger  than  25                                                                          0.35           0.48              0.15                287,506            26,190
      Mom  between  25  and  35                                                                       0.54           0.50              0.15                287,506            26,190
      Mom  had  previous  miscarriage                                                                 0.11           0.32              0.11                287,506            26,190
      Mom  had  previous  live  birth                                                                 0.51           0.50              0.15                287,506            26,190
      Mom  formally  married                                                                          0.48           0.50              0.16                287,506            26,190
      Mom  informally  married/cohabiting                                                             0.11           0.31              0.16                287,506            26,190
      Mom  college  educated                                                                          0.25           0.43              0.14                287,506            26,190
Note:  Cells  include  all  births  occuring  in  the  same  municipality  on  the  same  day.  All  cell-­‐‑level  statistics  are  weighted  by  the  number  of  births.  
Stillbirths  are  per  1,000  births  dead  or  alive;  all  other  rates  are  per  1,000  live  births.  Mortality  and  hospialization  data  do  not  have  individual-­‐‑level  
values  because  we  do  not  individually  link  them  to  births.




                                                                                                38
Table  3:  Effects  of  Fires  on  Average  Weekly  Air  Pollution
                                                    PM10                      PM10                  PM10                   PM10                    PM10                   NOx                      O3
                                                     [1]                       [2]                   [3]                    [4]                     [5]                    [6]                     [7]


Fires  in  week  ending  in  t                         0.471                  0.423                 0.599
                                                     (0.104)               (0.097)                (0.140)
                                                  pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01       pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01        pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01
Upwind    fires                                                                                                             2.490                  2.513                 -­‐‑0.107               0.598
                                                                                                                         (0.541)                 (0.567)                (0.229)                (0.336)
                                                                                                                      pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01       pᴬ=.001,  pᴮ<.001        pᴬ=.65,  pᴮ=.66        pᴬ=.10,  pᴮ=.11
Downwind    fires                                                                                                         0.631
                                                                                                                          (0.289)
                                                                                                                     pᴬ=.018,  pᴮ=.020
Other    fires                                                                                                             0.468
                                                                                                                          (0.140)
                                                                                                                      pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01
Non-­‐‑upwind    fires                                                                                                                            0.489                    0.088                -­‐‑0.079
                                                                                                                                                 (0.134)                (0.066)                (0.149)
                                                                                                                                            pᴬ=.003,  pᴮ=.012        pᴬ=.21,  pᴮ=.20        pᴬ=.61,  pᴮ=.68
Diff.  UPWIND  -­‐‑  NON-­‐‑UPWIND                                                                                                                2.024                  -­‐‑0.195                0.677
                                                                                                                                                 (0.568)                (0.205)                (0.278)
                                                                                                                                             pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01         pᴬ=.36,  pᴮ=.35        pᴬ=.03,  pᴮ=.02

Date    FE                                                X                     X                      X                      X                      X                      X                      X
Location  FE                                              X                     X                      X                      X                      X                      X                      X
Weather    covariates                                                           X                      X                      X                      X                      X                      X
Confidence-­‐‑adjusted  fire  counts                                                                   X                      X                      X                      X                      X

Mean  of  dep.  variable                                31.4                  31.4                   31.4                   31.4                   31.4                    15.3                   39.5
SD  of  dep.  variable                                  16.1                  16.1                   16.1                   16.1                   16.1                     9.1                   13.3

Observations                                           26,342                26,342                 26,342                 26,342                 26,342                 23,448                 27,159
Note:  Observations  are  at  the  station-­‐‑date  level,  with  fires  and  pollution  measured  over  the  preceding  week.    Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  
station  level.  pᴬ  refers  to  the  asymptotic  p-­‐‑value;  pᴮ refers  to  the  wild-­‐‑cluster  bootstrap  p-­‐‑value.  12  stations  are  observed  between  2009  and  2014;  one  station  is  observed  
between  2009  and  2013.  Fire  counts  include  fires  within  5  to  50km  of  the  municipal  population  centroid;  all  specifications  control  for  fires  within  5km.  Weather  controls  
include  average  temperature,  relative  humidty  and  their  interactions,  direction  of  wind  (fixed  octants),  periods  of  calm  and  non-­‐‑measured  winds.




                                                                                                      39
Table  4:  Effects  of  Fires  on  Birth  Weight  and  Gestational  Age  at  Birth
                                                                   Birth  weight  (in  grams)                                 Low  birth  wt. V.  low  birth                  Gestational           Preterm           V.  preterm
                                                                         Main  specification  (fires  by  wind  direction)      per  1,000    wt.  per  1,000                 age  (weeks)         per  1,000          per  1,000
                                         All  fires      All  fires        Upwind         Non-­‐‑upwind      Difference        Difference      Difference                      Difference          Difference         Difference
                                           [1]             [2]                [3]                [4]         [5]  =[3]-­‐‑[4]      [6]              [7]                             [8]                [9]                 [10]

Fires  bet.  weeks  t  and  t-­‐‑12              1.33            1.91           -­‐‑19.66        3.35           -­‐‑23.01        8.26            5.10           -­‐‑0.083        4.32            5.43
                                                (0.80)          (1.02)           (5.50)         (0.92)           (5.54)         (2.97)          (1.74)         (0.022)          (5.54)          (1.11)
                                            pᴬ=.12,  pᴮ=.11 pᴬ=.08,  pᴮ=.13 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ=.02 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01 pᴬ=.02,  pᴮ=.02 pᴬ=.01,  pᴮ=.06 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ=.02 pᴬ=.45,  pᴮ=.54 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01

Fires  bet.  weeks  t-­‐‑13  and  t-­‐‑25        1.13            2.18           10.56            2.12            8.44            0.55            -­‐‑1.54       0.000            -­‐‑5.55        -­‐‑0.62
                                                (0.64)          (0.78)          (7.65)          (0.73)          (7.70)          (4.21)          (2.28)         (0.030)          (3.77)          (2.21)
                                            pᴬ=.10,  pᴮ=.12 pᴬ=.02,  pᴮ=.04 pᴬ=.19,  pᴮ=.20 pᴬ=.01,  pᴮ=.03 pᴬ=.29,  pᴮ=.32 pᴬ=.89,  pᴮ=.83 pᴬ=.51,  pᴮ=.55 pᴬ=.99,  pᴮ=.96 pᴬ=.17,  pᴮ=.14 pᴬ=.79,  pᴮ=.80

Fires  bet.  weeks  t-­‐‑26  and  t-­‐‑38        0.60            -­‐‑0.95        -­‐‑9.54        -­‐‑0.26        -­‐‑9.28        -­‐‑3.54        1.55           -­‐‑0.032        3.38            1.65
                                                (0.90)          (1.42)          (8.87)          (1.35)          (8.71)          (4.23)          (2.21)         (0.025)          (4.06)          (1.97)
                                            pᴬ=.52,  pᴮ=.50 pᴬ=.59,  pᴮ=.94 pᴬ=.30,  pᴮ=.32 pᴬ=.85,  pᴮ=.89 pᴬ=.30,  pᴮ=.27 pᴬ=.42,  pᴮ=.64 pᴬ=.51,  pᴮ=.55 pᴬ=.22,  pᴮ=.23 pᴬ=.42,  pᴮ=.39 pᴬ=.42,  pᴮ=.47


Date  FE                                          X               X                                     X                                     X                   X                  X                  X                   X
Municipality  FE                                  X               X                                     X                                     X                   X                  X                  X                   X
Weather  covariates                                               X                                     X                                     X                   X                  X                  X                   X

Mean  of  dep.  variable                       3159.3           3159.3                               3159.3                                  80.7               12.4               38.6                96.9               12.4
SD  of  dep.  variable                         161.8            161.8                                161.8                                   83.7               34.2               0.7                 93.5               34.4

Observations                                   26,190           26,190                               26,190                                26,190              26,190             26,190             26,190              26,190
Note:  Estimates  are  13-­‐‑week  sums  of  coefficients  on  weekly  fire  counts.  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  municipality  level.  pᴬ  refers  to  the  asymptotic  p-­‐‑
value;  pᴮ  refers  to  the  wild-­‐‑cluster  bootstrap  p-­‐‑value.  Observations  are  at  the  municipality-­‐‑day  level  and  are  weighted  by  the  size  of  local  birth-­‐‑cohort  in  that  municipality-­‐‑day.  Fire  
counts  are  weighted  by  confidence  and  include  fires  within  5  to  50km  of  the  municipal  population  centroid;  all  specifications  control  for  fires  within  5km.  Weather  controls  include  
average  temperature,  relative  humidty  and  their  interactions,  direction  of  wind  (fixed  octants),  periods  of  calm  and  periods  of  non-­‐‑measured  winds.  




                                                                                                                 40
Table  5:  Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  on  Fetal  Mortality
                                                                Reported                                                                                     Including  reported  stillborns
                                              Log  live  births       stillbirths  per      Log  births                                 Low  birth  wt.     V.  low  birth  wt.    Gestational  age                                             Preterm                   V.  premature  
                                                   x  100                  1,000                x  100                  Birth  weight       per  1,000                       per  1,000                        (weeks)                         per  1,000                       per  1,000
                                                        [1]                 [2]                      [3]                         [4]              [5]                              [6]                                [7]                            [8]                              [9]
Fires  between  week  t  and  t-­‐‑12               -­‐‑2.75               3.91                  -­‐‑2.34                   -­‐‑26.80            9.98                             6.48                           -­‐‑0.084                          6.69                             5.68
                                                  (0.95)           (1.00)          (1.01)           (4.88)                                  (3.00)                          (1.51)                          (0.023)                           (5.62)                           (1.17)
                                              pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ=.03 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01 pᴬ=.04,  pᴮ=.048 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01                          pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01                 pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01                  pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ=.03                  pᴬ=.25,  pᴮ=.27                  pᴬ<.01,  pᴮ<.01
Fires  between  week  t-­‐‑13  and  t-­‐‑25       -­‐‑0.11         -­‐‑1.63        -­‐‑0.29          10.59                                    0.01                          -­‐‑2.66                           0.005                          -­‐‑6.23                         -­‐‑1.08
                                                  (1.07)           (1.51)          (1.15)           (6.19)                                  (3.49)                          (2.20)                          (0.030)                           (3.78)                           (2.17)
                                              pᴬ=.92,  pᴮ=.94 pᴬ=.30,  pᴮ=.36 pᴬ=.81,  pᴮ=.84 pᴬ=.11,  pᴮ=.10                           pᴬ>.99,  pᴮ=.92                 pᴬ=.25,  pᴮ=.26                  pᴬ=.87,  pᴮ=.80                  pᴬ=.13,  pᴮ=.11                  pᴬ=.63,  pᴮ=.63
Fires  between  week  t-­‐‑26  and  t-­‐‑38         0.42             2.08            0.63          -­‐‑12.29                                -­‐‑2.45                          2.85                           -­‐‑0.032                          5.85                             1.75
                                                  (1.93)           (0.80)          (1.98)           (9.37)                                  (4.44)                          (2.69)                          (0.027)                           (4.21)                           (2.05)
                                              pᴬ=.83,  pᴮ=.84 pᴬ=.02,  pᴮ=.048 pᴬ=.76,  pᴮ=.76 pᴬ=.21,  pᴮ=.18                          pᴬ=.59,  pᴮ=.64                 pᴬ=.31,  pᴮ=.28                  pᴬ=.25,  pᴮ=.28                  pᴬ=.19,  pᴮ=.13                  pᴬ=.41,  pᴮ=.45

Mean  of  dep.  variable                            215.9                   7.7                 216.6                       3147.6               85.9                             16.4                             38.6                            101.7                             12.5
SD  of  dep.  variable                              73.6                   26.9                 73.6                         168.6               85.9                             39.0                              0.7                            95.1                              34.3
Observations                                       26,190                26,198                26,198                       26,197             26,197                           26,197                           26,197                           26,197                           26,197
Note:  Estimates  are  13-­‐‑week  sums  of  upwind/non-­‐‑upwind  coefficient  differences.  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  municipality  level.  pᴬ  refers  to  the  
asymptotic  p-­‐‑value;  pᴮ  refers  to  the  wild-­‐‑cluster  bootstrap  p-­‐‑value.  Observations  are  at  the  municipality-­‐‑day  level  and  are  weighted  by  the  size  of  local  birth-­‐‑cohort  in  that  
municipality-­‐‑day.  Fire  counts  are  weighted  by  confidence  and  include  fires  within  5  to  50km  of  the  municipal  population  centroid.  All  models  include  location  and  date  fixed  effects,  
as  well  as  fires  within  5km,  average  temperature,  relative  humidty  and  their  interactions,  direction  of  wind  (fixed  octants),  periods  of  calm  and  periods  of  non-­‐‑measured  winds.  

Table  6:    Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  on  Neonatal  Mortality  and  Morbidity
                                                                                                                                            Hospital  admissions  in                                                                                                          
                                                                           Mortality  (per  1,000)                                      first  full  day  of  life  (per  1,000)                                                                                      APGAR  score  (0-­‐‑10)
                                                                         1st-­‐‑day          1st-­‐‑week                                   All  causes Fetal  growth  causes	                                                                 1-­‐‑minute                      5-­‐‑minute
                                                                            [1]                    [2]                                            [3]                              [4]                                                               [5]                              [6]
Fires  between  week  t  and  t-­‐‑12                                     0.422                0.519                                        0.546                           0.821                                                               0.020                          -­‐‑0.013
                                                                       (1.330)                (1.798)                                      (4.028)                         (0.586)                                                           (0.031)                          (0.035)
                                                                    pᴬ=.76,  pᴮ=.73        pᴬ=.78,  pᴮ=.82                              pᴬ=.89,  pᴮ=.92                 pᴬ=.19,  pᴮ=.22                                                   pᴬ=.53,  pᴮ=.57                  pᴬ=.72,  pᴮ=.89
Fires  between  week  t-­‐‑13  and  t-­‐‑25                             -­‐‑0.202              1.760                                        2.431                           0.458                                                               0.052                            0.014
                                                                       (0.749)                (1.621)                                      (4.508)                         (0.400)                                                           (0.034)                          (0.023)
                                                                    pᴬ=.79,  pᴮ=.72        pᴬ=.30,  pᴮ=.36                              pᴬ=.60,  pᴮ=.59                 pᴬ=.28,  pᴮ=.31                                                   pᴬ=.15,  pᴮ=.22                  pᴬ=.56,  pᴮ=.51
Fires  between  week  t-­‐‑26  and  t-­‐‑38                               1.497                3.260                                        1.811                           0.257                                                             -­‐‑0.042                        -­‐‑0.017
                                                                       (1.034)                (1.440)                                      (4.683)                         (0.506)                                                           (0.031)                          (0.027)
                                                                    pᴬ=.17,  pᴮ=.18        pᴬ=.04,  pᴮ=.06                              pᴬ=.71,  pᴮ=.69                 pᴬ=.62,  pᴮ=.58                                                   pᴬ=.21,  pᴮ=.30                  pᴬ=.54,  pᴮ=.62
Mean  of  dep.  variable                                                    2.6                   5.7                                            36.7                              1.1                                                              84.7                             95.4
SD  of  dep.  variable                                                     18.0                  26.8                                            63.2                              9.5                                                               4.6                              3.2
Observations                                                             26,190                26,190                                          26,190                           26,190                                                            26,189                           26,189
Note:  See  Table  5.



                                                                                                                            41
Table  7:  Robustness  and  Falsification  Checks  for  Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  in  the  Final  Gestational  Period  on  Birth  Weight  and  Gestational  Age
                                                                                                                     Alternative  fixed  effect  specifications                                  Falsification  exercises
                                               Base                          Base                                                                                              Out-­‐‑of-­‐‑sample     In-­‐‑sample       In-­‐‑sample  
                                              model                           model                                                                                                   births        random  year random  location
                                                                          +  covariates                                                                                         (5-­‐‑year  lag)        (Fraction  less  extreme)
Outcome                                          [1]                           [2]                         [3]                 [4]                [5]                [6]              [7]                 [8]                  [9]
Birth  weight                                 -­‐‑23.01                      -­‐‑22.54                  -­‐‑20.64            -­‐‑24.58          -­‐‑29.98         -­‐‑26.12           1.93               0.99                 0.99
                                               (5.54)                         (6.79)                     (4.55)               (3.88)             (6.18)            (7.27)           (3.33)
Low  birth  weight  per  1,000                    8.26                           8.05                       6.21                 5.76               9.99              8.16          -­‐‑4.26             0.96                 0.94
                                               (2.97)                        (3.26)                     (2.57)               (2.80)             (3.33)            (3.45)            (3.05)
Very  low  birth  weight  per  1,000            5.10                          5.18                       4.56                 3.94               4.79              3.51             -­‐‑0.20             0.99                 0.99
                                                (1.74)                        (1.77)                      (1.37)              (1.20)             (1.25)             (1.49)           (1.37)
Gestational  age  (in  weeks)                  -­‐‑0.083                     -­‐‑0.082                   -­‐‑0.083           -­‐‑0.054          -­‐‑0.040          -­‐‑0.064        -­‐‑0.005            0.99                 0.990
                                              (0.022)                       (0.023)                     (0.022)             (0.021)            (0.024)            (0.020)          (0.038)
Preterm  per  1,000                                4.32                          3.92                        4.32               -­‐‑2.15           -­‐‑1.16            4.17            -­‐‑5.40          0.81                 0.83
                                                (5.54)                        (5.52)                      (5.54)              (4.89)             (4.60)             (3.95)           (5.26)
Very  Preterm  per  1,000                          5.43                          5.49                        3.81                 2.22               4.13              4.48              5.19            0.99                 0.99
                                                (1.11)                        (1.11)                      (1.25)              (1.19)             (1.20)             (0.82)           (3.41)


Date  FE                                          X                             X                                                                  X                 X                 X                   X                    X
Station  FE                                       X                             X                          X                                                                           X                   X                    X
Weather  covariates                               X                             X                          X                    X                  X                 X                 X                   X                    X
Infant  and  maternal  covariates                                               X
Year  FE                                                                                                   X
Day-­‐‑of-­‐‑year  FE                                                                                      X                    X
Station*Year  FE                                                                                                                X                  X
Station*Week-­‐‑of-­‐‑year  FE                                                                                                                                       X

Observtions                                   26,190                         26,190                     26,190               26,190            26,190             26,190            25,896
Replications                                                                                                                                                                                              100                  100
Note:  Estimates  are  the  sum  of  upwind/non-­‐‑upwind  coefficient  differences  over  the  final  13  weeks  of  the  pregnancy.  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  
municipality  level.  Observations  are  at  the  municipality-­‐‑day  level  and  are  weighted  by  the  size  of  local  birth-­‐‑cohort  in  that  municipality-­‐‑day.  Fire  counts  are  weighted  by  confidence  and  
include  fires  within  5  to  50km  of  the  municipal  population  centroid;  all  specifications  control  for  fires  within  5km.  Weather  controls  include  average  temperature,  relative  humidty  and  
their  interactions,  direction  of  wind  (fixed  octants),  periods  of  calm  and  periods  of  non-­‐‑measured  winds.  Infant  and  maternal  controls  include  the  variables  in  Panel  C  of  Table  2.  
Columns  [8]-­‐‑[9]  perform  100  within-­‐‑sample  randomizations  and  report  the  fraction  of  placebo  estimates  that  are  less  extreme  than  the  effect  estimated  in  Table  4.




                                                                                                                                 42
Table  8:  Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  on  Adult  Female  Hospital  Admissions

                                                      Log(count)  excl.  zeros  x  100 Log(count  +  1)  x  100 Standardized  count
                                                                     [1]                            [2]                       [3]
A.  Prenatal  Patients  
    Diff.  upwind  -­‐‑  non-­‐‑upwind                              2.894                         3.913                     0.054
    in  week  ending  in  t                                        (1.785)                        (1.761)                  (0.035)
                                                                 [.131/.220]                   [.046/.128]                [.152/.244]
Observations                                                       21,093                         27,608                    27,608


B.  Women  15  to  45
    Diff.  upwind  -­‐‑  non-­‐‑upwind                              1.511                          1.544                    0.106
    in  week  ending  in  t                                        (0.829)                        (0.811)                  (0.045)
                                                                 [.094/.248]                   [.081/.224]                [.036/.152]
Observations                                                       27,591                         27,608                    27,608

Note:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  municipality  level.  pᴬ  refers  to  the  asymptotic  p-­‐‑
value;  pᴮ  refers  to  the  wild-­‐‑cluster  bootstrap  p-­‐‑value.  Dependent  variables  are  rolling  week  counts.  The  standardized  
count  subtracts  the  location  specific  mean  and  divides  by  the  location-­‐‑specific  standard  deviation.  Fire  counts  are  
weighted  by  confidence  and  include  fires  within  5  to  50km  of  the  municipal  population  centroid.  All  models  include  
location  and  date  fixed  effects,  as  well  as  fires  within  5km,  average  temperature,  relative  humidty  and  their  
interactions,  direction  of  wind  (fixed  octants),  periods  of  calm  and  periods  of  non-­‐‑measured  winds.  




                                                                     43
ONLINE  APPENDIX  –  NOT  FOR  PUBLICATION  




                     44
            A.  1990-­‐‑1999	                                                B.  2009-­‐‑2014	




                                                       (.75,1]
(.75,1]                                                (.5,.75]
(.5,.75]                                               (.35,.5]
(.35,.5]                                               (.25,.35]
(.25,.35]                                              (.15,.25]
(.15,.25]                                              (.05,.15]
(.05,.15]                                              [0,.05]
[0,.05]




                    Figure  A1:  Sugarcane  Planting  as  Share  of  Municipal  Land  Area	
                           (Points  indicate  locations  of  air  monitoring  stations)	




                                                 45
   Municipality percentile in
   distribution of fires per area
              (.75,1]
              (.5,.75]
              (.35,.5]
              (.25,.35]
              (.15,.25]
              (.05,.15]
              [0,.05]




Figure  A2:  Spatial  Distribution  of  Average  Annual  Fire  Intensity,  2009-­‐‑2014	
              (Points  indicate  locations  of  air  monitoring  stations)	
                                         	




                                         46
Table  A1:  Share  of  Rolling  Weeks  with  Missing  Data,  Air  Monitoring  Stations
                                                                                                      Pollutants                                                   Weather
                                                                       Particulate  Matter             Ozone                 Nitogen  Oxides       Relative  Humidity      Temperature
                                                                               [1]                        [2]                      [3]                     [4]                 [5]
Station  1  (Jan-­‐‑1-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                         0.037                      0.037                     0.054                  0                    0
Station  2  (May-­‐‑19-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        0.264                      0.028                     1.000                  0                    0
Station  3  (Jul-­‐‑11-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        0.026                      0.036                     0.055                 0.017                0.006
Station  4  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        0.189                      0.021                     0.317                  0                    0
Station  5  (May  -­‐‑9-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       0.017                      0.004                     0.027                  0                    0
Station  6  (Oct  -­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      0.014                      0.002                     0.013                 0.192                0.009
Station  7  (Sep-­‐‑25-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        0.028                      0.051                     0.161                  0                    0
Station  8  (Apr-­‐‑30-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        0.042                      0.057                     0.076                 0.152                 0
Station  9  (Sep-­‐‑2-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                         0.017                      0.032                     0.196                  0                   0.102
Station  10  (May-­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       0.064                      0.053                     0.091                  0                    0
Station  11  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑4-­‐‑2013)                        0.045                      0.031                     0.084                  0                    0
Station  12  (Jun-­‐‑26-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       0.034                      0.024                     0.049                  0                    0
Station  13  (Apr-­‐‑15-­‐‑2009  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       0.036                      0.034                     0.072                  0                    0

Notes:  For  rolling  week  computations  a  variable  was  considered  missing  if  more  than  3  days  had  no  readings  within  that  week.




                                                                                                    47
Table  A2:  Means/Standardard  Deviations,  Air  Monitoring  Stations
                                                                                                        Pollutants                                                         Weather
                                                                        Particulate  Matter              Ozone                      Nitogen  Oxides        Relative  Humidity      Temperature
                                                                                [1]                         [2]                           [3]                      [4]                 [5]

Station  1  (Jan-­‐‑1-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        33.42/12.4                  39.49/12.1                   20.41/11.7              72.80/10.3            21.82/2.9
Station  2  (May-­‐‑19-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       36.13/14.1                  34.00/12.8                        -­‐‑                67.78/9.9            22.72/2.7
Station  3  (Jul-­‐‑11-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       32.09/15.8                  41.83/12.4                    14.87/6.9              65.47/12.4            23.12/2.5
Station  4  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       33.83/17.6                  43.67/12.4                    6.37/3.5               70.03/11.4            24.40/2.6
Station  5  (May  -­‐‑9-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      30.47/15.6                  37.10/11.4                    15.82/8.9               66.91/9.6            23.41/3.0
Station  6  (Oct  -­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                     28.80/11.5                  36.64/13.3                    24.30/9.5               74.24/8.3            21.05/3.0
Station  7  (Sep-­‐‑25-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       29.60/14.8                  41.77/12.2                    12.59/4.8              73.33/10.6            22.81/2.8
Station  8  (Apr-­‐‑30-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       22.03/10.6                  48.08/13.0                    10.25/3.1              66.27/11.9            22.86/2.7
Station  9  (Sep-­‐‑2-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        36.35/16.2                  41.33/13.5                    18.99/8.6               75.47/9.8            22.30/2.9
Station  10  (May-­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      20.94/11.1                  44.28/13.5                    11.36/4.7              66.52/11.6            24.04/2.8
Station  11  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑4-­‐‑2013)                       31.53/16.0                  32.82/12.7                    13.66/4.9              62.70/10.3            24.86/2.7
Station  12  (Jun-­‐‑26-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      36.81/20.5                  35.41/12.5                   19.02/11.1              63.19/11.8            24.53/2.4
Station  13  (Apr-­‐‑15-­‐‑2009  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      37.58/18.9                  36.3/12.1                     13.96/6.9              63.74/11.5            22.94/2.5

                                                              Units              µμg/m
                                                                                         3
                                                                                                              µμg/m
                                                                                                                      3       ppb  (parts  per  billion)      Percentage             Celsius

Notes:  Weather  condition  values  for  missing  weeks  were  imputed  using  station-­‐‑specific  week-­‐‑of-­‐‑year  averages.




                                                                                                       48
Table  A3:  Descriptive  Statistics,  Wind  Direction


                                                             Percent  of  winds  originating  from  octant…
                                                                                                                                                                                               %  of  days  
                                                                                                                                                                                                 witout  
                                                                                                                                                                                               prevailing  
                                                               NNE            ENE            ESE              SSE    SSW          WSW             WNW             NNW           Missing          wind
                                                                [1]            [2]            [3]             [4]    [5]            [6]             [7]             [8]             [9]            [10]
Station  1  (Jan-­‐‑1-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)          10.4           12.2           26.2             10.1   7.0            8.0             8.0             7.5            10.8            53.7
Station  2  (May-­‐‑19-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)         12.5           10.3           15.4             18.5   5.0            4.5             5.4            10.7            18.0            40.8
Station  3  (Jul-­‐‑11-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)         15.9           22.7           16.2             10.6   7.6            2.9             4.8            11.7            7.5             37.1
Station  4  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)          8.0           15.6           19.4             27.3   7.3            7.1             4.4             6.1            4.9             33.2
Station  5  (May  -­‐‑9-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)         7.3           13.8           31.5             14.3   4.3            4.4             6.5             8.9            9.0             50.0
Station  6  (Oct  -­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)        3.5            3.9           27.7             35.3   2.5            3.8             7.7            10.2            5.3             39.2
Station  7  (Sep-­‐‑25-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)         10.0            6.6            5.6             49.2   8.8            3.6             3.4             7.8            5.1             44.8
Station  8  (Apr-­‐‑30-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)          4.3            9.1           33.6             22.1   5.1            4.0             8.3             4.1            9.5             31.2
Station  9  (Sep-­‐‑2-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)           8.5           18.1           22.6             12.5   12.1           7.7             7.9             3.5            7.2             47.5
Station  10  (May-­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)         7.2           19.3           34.1             6.4    3.1            8.0             5.5             3.6            12.8            26.9
Station  11  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑4-­‐‑2013)          6.1           13.7           24.7             15.7   10.4           3.9             6.6             9.3            9.6             43.8
Station  12  (Jun-­‐‑26-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)        10.0           23.7           14.6             13.4   11.2          10.0             5.5             4.1            7.5             40.2
Station  13  (Apr-­‐‑15-­‐‑2009  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)        11.7            9.4           19.0             19.0   5.4            3.6             4.6             8.9            18.4            34.2

Notes:  Days  assigned  prevailing  wind  only  if  the  wind  blows  for  8  or  more  hours  from  the  same  octant.  Prevailing  wind  octant  is  definied  by  a  grid  search  moving  around  the  
circle  in  10-­‐‑degrees  incremements.  More  details  in  the  text.    




                                                                                                              49
Table  A4:  Means/Standard  Deviations,  Fires
                                                                                   Fire  counts  5-­‐‑50km  (mean/SD),  per  satellite  per  week
                                                                                                                                     Confidence-­‐‑adjusted  fires  
                                                                               Fires                Confidence-­‐‑adjusted  fires in  prevailing-­‐‑wind  octant
                                                                               [11]                           [12]                             [13]
Station  1  (Jan-­‐‑1-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        1.62/3.51                        1.14/3.04                        0.03/0.23
Station  2  (May-­‐‑19-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       3.20/4.44                        1.64/3.12                        0.11/0.35
Station  3  (Jul-­‐‑11-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       3.96/5.07                        2.53/4.86                        0.20/0.70
Station  4  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       2.83/4.80                        2.05/4.61                        0.21/0.78
Station  5  (May  -­‐‑9-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      1.93/2.66                        1.10/2.30                        0.09/0.33
Station  6  (Oct  -­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                     2.51/5.83                        1.56/4.79                        0.04/0.19
Station  7  (Sep-­‐‑25-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       3.23/4.14                        1.98/3.64                        0.13/0.41
Station  8  (Apr-­‐‑30-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                       0.96/1.45                        0.63/1.28                        0.05/0.22
Station  9  (Sep-­‐‑2-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                        2.43/3.42                        1.24/2.38                        0.08/0.27
Station  10  (May-­‐‑15-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      1.15/1.76                        0.74/1.64                        0.09/0.32
Station  11  (Aug-­‐‑20-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑4-­‐‑2013)                       4.67/6.85                        3.12/6.30                        0.09/0.42
Station  12  (Jun-­‐‑26-­‐‑2008  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      3.40/4.15                        2.36/4.10                        0.21/0.61
Station  13  (Apr-­‐‑15-­‐‑2009  to  Dec-­‐‑31-­‐‑2014)                      4.15/4.70                        2.76/4.59                        0.22/0.56

All                                                                       2.77/4.45                           1.75/3.92                    0.12/0.46
Notes:  Prevailing  wind  octant  is  definied  by  a  grid  search  moving  around  the  circle  in  10-­‐‑degrees  incremements.  More  details  in  the  text.    




                                                                                50
Table  A5:  Air  Pollution  Robustness  Checks
                                                                                                                                                                                             Log  
                                                                                                                                                                                          transform  
                                         Main  model     Alternative  angles                      Alternative  radii                            Alternative  fixed  effects                  x  100
                                                       30-­‐‑degrees 90-­‐‑degrees   40km         30km         20km         10km
                                             [1]           [2]           [3]           [4]          [5]          [6]          [7]       [8]           [9]         [10]           [11]        [12]
A.  PM10  
      Diff.  upwind-­‐‑non-­‐‑upwind        2.024         0.818         0.917        1.901        2.106        3.611         1.266    1.738         1.592         1.592         1.310       4.204
            in  week  ending  in  t        (0.568)       (0.645)       (0.330)       (0.718)     (0.886)       (1.331)      (2.855)   (0.427)      (0.478)       (0.478)        (0.405)    (1.184)
Observations                               26,342        26,342        26,342        26,342       26,342       26,342       26,342    26,342        26,342       26,342         26,342     26,342


B.  O3  
      Diff.  upwind-­‐‑non-­‐‑upwind        0.677        0.571         0.103         0.720       0.775         0.411        1.723      0.745        0.430        0.430          0.522       1.014
            in  week  ending  in  t        (0.278)       (0.287)       (0.201)       (0.248)     (0.307)       (0.459)      (1.500)   (0.196)      (0.208)       (0.208)        (0.228)    (0.486)
Observations                               27,159        27,159        27,159        27,159       27,159       27,159       27,159    27,159        27,159       27,159         27,159     27,159


Date  FE                                     X              X             X            X            X             X            X                                    X             X           X
Station  FE                                  X              X             X            X            X             X            X        X                                                     X
Weather                                      X              X             X            X            X             X            X        X             X             X             X           X
Year  FE                                                                                                                                X
Day-­‐‑of-­‐‑year  FE                                                                                                                   X             X
Station*Year  FE                                                                                                                                      X             X
Station*Week-­‐‑of-­‐‑year  FE                                                                                                                                                    X
Note:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  station  level.  See  additional  notes  in  Table  3.




                                                                                                     51
Table  A6:  (Placebo)  Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  in  the  
Gestational  Period  on  Infant/Maternal  Demographics


                                          Estimate  for  
                                         weeks  t  to  t-­‐‑12    (se)


A.  Infant  Demographics
Male                                           -­‐‑0.580         (0.905)
White                                          -­‐‑0.529         (1.820)
Brown/Mullato                                  1.610             (1.780)


B.  Maternal  Demographics
Younger  than  25                              -­‐‑0.793         (0.774)
Aged  between  25  and  35                     -­‐‑0.009         (0.892)
Had  previous  miscarriage                     -­‐‑0.937         (1.490)
Had  previous  live  birth                     1.270             (1.830)
Formally  married                              -­‐‑1.300         (0.773)
Informally  married/Cohabiting                 0.046             (3.740)
College  eduation                              0.031             (0.934)

Notes:  Point  estimates  are  based  on  linear  probability  models  
using  the  same  specification  of  Table  4.  Estimates  are  
multiplied  by  100  to  facilitate  reading  as  percentage  points.




                                    52
Table  A7:  Stratifications  for  Differential  Effects  of  Upwind  Fires  in  the  Final  Gestational  Period  on  Birth  Weight  and  Gestational  Age
                                                            Boys               Girls           Mom  <  25       Mom  25  to  35     Mom  >  35    HS  or  less   College
                                                             [1]                [2]              [3]               [4]                [5]             [6]          [7]
Birth  weight                                              -­‐‑25.02           -­‐‑23.07          -­‐‑32.28             -­‐‑17.64     -­‐‑27.10     -­‐‑22.86    -­‐‑18.19
                                                            (8.69)            (12.52)            (13.67)                 (7.54)      (13.20)        (10.97)      (12.50)
Low  birth  weight  per  1,000                                 8.04               9.08                4.62                11.23          1.19           7.75         7.54
                                                            (5.62)             (7.51)             (6.09)                 (3.20)       (9.54)         (5.10)       (8.68)
Very  low  birth  weight  per  1,000                           4.40               6.19                8.70                  2.09         9.93           5.87         2.09
                                                            (1.49)             (2.95)             (3.12)                 (2.04)       (4.62)         (2.52)       (2.24)
Gestational  age  (in  weeks)                              -­‐‑0.106          -­‐‑0.066          -­‐‑0.080              -­‐‑0.088    -­‐‑0.105      -­‐‑0.081    -­‐‑0.085
                                                           (0.030)            (0.047)            (0.062)                (0.027)      (0.098)        (0.036)      (0.030)
Preterm  per  1,000                                            4.93               4.89              -­‐‑4.47              10.03        11.97            2.74         6.40
                                                            (7.70)             (8.43)            (12.11)                 (4.78)      (22.01)         (8.07)       (8.59)
Very  Preterm  per  1,000                                      6.70               3.90                8.33                  3.33         7.02           5.98         4.10
                                                            (1.45)             (2.60)             (3.22)                 (2.15)       (4.64)         (1.72)       (3.46)

Date  FE                                                      X                   X                  X                     X             X             X            X
Municipality  FE                                              X                   X                  X                     X             X             X            X
Weather  covariates                                           X                   X                  X                     X             X             X            X

Observations                                               25,312             25,170              24,423                25,342       15,868         26,043       21,544
Note:  Robust  standard  errors  in  parentheses  are  clustered  at  the  station  level.  See  notes  in  Table  4.




                                                                                            53
