                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE-IN-SERVICES
                             AGREEMENTS

                                        Robert W. Staiger
                                         Alan O. Sykes

                                       Working Paper 22960
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22960


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




Staiger gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (NSF
Grant SES-1326940). We thank Kyle Bagwell, Petros C. Mavroidis, Alan Spearot and seminar
participants at Stanford for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛˛

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22960.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Robert W. Staiger and Alan O. Sykes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economic Structure of International Trade-in-Services Agreements
Robert W. Staiger and Alan O. Sykes
NBER Working Paper No. 22960
December 2016
JEL No. F13,F23

                                         ABSTRACT

The existing economics literature on international trade agreements focuses on tariff agreements
covering trade in goods, and offers an explanation for core features of the GATT. Tariffs play
almost no role in services markets, however, and the existing models cannot account for the
dramatically different approach to trade liberalization in agreements such as the WTO General
Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). We develop a model through which key features of
GATS, including its emphasis on "deep integration" – sector-by-sector negotiations on behind the
border policy instruments – can be understood. And we use this model to suggest that there may
also be a middle ground for services trade liberalization between the GATS deep-integration
approach and the traditional border-policy focused "shallow integration" approach of GATT.


Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
319 Silsby
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rstaiger@dartmouth.edu

Alan O. Sykes
Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
asykes@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

There is now an established literature on the economics of international trade agreements
(see the relevant chapters in Bagwell and Staiger, eds, forthcoming, for recent comprehensive
reviews). This literature has enjoyed success in illuminated many features of real-world trade
agreements, but the insights have been developed almost entirely in the context of trade in
goods. Given the historical unimportance of trade in services, until recently the literature’s
exclusive focus on trade in goods made sense. But the importance of trade in services has grown
rapidly over the past several decades, bringing services to the top of the trade liberalization
agenda; and as a consequence the need for the literature to consider trade-in-services agreements
has become more pressing. In this paper we take a …rst step in …lling this lacuna.
   The World Trade Organization (WTO) includes agreements aimed at liberalizing both goods
trade and trade in services. The General Agreement on Tari¤s and Trade (GATT) is the central
WTO agreement covering goods trade, while the General Agreement on Trade in Services
(GATS) is the WTO agreement covering services trade. There are striking di¤erences between
GATT and GATS that cry out for explanation. Our paper catalogs these di¤erences, and asks
why they exist. Our answer builds from the terms-of-trade theory, a theory that can account
for many of the core features of GATT (see, for example, Bagwell and Staiger, 2002). We show
that the broad di¤erences between GATT and GATS can be accounted for when this theory
is augmented with a set of restrictions, motivated by salient features of services trade, on the
policy instruments and trade data available to governments. This is the main positive message
of our paper.
   The GATT/WTO has been highly successful in facilitating the liberalization of goods trade
among its member governments. GATS, on the other hand, has to date been largely unsuccessful
in achieving liberalization of services trade (Francois and Hoekman, 2010). What explains
this di¤erence in success? A potential reason is the distinct nature of integration that each
agreement has attempted. While both agreements seek to expand market access, GATT was
designed with “shallow integration”in mind, achieving an expansion in market access primarily
through negotiated reductions in tari¤s; by contrast, the design of GATS re‡ects an orientation
towards “deep integration,”whereby the negotiated change or removal of domestic regulations
in the service sector is seen as the primary method of expanding market access. Clearly, the
latter orientation raises signi…cant challenges for negotiations seeking to expand market access


                                               1
that do not arise with the former. Copeland and Mattoo (2008) put the point this way:

        For goods trade, analysts typically distinguish between tari¤ and non-tari¤ bar-
     riers (NTBs) to trade. Tari¤s are discriminatory taxes on trade. An import tax is
     a tax levied on foreign goods but not domestic goods. Tari¤s tend to be easy to
     measure and are very transparent. It is therefore quite straightforward to design
     an agreement to liberalize trade via tari¤ reduction (provided governments have
     the will to open up their economies to trade). Successive rounds of GATT nego-
     tiations were successful in achieving broad-based reductions in trade barriers via
     across-the-board reductions in trade taxes.
        NTBs, on the other hand, are much more complex...The pervasiveness of NTBs in
     the service sector means that trade liberalization in this sector is complex. Moreover,
     a major reason for the pervasiveness of NTBs is because of market imperfection
     in service sectors. Many trade barriers in the service sector are a side e¤ect of
     domestic regulations that have legitimate purposes. For example, because of issues
     in asymmetric information, doctors must be certi…ed to protect patients, engineers
     need certi…cation to ensure that bridges they build do not collapse, and insurance
     companies have to be regulated to ensure their solvency. However, these same
     rules can be manipulated to protect local suppliers. For example, a rule requiring
     that an engineer graduate from a domestic university might ensure that quality
     standards are met, but would prevent consumers from having access to the services
     of highly quali…ed foreign engineers. The regulatory apparatus may therefore serve
     the dual purpose of responding to market failures and protecting local suppliers at
     the expense of consumers. A challenge for trade-policy analysis is to isolate the
     protective e¤ect of regulatory policy from the bene…cial e¤ects, and to suggest rules
     for liberalization that provide the bene…ts of increased trade while ensuring that
     other legitimate policy objectives are achieved. (Copeland and Mattoo, 2008, p.
     104)

   Our augmented terms-of-trade model can help interpret the deep-integration focus of GATS,
while at the same time clarifying the underlying problems that a trade-in-services agreement
should be designed to solve. A clear understanding of the underlying problems to be solved
can then inform the consideration of alternative design approaches for the agreement. We use

                                               2
our augmented model to ask if a shallow-integration approach more in line with that taken
by GATT might be possible in a trade-in-services agreement. Surprisingly, we …nd that a
shallow-integration approach, suitably modi…ed to …t the needs of the services trade context,
may indeed be possible. This is the main normative message of our paper.
   To provide some intuition up front for our results, it is helpful …rst to review the logic of
shallow integration that emerges from the terms-of-trade theory when applied to agreements on
trade in goods. That logic begins from the observation that a trade agreement must address an
international ine¢ ciency that exists under non-cooperative (Nash equilibrium) policy choices
if the agreement is to generate mutual gains for the participants. The argument then proceeds
by noting that terms-of-trade manipulation is the source of international ine¢ ciencies in Nash
policy choices; that trade taxes (import and export tari¤s) are the …rst-best instruments for
manipulating the terms of trade, and hence with Nash trade taxes unconstrained no other
policies in the Nash equilibrium will be distorted for this purpose; and that therefore in the
Nash equilibrium trade taxes are too high, making trade volumes too low, but there are no other
policy distortions from an international perspective. From this starting point, it is then natural
that a trade agreement might focus on lowering tari¤s as a means of expanding market access
and trade volumes to e¢ cient levels, while putting in place various rules to prevent governments
from back-sliding on the market access commitments implied by their negotiated tari¤ bindings
with the substitution of new protective non-tari¤ (e.g., behind-the-border) measures. As we
will describe more fully below, this logic …ts nicely with the basic structure of GATT’s shallow
integration approach.
   What can go wrong with this logic when it is applied to trade in services rather than trade in
goods? An immediate issue arises for services whose importation necessitates the establishment
by the foreign service provider of a commercial presence in the importing country, the kinds
of services that are a central focus of GATS (“Mode 3” services in the terminology used by
GATS) and the topic of our paper. The imports of such services do not cross international
borders, and so import tari¤s and export taxes/subsidies collected at the border are by de…nition
simply unavailable to governments that might wish to intervene in the international trade of
these services. There are other policy instruments that can in principle replicate the e¤ects
of trade taxes, and below we will exploit the existence of these alternative policies to derive
benchmark results, but we argue that as a practical matter these alternatives too are unavailable
to governments. This has two implications: …rst, without an import tari¤ to manipulate its


                                                3
services terms of trade, an importing government will in the Nash equilibrium tend to spread
protective distortions for this purpose widely across the policy instruments that it does wield
in the service sector, thereby “contaminating” many of its Nash policies with internationally
ine¢ cient terms-of-trade motives; and second, without an export tax/subsidy, the exporting
government must rely on policy adjustments from the importing government if it wishes to raise
(in a targeted fashion) the incomes of its service exporters, introducing a new potential source
of international ine¢ ciency in the Nash equilibrium that an agreement can address. As we will
demonstrate in a terms-of-trade model augmented to acknowledge the unavailability of such
policies, these two implications can go a long way toward accounting for the broad di¤erences
between the structure of GATT and GATS. A related issue concerns the data on trade in
(Mode 3) services that is typically available to governments. Because such trade does not cross
international borders, the amount of detailed and accurate data on trade ‡ows is limited. This
has a further implication: the ability of governments to measure the trade volume impacts of
policy changes in the service sector, an ability which as we explain below would be especially
important for implementing any sort of shallow integration for services trade, is compromised.
As we will argue, this too can help explain the broad di¤erences between GATT and GATS.
   Does this then mean that shallow integration is impossible for services? Not necessarily.
Our augmented terms-of-trade model suggests that a shallow-integration approach may indeed
be possible for services, but that to facilitate this approach to liberalization it would …rst
be necessary to make some changes to the structure of GATS which move it closer to the
structure of GATT. More speci…cally, we show that, in spite of the limited availability of
policies in our augmented terms-of-trade model, if governments were to …rst agree to a set of
blanket non-discrimination rules along the lines of those contained in GATT, they would then be
induced to concentrate their internationally ine¢ cient terms-of-trade motives into distorting a
narrow set of …scal –but not regulatory –measures. And with international policy ine¢ ciencies
concentrated in …scal instruments, governments could then in principle use negotiations over
these …scal instruments as a means of establishing market access commitments in the service
sector without the need to directly negotiate over domestic regulatory measures, much as GATT
has used negotiated commitments on tari¤s in the goods sector. Provided that the services data
issues raised above can be addressed, we interpret this …nding as pointing toward a possible
way forward for achieving success in future e¤orts to liberalize trade in services.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews some stylized facts about


                                                4
GATT and GATS, highlighting the substantial di¤erences in their basic architecture. Section 3
introduces our benchmark model that assumes an expansive set of service-sector policy instru-
ments available to governments, while results on the purpose and design of a trade-in-services
agreement in our benchmark setting are contained in section 4. Section 5 then develops an
augmented model under the assumption of a more limited set of policy options, shows that the
broad di¤erences between GATT and GATS can be understood from the perspective of this
augmented model, and employs the augmented model to establish that a shallow-integration
approach more in line with that taken by GATT might nevertheless be possible in a trade-in-
services agreement. Section 6 concludes.


2. GATT versus GATS

The GATT was …rst negotiated in 1947. Its commitments were deepened and re…ned in a
number of subsequent negotiating “rounds,”and its disciplines have been elaborated in several
additional treaties within the WTO system. GATS is a more recent development that dates
back only to 1994. It is thus no surprise that WTO goods market disciplines are more elaborate
and “complete”than those in services sectors. Nevertheless, the legal structure of GATS looks
dramatically di¤erent from both the early GATT and the more modern set of WTO disciplines
in goods markets. This section highlights a number of key distinctions.

2.1. GATT

The GATT was a post-WWII response to the high tari¤ rates that had emerged globally fol-
lowing the Smoot-HawleyTari¤ Act of 1930 in the United States. The central commitments are
the tari¤ ceilings or “bindings” negotiated on a product-by-product basis pursuant to GATT
Article II. Tari¤s are not prohibited, and GATT members are under no general obligation to
reduce tari¤s, but they can choose to open their markets through reciprocal tari¤ reductions.
Concurrently, GATT seeks to prevent the substitution of other forms of protection. The key
obligations in this regard are the prohibition on quantitative restrictions in GATT Article XI,
and the national treatment obligation of GATT Article III which, roughly speaking, prohibits
domestic taxation and regulation that discriminates against imported goods. Additional dis-
ciplines limit the degree to which state monopolies and other state trading enterprises can
engage in protectionist conduct. Discrimination among trading partners is targeted by the
“most-favored nation” (MFN) obligation of GATT Article I. Finally, the drafters recognized

                                              5
the incompleteness of the GATT contract by including a provision that allows members to seek
redress if some change in domestic policy by an importing government, even though not specif-
ically prohibited by GATT, nevertheless curtails trade in a manner that upsets the reasonable
market access expectations associated with tari¤ commitments – the so-called “nonviolation
doctrine.”
      This basic approach of GATT may be termed “tari¢ cation.” The e¤ort was not simply to
reduce tari¤s, but to channel all remaining trade protection into tari¤s by precluding the use
of other policy instruments for protectionist objectives. Tari¢ cation makes protection more
transparent since tari¤s are published and imposed at the border, and reduces the costs of
trade negotiations by reducing the number of instruments in play (see Bagwell and Sykes,
2004). Tari¤s also tend to minimize the deadweight costs of protection for any given local price
in a protected market (see Schwartz and Sykes, 1996).
      The basic approach of GATT may also be termed “shallow integration.” By shallow inte-
gration, we mean that detailed product-by-product negotiations are focused on a single border
instrument –tari¤s –and do not extend to behind-the-border measures (such as domestic taxes
and regulations) that are unquestionably important for particular products or industries. In-
stead, behind-the-border measures are subject to across-the-board rules that apply in all goods
markets, such as the national treatment obligation noted above. These across-the-board rules
apply whether or not the goods in question are the subject of a tari¤ binding.
      Goods market obligations have evolved considerably through the years, and now extend to
several additional treaty instruments pertaining to policies such as the use of antidumping and
countervailing duties, the use of government subsidies, and problems associated with regulatory
or “technical barriers” to trade. Nevertheless, the general approach in goods markets remains
overwhelmingly one of shallow integration.1 For example, the WTO’s Agreement on Technical
Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement) requires that product regulations obey certain general
principles, including an obligation to ensure that they are not more trade restrictive than
necessary to achieve a legitimate regulatory objective. The WTO’s Agreement on Sanitary and
Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) requires that such measures be based on a scienti…c
risk assessment where possible. And the WTO’s Antidumping and Subsidies Agreements require
that certain substantive and procedural rules be satis…ed before a member imposes antidumping
  1
    An important exception arises under the WTO’s Agreement on Agriculture, pursuant to which product-by-
product negotiations on subsidy levels have taken place.



                                                   6
or countervailing duties on any imported product.

2.2. GATS

The structure and approach of GATS is profoundly di¤erent. To aid in understanding the
di¤erences, it is useful to begin by setting out the “modes”of services trade and the attendant
focus of GATS commitments within that framework.
       GATS de…nes four modes of trade. “Mode 1”trade involves the cross border sale of a service
from the exporting country to a consumer in the importing country – an American buys an
insurance policy from a Swiss insurer, for example, receiving an insurance policy by mail or
email while sending payment by mail or wire transfer. Such cross-border transactions are the
closest analogue to ordinary trade in goods. The di¤erence here lies in the fact that cross-
border services transactions are often unobservable by importing governments because they do
not pass through port facilities or come to the attention of customs inspectors. As a result,
governments generally do little to tax or otherwise regulate Mode 1 trade.
       “Mode 2” involves the consumption of a service in the exporting country by a national of
another importing country – a tourist goes to France and gets a haircut. Governments make
little e¤ort to regulate Mode 2 trade.
       To a great extent, therefore, the status quo ante for Mode 1 and Mode 2 trade was de facto
free trade, and GATS has little e¤ect on it. Although governments do make formal GATS
commitments on Mode 1 and 2 trade, these commitments typically entail no more than a
promise not to interfere with such trade, in e¤ect preserving the free trade policy that prevailed
for the most part before GATS.
       “Mode 3”trade involves the establishment of a commercial presence in the importing nation
by a foreign service provider – a foreign bank or law …rm opens a domestic branch o¢ ce, for
example. Importing governments have much more capacity to restrict or regulate services trade
when it involves the establishment of local o¢ ces within their territory, and such restrictions
are commonplace.2
       “Mode 4” trade occurs when a foreign supplier not only establishes a commercial presence
in the importing nation, but also employs foreign nationals in its domestic o¢ ces. A foreign
   2
    The fact that domestic branches of foreign service suppliers are typically sta¤ed at least in part by domestic
nationals may diminish the political demands for protection when services trade entails direct investment in
a commercial presence (see generally Blanchard, 2007). Nevertheless, service providers seeking to establish a
presence in a foreign market often confront formidable obstacles.


                                                        7
bank or law …rm might wish to bring in senior personnel from its home country to oversee the
domestic branch, for example. Mode 4 thus touches on immigration policy, where most nations
also regulate extensively.
       Accordingly, by far the bulk of the barriers to trade in service sectors prior to GATS involve
restraints on Mode 3 or Mode 4. The focus of GATS negotiations, in turn, has been on Modes
3 and 4. Mode 4 commitments are largely limited to certain “horizontal”policies that allow the
temporary presence of highly skilled and executive workers from abroad. Most of the sectoral
commitments are for Mode 3. We therefore focus our discussion henceforth on Mode 3 services.
       In contrast to GATT, however, tari¢ cation is not an important dimension of GATS. As
noted, conventional tari¤s, imposed when a transaction involves cross-border exchange, play a
negligible role in services markets. Indeed, with respect to Mode 3 (and Mode 4) trade, tari¤s
are unavailable by de…nition.
       Moreover, unlike GATT, GATS does not try to channel trade protection into any particular
policy instrument. There is no generally applicable analogue to the GATT Article XI prohi-
bition on quantitative restrictions, or the GATT Article III national treatment obligation for
domestic regulation and taxation. Instead, GATS members retain the ability to use any of these
instruments for protective purposes. Nevertheless, they may choose to make commitments to
limit the use of these instruments, much as they may choose to negotiate tari¤ bindings under
GATT Article II.
       Thus, with respect to each service sector under GATS,3 member governments elect whether
to make any commitments or not. Absent commitments, their future policy choices are un-
constrained beyond an MFN obligation. In sectors where commitments are made, members
negotiate and memorialize their trade restrictive policies. These commitments are divided into
schedules of market access restrictions and schedules of national treatment exceptions. And
in the sectors where commitments are made, any restriction that is not memorialized in a
member’s schedule is e¤ectively “waived”and cannot be employed in the future.
       The market access restrictions are embodied in each member’s GATS Article XVI schedules.
Such restrictions include, among other things, limitations on the number of service providers
in a sector, limitations on the value or quantity of transactions, ceilings on the number of
persons that may be employed in a sector, restrictions on the type of legal entity that may
   3
    Service sector classi…cations are part of the Central Product Classi…cation (CPC) system, developed by the
United Nations. The WTO created its own classi…cation system based on the CPC, found in the Services Sector
Classi…cation List, MTN.GNS/W/120, July 10, 1991.


                                                      8
supply services, and limits on the percentage of foreign ownership in the sector as a whole or
in individual service suppliers.
       GATS Article XVII imposes a national treatment obligation only for sectors where market
access commitments are made. The national treatment obligation is also subject to any enu-
merated exceptions that the importing member wishes to schedule. Thus, national treatment
is also a subject of sector by sector negotiation.
       In sum, GATS members retain complete freedom of action in sectors where they do not wish
to make commitments, except for the MFN principle. In the sectors where commitments are
made, the only fundamental obligation is transparency –members may still employ a wide array
of quantitative restrictions, tax and regulatory policy instruments for protective purposes, but
they must record those instruments in their schedules of commitments. Over time, Members
may negotiate further changes in these schedules to enhance market access on a reciprocal basis.
       Plainly, the approach of GATS goes beyond the predominantly shallow integration strategy
of GATT. Generally applicable disciplines are few and, instead, members can and do negotiate
over a variety of sector-speci…c behind-the-border measures, most commonly involving regula-
tory measures. In this respect, although still in its relative infancy, GATS may be characterized
as a “deep integration”agreement by comparison to GATT.


3. A Benchmark Model of Trade in Services

In this section we construct a benchmark partial equilibrium terms-of-trade model of Mode 3
services trade between a domestic and a foreign country, recasting the model of Staiger and
Sykes (2011) to apply to this context.4 We refer to this model as the Benchmark Model.

3.1. The Model

We assume for simplicity that the service under consideration is demanded only in the domestic
country, and we represent demand by the linear demand curve D =                    P for P 2 [0; ], with
P the consumer price of this service in the domestic market. The service must be produced
in the domestic country where it is consumed (mode 3), and to re‡ect the idea that there
are widespread market imperfections in the service sector we assume that the consumption
   4
    As we note earlier, the primary role for liberalization through GATS arises for Mode 3 and Mode 4 trade.
We suppress the distinction between Modes 3 and 4 here, and simply model a market in which a foreign service
supplier establishes a domestic commercial presence.


                                                     9
of this service generates a negative (“eye sore”) externality that does not e¤ect production
and that is not internalized by individual consumers (and hence does not impact demand for
the product), but which detracts from aggregate national welfare in the domestic country (the
externality does not cross borders). For ease of reference we will refer to this negative externality
as a “pollutant” – for example, one could think of noise levels or dust levels associated with
construction services –but it could correspond loosely to any of a variety of negative externalities
that might be associated with the provision of services, such as speci…c health or safety risks
imposed on the general public by sub-standard service suppliers in the construction, food or
health services industries, or general risks to the domestic …nancial system associated with
imprudent banking practices. We note also that as the service must be consumed where it is
produced, it is immaterial for our purposes whether the externality arises from the process of
production or from the act of consuming the service: again for ease of reference we assume it
is consumption that generates the externality.
   The domestic government can impose a regulatory standard s which speci…es as a condition
of entry into the domestic service market a (maximum) level of pollution (s) generated per
unit of the service provided, and in principle a di¤erent standard may be applied to domestic
and foreign service providers. We denote by r and           the particular standards imposed on
domestic and foreign service providers respectively, with (r) and ( ) the associated per-unit
pollution levels generated by consumption of the services provided by domestic and foreign
service providers under their respective standards. We assume that is a decreasing and convex
function. A nondiscriminatory standard would satisfy r = , while           > r would indicate that
the domestic government has imposed a discriminatory standard on foreign service providers
in the domestic market. Many policy interventions in the service sector take the form of
entry restrictions, some implicit (licensing or certi…cation requirements for entry) and some
explicit (numerical quotas on numbers of service suppliers that may enter), and our modeling
of regulatory standards can be thought of as a shorthand for such policy interventions.
   To meet the standard s, service providers must incur a per-unit compliance cost. These
compliance costs – which could include both the cost of actually meeting the standard as
well as the cost of establishing conformity with the standard – are not immutable, and can
be reduced by government investment in the e¢ cient design and implementation of a given
standard. For example, to ensure a minimum quality standard for the provision of legal services,
the government could simply require as a condition of entry that all providers of legal services


                                                 10
obtain a 3-year law degree from an accredited domestic law school. But the government could
also with minimal additional e¤ort provide a list of foreign law school degrees that would su¢ ce,
or with more substantial e¤ort the government might alternatively invest in the design of a
speci…c entrance exam that provides reliable information for the purpose of quality screening,
or devise a system to monitor performance or a system to permit reliable self-monitoring of
performance, any of which might reduce compliance costs for (domestic, or foreign, or both
domestic and foreign) suppliers. Similar investments in the design and implementation of
regulations applying to the …nancial or insurance sectors could reduce the costs of compliance
with a particular standard for those services.
       To capture this possibility, we assume that by investing I                 0 at a cost of c I in the
design and implementation of the standard s, the domestic government imposes the per-unit
compliance cost (s; I)           (s)      (I) on the service providers subject to the standard, where
  is increasing and convex in s and           is increasing and concave in I with (s) > (I)                0 for
all s and I. We assume that separate investments must be made by the domestic government
to reduce the costs for domestic and for foreign service providers in meeting their respective
standards (even if the standards themselves are set at the same level), and we denote by Id and
If these investments: the per-unit cost of compliance for domestic service providers to meet the
standard r is then given by (r; Id ), while the per-unit cost of compliance for foreign service
providers to meet the standard           is given by ( ; If ). For any regulatory standards r and ,
supply of domestic and foreign service providers are then given respectively by Sd = qd                   (r; Id )
for qd       (r; Id ), and Sf = qf     ( ; If ) for qf        ( ; If ), where qd and qf are the prices received
in the domestic market by the domestic and foreign service providers, respectively.5
       Import tari¤s and export taxes are central instruments of intervention for goods trade, but
they are by de…nition not available in the context of Mode 3 services trade. Still, governments
may have other …scal instruments at their disposal. To re‡ect this possibility, we consider in this
section a benchmark case in which an expansive list of non-tari¤ …scal instruments is available.
In particular, in addition to the regulatory standards, we assume that the domestic government
   5
    Notice that we have assumed domestic and foreign service providers facing the same standard will generate
the same per-unit level of pollution. And hence with our speci…cation of the per-unit compliance cost (s; I),
we have assumed as well that for …xed investment levels Id and If the marginal impact on compliance cost of
reducing the per-unit level of pollution with a slightly higher standard is the same across domestic and foreign
service providers. However, domestic and foreign service providers will face di¤erent compliance costs for the
same standard as long as the domestic government invests di¤erent amounts in reducing the costs of compliance
for domestic and foreign service …rms (i.e., if Id 6= If ). In this way our speci…cation of (s; I) highlights the
possibility that a given standard may impose very di¤erent costs on domestic and foreign service providers.


                                                         11
has at its disposal two distinct tax/subsidy instruments: a nondiscriminatory sales tax t that
it levies uniformly on domestic and foreign service providers alike (tax if positive and subsidy
if negative), and an additional discriminatory sales tax or surcharge tf that it levies only on
foreign service providers (tax if positive and subsidy if negative), each expressed in speci…c
terms.6 Setting tf = 0 would imply a nondiscriminatory tax (t) on the sales of domestic and
foreign service suppliers in the domestic market, whereas tf > 0 re‡ects a discriminatory tax
(in the amount t + tf ) imposed by the domestic government on the domestic market sales of
foreign service suppliers (discriminatory, because domestic service providers only pay the sales
tax t on their domestic market sales). And for its part, we assume that the foreign government
can levy a tax tf on its service providers’ sales in the domestic market (tax if positive and
subsidy if negative, also expressed in speci…c terms).
       Of course, a discriminatory sales tax imposed on the sales of foreign service providers in
the domestic market is simply an import tari¤ (if imposed by the domestic government) or
export tax (if imposed by the foreign government) by another name. And as with import
tari¤s and export taxes, there may be good reasons why governments do not or cannot use
discriminatory sales taxes in the context of Mode 3 services trade. Consider for example the
foreign government’s tax tf on the sales of foreign service providers in the domestic market:
owing to the nature of Mode 3 services, the imposition of this sales tax would require the
foreign government to monitor output and collect taxes in the jurisdiction of the domestic
government, clearly something that is not likely to be observed in practice. But in contrast to
the unavailability of import tari¤s and export taxes in the context of Mode 3 services trade, the
unavailability of such sales taxes does not follow by de…nition. And as will become clear below,
assuming that these sorts of discriminatory sales taxes are available to governments provides an
important benchmark with which to illuminate the essential issues associated with liberalizing
Mode 3 trade in services, and from which we can then consider the implications of imposing
more realistic limitations on the set of instruments available to governments in the context of
Mode 3 service trade.
       We assume that all taxes are set at non-prohibitive levels. With this, the price paid by
domestic consumers and the prices received by domestic and foreign service providers must
   6
    In light of the fact that any Mode 3 service that is consumed in the domestic market must also be produced
there, production taxes are equivalent to sales/consumption taxes in our setting. Therefore, while for simplicity
we refer to these taxes as sales taxes, thinking of them as production taxes would be equally valid and leave
unchanged our analysis.



                                                       12
satisfy
                                     qd + t = P = qf + tf + t + tf :                                (3.1)

Note that services sell in the domestic country at the same price P regardless of the standard
to which they are produced, re‡ecting the fact that individual consumers do not di¤erentiate
across units of the service on the basis of how much pollution it generates when it is consumed.
We also de…ne qw       qf + tf , the “world” price of the foreign service provided in the domestic
market (i.e., the price outside the foreign market at which this service would be available for
sale from foreign service providers). Note that (3.1) implies:

                                             qw = qd      tf :                                      (3.2)

   The market-clearing condition D = Sd + Sf determines equilibrium in this market. Using
the explicit expressions for demands and supplies and the pricing relationships in (3.1)-(3.2),
this condition determines the market-clearing world price for the service as a function of the
tax and regulatory policies:
                                1
                           q~w = [       2tf + tf    t + (r; Id ) + ( ; If )]:                      (3.3)
                                3
With (3.1)-(3.2) we may also derive expressions for the market-clearing levels of each of the
local prices in the domestic market as functions of the tax and regulatory policies:
                             1
                        P~ =   [ + (tf + tf ) + 2t + (r; Id ) + ( ; If )];                          (3.4)
                             3
                             1
                       q~d =   [ + (tf + tf ) t + (r; Id ) + ( ; If )]; and
                             3
                             1
                      q~f =    [   2(tf + tf ) t + (r; Id ) + ( ; If )]:
                             3
   Following Staiger and Sykes (2011), we de…ne as well the market-clearing foreign producer
price of the “raw” unregulated service –prior to bringing it into compliance with the prevail-
ing domestic regulatory standard – as a function of the tax and regulatory policies, and the
associated world price of the foreign-produced unregulated service, by
                                      1
             q~f0    q~f    ( ; If ) = [      2(tf + tf )        t + (r; Id )    2 ( ; If )]; and   (3.5)
                                      3
                                       1
             q~w0    q~w    ( ; If ) = [       2tf + tf     t + (r; Id )        2 ( ; If )]:
                                       3
As the second line of (3.5) indicates, for any           and If there is a one-to-one correspondence
between q~w and q~w0 , but in what follows it will prove useful to refer to q~w0 rather than q~w as “the

                                                    13
terms of trade”in services. Notice that q~f0 is also the market-clearing output of foreign service
providers in the domestic market (Sf ), and therefore the trade volume in Mode 3 services. As
(3.5) indicates, while neither government can impose a tari¤ on this trade volume, each of the
non-tari¤ policies that the governments do possess can be altered to reduce this trade volume
and hence act as a non-tari¤ barrier (NTB) to trade in Mode 3 services.
   We next de…ne domestic and foreign welfare. The welfare level in the domestic country is
calculated by subtracting from the usual partial equilibrium measure of consumer surplus plus
producer surplus plus tax revenue the disutility of the consumption-generated pollution and
the cost of investments in design and implementation of the standards. However, the producer
surplus accruing to the domestic country is limited to that associated with domestic service
suppliers: the producer surplus generated by foreign service suppliers in the domestic market
accrues to the foreign country. Domestic consumer surplus (CS) and domestic producer surplus
(P S) are given by
              Z                                                           Z   q~d
       CS =      [           P ]dP        CS(P~ ); and P S =                            [q      (r; Id )]dq    P S(r; Id ; q~d ):
                   P~                                                         (r;Id )

With the pricing relationships above and the de…nition of q~w0 , the tax revenue collected by the
domestic government (T R) can be written as

       T R = [P~            q~d ] [~
                                   qd        (r; Id )] + [P~       q~w0        ( ; If )] [(           P~ )    (~
                                                                                                               qd      (r; Id ))]
                    T R(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~w0 ):

And the utility cost of domestic pollution (Z) is given by

                        Z =       (r) [~
                                       qd          (r; Id )] + ( ) [(                    P~ )   (~
                                                                                                 qd      (r; Id ))]
                                Z(r; ; Id ; P~ ; q~d ):

With these de…nitions, domestic welfare may now be expressed as

                         W = CS(P~ ) + P S(r; Id ; q~d ) + T R(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~w0 )                                     (3.6)
                                        Z(r; ; Id ; P~ ; q~d )      c[Id + If ]
                                     W (r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~w0 ):

    Notice that by the de…nition of T R(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~w0 ) and market clearing, it follows from
(3.6) that Wq~w = [(
               0
                         P~ ) (~
                               qd     (r; Id ))] = q~0 < 0 (where here and throughout a function
                                                                          f


                                                                  14
subscripted with a variable denotes the partial derivative of the function with respect to the
variable). This re‡ects the domestic welfare loss associated with a terms-of-trade movement
against the domestic country (i.e., a rise in q~w0 ) holding …xed all regulatory standards, associated
investments and domestic local prices. This loss is simply the income e¤ect of the terms-of-
trade deterioration for the domestic country, which amounts to the domestic sales volume of
the foreign service providers.
   Given the absence of foreign demand for the service under consideration and of foreign
pollution, the welfare level in the foreign country is composed of just two components: the
producer surplus accruing to foreign service providers operating in the domestic market, and
tax revenue. However, while we have for simplicity (and without impact for the results we
emphasize below) abstracted from political economy in‡uences in characterizing the objectives
of the domestic government, it will prove important for some of our later results to include
the possibility of political economy in‡uences in the foreign service sector when specifying the
foreign government’s objectives, which we do by placing a weight                                    1 on foreign producer
surplus in the foreign government objective function. More speci…cally, using the pricing rela-
tionships above and the de…nitions of q~f0 and q~w0 , foreign producer surplus (P S ) and trade tax
revenue (T R ) can be de…ned as
                         Z   q~f0 + ( ;If )                                Z   q~f0
              PS     =                        [qf      ( ; If )]dqf =                 qf dqf        qf0 ); and
                                                                                               P S (~
                            ( ;If )                                        0

              TR     =   [~0
                          qw q~f0 ]       q~f0      TR     qf0 ; q~w0 ):
                                                          (~

With these de…nitions, foreign welfare may now be expressed as

                                  W           =               qf0 ) + T R (~
                                                         P S (~            qf0 ; q~w0 )                               (3.7)
                                                       qf0 ; q~w0 ):
                                                    W (~

                                                      qf0 ; q~w0 ), foreign welfare does not depend
   Notice an implication of (3.7): as expressed by W (~
directly on the standard        to which foreign service providers must comply when they sell in
the domestic market, but only depends on                         indirectly through the impact of                on q~f0 and
q~w0 , the market-clearing producer price and world price of the foreign-produced unregulated
service. Intuitively, and following Staiger and Sykes (2011), we have modeled production of the
unregulated service as an increasing cost (upward-sloping supply) industry, while for a given
standard level   and standard-writing investment I the per-unit cost of coming into compliance

                                                              15
with the standard is then constant (and equal to ( ; If ) regardless of how many units of the
unregulated service must be altered to meet the standard. As a consequence, foreign producer
surplus is impacted by the standard level only to the extent that impacts the market-clearing
foreign supply decisions for the unregulated service (through q~f0 ). Note as well that by (3.7)
                          qf0 ; q~w0 ), it follows that Wq~w0 = q~f0 > 0, re‡ecting the foreign welfare
and the de…nition of T R (~
gain from a terms-of-trade improvement (i.e., arise in q~w0 ) holding the foreign local price …xed.
This gain is the income e¤ect of the terms-of-trade improvement for the foreign country, which
amounts to the domestic sales volume of the foreign service providers.
       Finally, we develop an expression for the joint (sum of) domestic and foreign welfare. When
we characterize e¢ cient policies, we look for policy choices that maximize the sum of the welfare
across the two countries.7 Using the market-clearing condition that the domestic demand
for services (  P~ ) must be satis…ed by supply from domestic and foreign service providers
[(~
  qd       (r; Id )) + q~f0 ], observe that the world price q~w0 cancels from the sum of domestic and
foreign tax revenue:

 T R(r; ; P~ ; Id ; If ; q~d ; q~w0 ) + T R (~
                                             qf0 ; q~w0 ) = [P~         q~d ] [~
                                                                               qd         (r; Id )]
                                                                +[P~       q~f0      ( ; If )] [(       P~ )    (~
                                                                                                                 qd          (r; Id ))]
                                                                g(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~f0 ):

This allows us to write

             W +W         = W (r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~w0 ) + W (~
                                                                     qf0 ; q~w0 )                                                 (3.8)
                          = CS(P~ ) + P S(r; Id ; q~d ) +                       qf0 ) + g(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~f0 )
                                                                           P S (~
                                 Z(r; ; Id ; P~ ; q~d )       c[Id + If ]
                               G(r; ; Id ; If ; P~ ; q~d ; q~f0 ):

Hence, while the world price q~w0 enters into each country’s welfare function, it is absent from the
expression for joint welfare. This is because W 0 + Wq~0 = q~0 [(q~w    P~ ) (~
                                                                             w
                                                                              qd     f(r; Id ))] = 0, so
that movements in the world price represent pure (lump-sum) international transfers between
countries.
   7
    Implicitly, we are assuming that lump sum transfers are available to distribute surplus across the two
countries as desired




                                                                 16
3.2. E¢ cient and Noncooperative Policies

With our Benchmark Model described, we close this section by characterizing the jointly e¢ cient
and the noncooperative (Nash) policy choices. We begin with e¢ cient policies.
        To characterize e¢ cient policies, recall that only local prices are relevant for joint welfare,
as (3.8) indicates. But now observe from (3.3), (3.4) and (3.5) that, while world prices depend
on the individual levels of both tf and tf , all local prices depend on tf and tf only through
their sum. Therefore, in addition to the choices of t, r, , Id and If , e¢ ciency ties down only
the sum of tf and tf , not their individual levels.
        With reference to the expression for joint welfare given in (3.8), there are then six …rst-order
conditions that the e¢ cient policy choices must satisfy.8 Evaluating these …rst-order conditions
using the expressions in (3.3)-(3.7), denoting the e¢ cient domestic-market sales of the domestic
and foreign service providers respectively by SdE and SfE , and denoting the e¢ cient policy choices
by tE     E   E   E
    f + tf , t , r ,
                            E
                                , IdE and IfE , the following conditions which must be satis…ed by the
e¢ cient policy levels may be derived:

                                      tE     E
                                       f + tf =     (        1) SfE ;                                       (3.9)
                                            tE = (rE );
                        @ (rE )       @ (rE )                       @ (   E
                                                                              )   @ (   E
                                                                                            )
                                              = 0 and                                           = 0;
                          @r            @r                            @             @
                                                             "                    #
                           @ (IdE ) E                            @ (IfE ) E
                                    Sd      c = 0 and                     Sf      c = 0:
                            @Id                                   @If

        The interpretation of (3.9) is intuitive. Notice …rst from the third line of (3.9) that e¢ ciency
requires that the standards for both domestic and foreign service providers are chosen to equate
the marginal bene…t of a slightly higher standard in terms of per-unit pollution reduction
    @ (rE )        @ ( E)
(     @r
              and    @
                          ) with the increase in marginal cost       of service production from the slightly
                        (rE )         E
higher     standard ( @ @r    and @ @( ) ), and hence e¢ ciency      implies rE =       E
                                                                                            : given the symmetric
technologies across domestic and foreign service suppliers in terms of both the externality that
their services generate for a given standard ( (s)) and the sensitivity of the cost of compliance to
changes in the standard ( (s)), there is no e¢ ciency reason to impose discriminatory standards
across domestic and foreign service providers. And with the e¢ cient standard rE =                          E
                                                                                                                in
    8
    We assume throughout that policy choices correspond to interior solutions of the relevant maximization prob-
lems. The second-order conditions associated with the maximization problems considered here and throughout
the paper are satis…ed under our convexity/concavity assumptions for , and .


                                                        17
place, the e¢ cient nondiscriminatory domestic sales tax (tE ) is simply the Pigouvian tax that
internalizes the remaining externality imposed by the domestic and foreign service providers in
the domestic market, as the second line of (3.9) indicates. Now consider the …rst line of (3.9): in
the case where the foreign government is subjected to political economy in‡uences (                        > 1), it
is then also e¢ cient to o¤set somewhat the sales tax imposed on foreign service providers in the
domestic market with discriminatory tax rebates (tE     E
                                                  f + tf < 0), re‡ecting the extra value that

the foreign government places on redistributing surplus towards foreign service providers. And
as the bottom line of (3.9) shows, it is e¢ cient to make compliance-cost-reducing investments
in the design and implementation of each standard to the point where the marginal bene…t (the
reduction in the total costs incurred by the impacted service providers in meeting the standard,
@ (IdE )           @ (IfE )
 @Id
           SdE and   @If
                              SfE ) is equal to the marginal cost of such investments (c), implying that
in general    Id 6= IfE .9
               E


       Notice that IdE R IfE as SdE R SfE for the intuitive reason that it is worth investing more
in reducing the cost of compliance when the cost savings applies to a larger sales volume. For
the case where         = 1, it is straightforward to show that SdE = SfE and hence IdE = IfE , but as
noted above for         > 1 it is e¢ cient to lower the sales tax imposed on foreign service providers
in the domestic market with the discriminatory tax rebate (tE     E
                                                            f + tf < 0), and this stimulates

the domestic sales of foreign service providers, leading to SdE < SfE and therefore IdE < IfE .10
       Next we characterize the noncooperative (Nash) policy choices. Facing a given foreign tax tf
on the sales of foreign service providers in the domestic country and using the domestic welfare
expression in (3.6), the best-response policy choices of the domestic government are the choices
   9
     As discussed in note 5, the possibility that the same standard imposes di¤erent compliance costs on domestic
and foreign service providers is captured in our model by the level of domestic-provider-speci…c and foreign-
provider-speci…c investments in compliance-cost reduction that the domestic government selects. For this reason,
as (3.9) indicates, the e¢ cient investment levels will typically di¤er across domestic and foreign service providers
but the e¢ cient standard level will not. Together these two features imply that at e¢ cient policy choices the
domestic and foreign service providers will face the same standard and generate the same level of per-unit
pollution as we have observed, but may face di¤erent costs of compliance with the standard. As we discuss further
below, this distinction in turn allows us to distinguish between the nondiscrimination obligations imposed by
the WTO’s NT rule on regulatory standards, and the obligation imposed by the WTO’s TBT rule to implement
regulations in a way that is no more trade restrictive than necessary.
  10
     In our benchmark model, e¢ ciency implies a greater domestic market share for foreign service providers
than for domestic service providers whenever foreign political pressure is present. At the cost of extra notation,
we could easily introduce into the model exogenous supply-curve shifters that delivered the arguably more
realistic prediction that foreign service providers supply a relatively small share of the domestic market, with
the implication that e¢ ciency would then require greater investment in compliance-cost reduction for domestic
service suppliers than for foreign service suppliers.




                                                         18
of t, tf , r, , Id and If that satisfy the following six …rst-order conditions:

                                         dP~         d~qd                 qw0
                                                                         d~
                                      WP~     + Wq~d           + Wq~w0        = 0;                           (3.10)
                                         dtf         dtf                 dtf
                                         dP~         d~qd              qw0
                                                                      d~
                                     WP~      + Wq~d           + Wq~w0         = 0;
                                          dt          dt               dt
                                         dP ~        d~qd              q0
                                                                      d~
                                Wr + WP~      + Wq~d           + Wq~w0 w       = 0;
                                          dr         dr               dr
                                         dP ~        d~qd              q0
                                                                      d~
                                W + WP~       + Wq~d           + Wq~w0 w       = 0;
                                          d          d                d
                                         dP ~        d~qd              q0
                                                                      d~
                               WId + WP~      + Wq~d           + Wq~w0 w       = 0 and
                                         dId         dId              dId
                                         dP~         d~
                                                      qd               q0
                                                                      d~
                               WIf + WP~      + Wq~d           + Wq~w0 w       = 0:
                                         dIf         dIf              dIf
And facing given domestic choices of t, tf , r, , Id and If and using the foreign welfare expression
(3.7), the best-response foreign tax tf must satisfy the following …rst-order condition:

                                                   qf0
                                                  d~           q0
                                                              d~
                                            Wq~0       + Wq~w0 w = 0:                                        (3.11)
                                                f dt          dtf
                                                    f

Nash policy choices simultaneously satisfy the conditions in (3.10) and (3.11), ensuring that
each country is adopting its best-response policy to the other country’s policy choices.
   Evaluating the …rst-order conditions contained in (3.10) and (3.11) that de…ne the Nash
policies using the expressions in (3.3)-(3.7), denoting the Nash domestic-market sales of the
domestic and foreign service providers respectively by SdN and SfN and the Nash policy choices
by tN     N   N   N
    f , tf , t , r ,
                           N
                               , IdN and IfN , and reporting the sum tN
                                                                      f + tf
                                                                             N
                                                                               rather than tN
                                                                                            f and tf
                                                                                                     N

separately in order to facilitate comparison with the e¢ cient policies in (3.9), it follows that
the Nash policy levels satisfy
                                                                         3
                                    tN
                                     f + tf
                                            N
                                              =       (          1) SfN + SfN ;                              (3.12)
                                                                         2
                                          tN = (rN );
                  @ (rN )           @ (rN )                              @ (   N
                                                                                   )   @ (    N
                                                                                                  )
                                             = 0 and                                                  = 0;
                    @r                @r                                   @              @
                                                                  "                     #
                       @   (IdN )                                     @ (IfN ) N
                                     SdN    c      = 0 and                     Sf      c = 0:
                           @Id                                         @If

With Nash and e¢ cient policy choices characterized for our Benchmark Model of trade in
services, we are ready to consider the purpose and design of trade-in-services agreements.

                                                          19
4. Trade-in-Services Agreements: Benchmark Results

In this section we use our Benchmark Model to investigate the purpose and design of a trade-
in-services agreement. We show that the Benchmark Model fails to o¤er an explanation for the
striking di¤erences between GATT and GATS that we described above. This negative result
is instructive, however, as it both points the way to an augmented model (which we develop in
section 5) that can account for the di¤erences between GATT and GATS and at the same time
suggests changes in the existing GATS architecture (which we discuss in section 5) that might
facilitate greater liberalizing success for services through an analog to the shallow integration
approach that proved successful for GATT.

4.1. The Purpose of a Trade-in-Services Agreement

What problem must an agreement on trade in services solve if it is to move governments from
ine¢ cient Nash choices to the e¢ ciency frontier? The answer is important, because it reveals the
purpose of a trade-in-services agreement. Armed with the characterization of e¢ cient policies
in (3.9) and Nash policies in (3.12), we now turn to a comparison of these policies as a means
of answering this question.
       A …rst observation is immediate from a comparison of (3.9) with (3.12): the ine¢ ciencies
associated with Nash choices are not spread widely across the range of government interven-
tions in the service sector, but are instead limited to a narrow range of policies. Speci…cally,
conditional on the trade volume, the Nash choices of t, r, , Id and If described in (3.12)
satisfy the same conditions as do the e¢ cient choices of these policies described in (3.9), and it
is only tf + tf , the sum of the discriminatory domestic and foreign sales taxes levied on foreign
service providers in the domestic market, that under Nash choices is excessively protective and
results in diminished market access and trade volume relative to the e¢ cient choice, owing to
the extra term 23 SfN in the expression for tN     N 11
                                             f + tf .

  11
     That the sum of the Nash discriminatory taxes is higher than e¢ cient follows from our focus on non-
prohibitive intervention, which ensures that the Nash supply of foreign services to the domestic market SfN is
strictly positive. We use the term “market access”informally here in order to tie in with the language present in
trade agreements (e.g., GATT and GATS), but see Bagwell and Staiger (2002) for a formalization of this term
within the context of the terms-of-trade theory. In essence, a market access commitment in a trade agreement
is a commitment to conditions of competition between foreign exporting and domestic import-competing …rms,
and can be interpreted in the context of our Benchmark Model as a commitment to a given level of sales volume
by foreign service providers in the domestic market (i.e., a given level of domestic import volume) at a given
foreign-service-provider price.



                                                       20
    A second observation then also follows: the di¤erence between Nash and e¢ cient sales taxes
on foreign service providers is driven by each country’s incentive to exert its market power
                         qw0 ) with its unilateral tax choice and to impose its Johnson (1953-
over the terms of trade (~
54) “optimal tari¤” on the sales of foreign service providers in the domestic market. To see
this, consider the expression for tN                                      N
                                   f , which it can be shown is given by tf = (
                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                          ) + SfN , and
note that the elasticity of foreign service supply into the domestic market can be written as
@Sf q~w        q~w
@ q~w Sf
           =   Sf
                   .   But then, dividing the expression for tN
                                                              f by q
                                                                   ~w to convert from a speci…c to an
                               tNf       ( N)       SfN
ad valorem tax yields          q~w
                                     =    q~w
                                                +   q~w
                                                        ,   and hence the second term in this expression is simply
the inverse of the foreign export supply elasticity, the Johnson (1953-54) optimal ad-valorem
tari¤ term. A similar calculation can be performed for the Nash foreign tax, which is given by
tfN =      (           1) SfN + 12 SfN , leading to an analogous interpretation.
    Collecting these two observations, we may conclude that the di¤erence between Nash and
e¢ cient service sector policies can be traced to each country’s incentive to exert its market
power over the terms of trade. To con…rm this at a more general level and develop further
its implications, we now follow Bagwell and Staiger (1999, 2001) and de…ne politically optimal
policies as those policies that would hypothetically be chosen by governments unilaterally if
they did not value the terms-of-trade implications of their policy choices. We then ask whether
politically optimal policies so de…ned are e¢ cient when evaluated in light of the governments’
actual objectives, and thereby consider whether the Nash ine¢ ciencies identi…ed above can in
fact be given the terms-of-trade interpretation we have just outlined.
    Formally, to characterize politically optimal policies we suppose hypothetically that the
domestic government acts as if Wq~w0                         0 when choosing unilaterally its policies, while the
foreign government acts as if Wq~w0                    0 when choosing unilaterally its policy, and we solve for
the non-cooperative (Nash) policy choices that would emerge with these hypothetical objectives.
It is easy to show that the politically optimal policies, which we denote by tfP O , tPf O , tP O , rP O ,
 PO
      , IdP O and IfP O , are e¢ cient when evaluated in light of the governments’actual objectives,
and take an intuitive form of the e¢ cient policies described by (3.9). At the political optimum,
the foreign government departs from laissez-faire and subsidizes its service providers’sales in
the domestic market if and only if it is motivated by political economy considerations; and the
domestic government sets e¢ cient and nondiscriminatory standards (rP O =                        PO
                                                                                                      ) for domestic
and foreign service providers in the domestic market while making e¢ cient compliance-cost-
reducing investments in the design and implementation of these standards, and imposes a


                                                                  21
Pigouvian nondiscriminatory sales tax to internalize the remaining externality. Formally,

                                 tPf O = 0 and tfP O =          (      1) SfP O ;             (4.1)
                                 tP O = (rP O );
             @ (rP O )     @ (rP O )                        @ ( P O)      @ ( P O)
                                      = 0 and                                      = 0; and
               @r            @r                               @             @
                                                     "                     #
                @ (IdP O ) P O                           @ (IfP O ) P O
                           Sd      c   = 0 and                      Sf     c = 0;
                  @Id                                      @If

where SdP O and SfP O denote the (e¢ cient) politically optimal domestic-market sales of the
domestic and foreign service providers respectively. Comparing (4.1) with (3.9), it is clear that
politically optimal policies satisfy the conditions for e¢ ciency.
   Just as with trade in goods, therefore, if governments could be induced to make service
sector policy choices free from motives re‡ecting terms-of-trade manipulation, there would be
nothing left for a trade-in-services agreement to do. We thus arrive at an important conclusion:
as long as governments can levy discriminatory sales taxes on foreign service providers in the
domestic market as we have assumed in our Benchmark Model, the scope of the Nash policy
ine¢ ciencies in the service sector will be limited to these tari¤-equivalent sales tax instruments;
and the fundamental problem for a trade-in-services agreement to address is then to prevent
terms-of-trade manipulation, and to thereby reduce the discriminatory sales taxes on foreign
service providers and increase market access and service trade volumes without introducing
distortions into the choice of domestic regulatory and tax policies. This is the same problem
that arises with goods trade according to the terms-of-trade theory (see for example Bagwell and
Staiger, 2001, and Staiger and Sykes, 2011), with the only di¤erence being that discriminatory
taxes on the sales of foreign service providers play the role of import tari¤s and export taxes.
   Evidently, while it is true that import tari¤s and export taxes are unavailable in the context
of (Mode 3) services trade as we have assumed, this does not necessarily imply that the funda-
mental nature of Nash policy ine¢ ciencies in services trade is any di¤erent from the nature of
Nash policy ine¢ ciencies in the context of goods trade. We summarize with:

Proposition 1. In the Nash equilibrium of the Benchmark Model, the domestic and foreign
governments exert their power over the terms of services trade with discriminatory sales taxes
imposed on foreign service providers in the domestic market that restrict market access and
service trade volumes below e¢ cient levels; governments leave all other policy instruments

                                                22
undistorted. The purpose of a trade-in-services agreement is then to remove the terms-of-trade
driven distortions from discriminatory sales taxes and raise trade volumes.

4.2. A ‘GATT-like’Agreement for Trade in Services

We now show that, according to our Benchmark Model, with only minor adjustments it should
have been possible to apply the broad structure of GATT to the liberalization of trade in
services. This result both sets the stage for our later normative results and frames the positive
question that we later address: How can our benchmark terms-of-trade model be modi…ed to
account for the striking di¤erences between GATT and GATS?
   We begin with a basic point: while Proposition 1 indicates that the purpose of a trade-in-
services agreement is to remove the terms-of-trade driven distortions from discriminatory sales
taxes and raise trade volumes, this does not mean that an agreement over tf + tf alone, without
restrictions on other policies, could lead governments to the international e¢ ciency frontier.
   To see this, let us suppose for example that the domestic and foreign governments attempt
to implement the politically optimal policies de…ned in (4.1) with an agreement to bind their
discriminatory sales taxes at the politically optimal levels tPf O = 0 and tfP O =              (       1) SfP O ,
leaving all other (domestic) policy instruments unconstrained. Denoting best-response choices
with a superscript “R,” and letting SdR and SfR denote the domestic market sales of domestic
and foreign service providers, respectively, under the politically optimal discriminatory sales
taxes and the best-response levels for the remaining policies of the domestic government, it is
straightforward to show that tR , rR ,   R
                                             , IdR and IfR satisfy the following conditions:


                                           1                        1
                                   tR =        [ (rR ) + ( R )] + SfR ;                                     (4.2)
                                           2                        2
                @ (rR )      @ (rR )         1       R       R         R       @ (rR )
                                         =        [Sf    ( (r )       ( ))]            ;
                  @r           @r          2SdR                                  @r
                @ ( R)       @ ( R)            1       R        R        R      @ ( R)
                                         =          [S f   ( (r   )    (   ))]           ;
                  @            @             2SfR                                 @
                     @ (IdR ) R                 1                                      @ (IdR )
                              Sd   c =            [SfR     ( (rR )       (   R
                                                                                 ))]            ; and
                      @Id                       2                                       @Id
                 "                  #
                     @ (IfR ) R            1                                     @ (IfR )
                              Sf   c     =   [SfR            R
                                                         ( (r )      (   R
                                                                             ))]          :
                      @If                  2                                      @If

Comparing (4.1) and (4.2), it is clear that an agreement that binds discriminatory sales taxes

                                                   23
at their politically optimal levels but leaves all other policy choices unconstrained will lead the
                                                                                   R
domestic government to (i) impose a discriminatory standard (                          > rR ) against foreign ser-
vice providers in the domestic market, with a higher-than-e¢ cient standard imposed on foreign
service providers and a lower-than-e¢ cient standard imposed on domestic service providers,
(ii) make smaller-than-e¢ cient compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and imple-
mentation of the standard applied to foreign service providers (IfR ) and higher-than-e¢ cient
compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and implementation of the standard applied
to domestic service providers (IdR ), and (iii) set the domestic sales tax above the Pigouvian level.
     How, then, can a trade-in-services agreement be structured to reduce sales taxes on foreign
service providers and increase market access and service trade volumes from their Nash levels
without introducing distortions into the choice of domestic regulatory and tax policies? One
possible approach is to structure the agreement so as to place constraints directly on each
policy at its e¢ cient level, a deep form of integration that entails negotiations over all trade-
impacting policies. To be e¤ective, deep integration requires that governments are able to
accurately distinguish in their negotiations between internationally e¢ cient and ine¢ cient levels
of regulatory standards (and the same goes for domestic taxes). Here we consider the possibility
of adopting an alternative, shallow integration, approach, analogous to the approach taken by
GATT in the context of goods trade liberalization.
     To this end, suppose that governments were to agree to some across-the-board rules that
apply whether or not the services in question are subject to negotiated market access commit-
ments. We focus on three such rules, analogs of which …gure prominently in GATT.
     Consider …rst the impact of governments adopting a national treatment (NT) rule which
prohibits regulation –but not taxation –that discriminates against the sales of foreign service
providers in the domestic market, implying the restriction r               . In the presence of such a rule,
if the two governments then agree to bind their discriminatory sales taxes at the politically
optimal levels tPf O = 0 and tfP O =      (     1) SfP O , it is straightforward to show that tR , rR ,
 R
     , IdR and IfR now satisfy the following conditions:
                                             1
                               tR =   (rR ) + SfR ;                                                          (4.3)
                                             2
         @ (rR )         @ (rR )                   @ (   R
                                                             )       @ (   R
                                                                               )
                                   = 0 and                                             = 0;
           @r              @r                        @                 @
                                                                 "                            #
            @   (IdR )                  1 R @   (IdR )               @ (IfR ) R                  1 R @ (IfR )
                         SdR   c   =     S        ; and                       Sf              c = Sf          :
                @Id                     2 f   @Id                     @If                        2    @If

                                                   24
Evidently, as a comparison of the second and third lines of (4.2) with the second line of (4.3)
makes clear, by eliminating the possibility of setting discriminatory standards against foreign
service providers, the NT rule works to ensure that the standards will in fact remain at their
Nash, e¢ cient, levels (as de…ned by the third line of (3.12)) when the negotiated constraints
on discriminatory sales taxes are imposed, even though the choice of the level of the (nondis-
criminatory) standards is left to the discretion of the domestic government.12 Intuitively, when
discriminatory sales taxes are bound by agreement and therefore unavailable for terms-of-trade
manipulation and nondiscriminatory sales taxes become the only …scal policy available for this
purpose, the use of discriminatory regulatory standards becomes an attractive weapon to add
to the terms-of-trade manipulation arsenal; but if the application of discriminatory standards
is also unavailable as under the NT rule, the use of standards for this purpose loses its luster,
and standards become immune to terms-of-trade manipulation motives.
       It might be thought that the ability of the NT rule to mitigate against terms-of-trade
motives in the unilateral setting of standards hinges on a su¢ ciently dominant presence of
domestic service suppliers who, in the presence of the NT rule, must face any terms-of-trade
driven distortions in standards that foreign service providers face. But in fact, as the second
line of (4.3) indicates, the market share of domestic service providers plays no role in this
argument: in the presence of the NT rule, the non-discriminatory sales tax simply dominates
non-discriminatory standards for purposes of terms-of-trade manipulation, independent of the
market share of domestic service providers.
       Consider next the impact of governments adopting as well in their trade-in-services agree-
ment a rule akin to aspects of the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) agreement, under which
the governments are obligated to ensure that, whatever non-protectionist objectives they choose
to pursue with their choice of standards, they do so with regulations that are no more trade
restrictive than necessary to achieve these objectives.13 In terms of our Benchmark Model, we
can impose and interpret a “TBT rule” as committing the domestic government to make e¢ -
cient compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and implementation of the standards
that it chooses to put in place (that is, e¢ cient choices for Id and If ).14 With the domestic gov-
  12
     Staiger and Sykes (2011) make the analogous point in the context of goods trade.
  13
     Under the TBT Agreement, governments have broad latitude to pursue non-protectionist objectives relating
to health, safety, the environment, consumer protection, and the like But they are subject to an array of
across-the-board rules desigined to ensure transparency, that the means chosen to achieve these objectives are
reasonable, and that the rules do not impose unnecessary costs on trade.
  14
     Nothing in the TBT Agreement creates an obligation in precisely these terms, but in broad brush this


                                                     25
ernment’s choices of Id and If then satisfying the conditions for e¢ ciency under the TBT rule,
it is straightforward to show that the NT rule continues to ensure that the domestic govern-
ment’s standards choices will remain at their Nash, e¢ cient, levels when the two governments
agree to bind their discriminatory sales taxes at the politically optimal levels, and only the
nondiscriminatory domestic sales tax remains ine¢ ciently high.
   That is, if the trade-in-services agreement were to include an NT rule and a TBT rule
as we have described these rules here, and if the domestic and foreign government were to
agree to bind their discriminatory sales taxes at the politically optimal levels tPf O = 0 and
tfP O =     (    1) SfP O , the remaining policies tR , rR ,   R
                                                                   , IdR and IfR would satisfy the following
conditions:
                                                       1
                                        tR =    (rR ) + SfR ;                                          (4.4)
                                                       2
                    @ (rR )      @ (rR )                     @ ( R)             @ (   R
                                                                                          )
                                             = 0 and                                          = 0;
                      @r           @r                          @                  @
                                                        "                        #
                       @ (IdR ) R                         @ (IfR ) R
                                Sd      c    = 0; and              Sf           c = 0:
                        @Id                                 @If

Evidently, according to (4.4), if governments were to bind their discriminatory sales taxes at
the politically optimal levels in the presence of NT and TBT rules, the spread of distortions in
service sector policies would be limited to the remaining “commercial measures”/…scal instru-
ments of governments (tR ); there would be no induced distortions in regulatory choices (r,               Id
and If ).
   Finally, suppose that in addition to the NT and TBT rules, a non-violation (NV) doctrine
is adopted, under which a service-exporting government could seek redress if some change in
domestic policy by an importing government, even though not speci…cally prohibited by the
trade-in-services agreement, nevertheless curtails trade in a manner that upsets the reasonable
market access expectations associated with discriminatory-sales-tax commitments. If we use
the phrase “market access”to denote the domestic import volume at a given terms of trade (see
also note 11), then we can think of the NV rule as implying that, once the domestic government
characterization captures the essence of what important aspects of the agreement seek to achieve. It seeks to
ensure that regulatory standards are cost-justi…ed and are “necessary” to the attainment of some legitimate
regulatory objective, both as to the substance of regulation and the measures used to ensure conformity. And
the Appellate Body has interepreted the “necessary” requirement (in a case involving GATT Article XX) to
preclude an enforcement system that shifts most of the enforcement costs to foreigners (see Korea – Measures
A¤ ecting Imports of Fresh, Chilled and Frozen Beef Beef, WT/DS161/AB/R,adopted January 10, 2001).


                                                     26
makes a market access commitment by binding its discriminatory sales tax, it will be dissuaded
from making any subsequent changes to its full set of policies that together would have the
e¤ect of reducing the volume of service imports it demands at a given terms of trade.
       Here we follow Staiger and Sykes (2011) and formalize the NV doctrine as a “market-access
preservation” rule de…ned in terms of the raw (unregulated) service.15 A key observation is
that, if the NV rule prevents the domestic government from making unilateral post-agreement
changes in its policies in a way that would alter its demand for imported raw services at the
terms of trade implied by its negotiated market access commitments, then the market-clearing
level of imports of raw services q~f0 and the terms of trade q~w0 cannot be altered by any post-
agreement changes in domestic policies allowable under the NV rule either. And without the
ability to manipulate the terms of trade with its remaining (unconstrained) policy instruments,
the incentive for the domestic government to introduce distortions in these policy instruments
once its discriminatory sales tax is constrained in a market access agreement is removed.
       Collecting these points, suppose, then, that the domestic and foreign governments negotiate
a shallow integration services agreement, in which they agree to abide by the NT, TBT and
NV rules, and where, beginning from the Nash policies de…ned in (3.12), the domestic and
foreign governments then negotiate a market access agreement with the following features: (i)
the foreign government agrees to set its sales tax on foreign service providers in the domestic
market at the politically optimal level tfP O =           (      1) SfP O ; and (ii) the domestic government
agrees to set its sales tax on foreign service providers in the domestic market at a level tf
de…ned by q~f0 (tf + tfP O ; tN   N
                              d ;r ;
                                        N
                                            ; IdN ; IfN ) = SfP O , where using (3.5) we now express q~f0 as a
function of domestic and foreign policies. With these market access commitments implying a
volume of imported raw services q~f0 and a terms of services trade q~w0 which are then …xed at
their politically optimal level under the NV rule, it follows that, subsequent to their market
access agreement, the domestic government will be induced to implement the politically optimal
choices for its policies as de…ned in (4.1).16 In this way, according to our Benchmark Model
  15
      More speci…cally, as emphasized by Staiger and Sykes (2011) in the context of goods trade and shared in
the trade-in-services setting we analyze here, an important feature of the market-access preservation rule we
describe in the text is that, to deliver its desirable impact, it must be de…ned with respect to the world price of
the unregulated service q~0w rather than with respect to q~w , the world price of the service actually being imported
by the domestic country under its chosen standard. This is because a rule that prevents the domestic country
from altering the foreign exporter price of the unregulated service as it considers various levels of domestic taxes
and regulatory standards ensures that the domestic country pays the full price of higher standards and taxes
and –as it also enjoys the full bene…ts –therefore makes internationally e¢ cient policy choices.
   16
      This follows by noting that the …rst-order conditions de…ning the politically optimal policies in (4.1), which


                                                         27
a ‘GATT-like’ shallow integration approach to services trade liberalization could in principle
be used by governments to negotiate from ine¢ cient Nash policies to the (e¢ cient) political
optimum.
    Moreover, taking the perspective of the Nash equilibrium described in (3.12), from which
according to the Benchmark Model governments would have considered the design of a trade-
in-services agreement, it is natural that these governments might be drawn to the possibility
of designing an agreement that borrowed heavily from the broad features of GATT, and that
therefore focuses on lowering discriminatory sales taxes as a means of expanding market access
and trade volumes in the service sector to e¢ cient levels, while putting in place various rules
to prevent governments from back-sliding on the market access commitments implied by their
negotiated bindings with the substitution of new protective behind-the-border measures.
    We summarize with:

Proposition 2. According to the Benchmark Model, a ‘GATT-like’ shallow integration ap-
proach to services trade liberalization, which relies on across-the-board NT, TBT and NV rules
combined with market access negotiations to bind the levels of discriminatory sales taxes on
foreign service providers in the domestic market, could in principle be used by governments to
negotiate from ine¢ cient Nash policies to the e¢ ciency frontier.

    Notice how the three rules –NT, TBT and NV –work in tandem in the Benchmark Model
to facilitate a shallow integration approach to liberalization. With NT addressing the incentives
to distort regulatory standards choices for purposes of terms-of-trade manipulation that arise
once market access commitments are made, and with TBT addressing the potential distortion
of compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and implementation of these standards,
a comparison of (3.12) and (4.4) con…rms that the NV rule can then be aimed primarily at the
more narrow task of preventing these market access commitments from being frustrated by the
introduction of new “commercial measures”/…scal instruments (t) as a second-best means of
terms-of-trade manipulation.17
for the domestic government assume that it acts as if Wq~w0      0 when making its politically optimal choices
and amount to the …rst-order conditions in (3.10) with the last term on the left-hand side of each …rst-order
condition removed, will be the same …rst order conditions that the domestic government faces when instead, as
                                                                                              0
a result of the NV rule and evaluated at politically optimal trade volumes, it cannot alter q~w .
  17
     A secondary task of the NV rule would be to prevent terms-of-trade motivated distortions from spreading
to regulatory choices once the NV rule had blocked the path of introducing new commercial measures for
this purpose. See Staiger and Sykes (2013) on the observed/on-equilibrium use of non-violation claims in


                                                     28
    According to Propositions 1 and 2, our Benchmark Model provides no reason to expect
that either the purpose or the design of a trade-in-services agreement would di¤er in any
substantial way from an agreement to liberalize goods trade, suggesting in turn that GATS
should look much like GATT. And yet, as we have detailed in section 2, the structure of these
two agreements is strikingly di¤erent, with GATT following a shallow integration approach
much as we have described here and GATS instead adopting a deep integration approach that
bears little resemblance to GATT. In the next section we describe an augmented terms-of-trade
model of services trade that can account for these di¤erences, and then revisit the possibility
of shallow integration from the perspective of this augmented model.


5. The Implications of Limited Service-Sector Policy Options

Thus far we have assumed that an expansive set of policy options is available to the domestic and
foreign governments for intervention in Mode 3 service trade. This set includes discriminatory
sales taxes that both the domestic and the foreign government may impose on foreign service
providers in the domestic country. However, as we discuss below, there are good reasons to
believe that such taxes may be unavailable to governments in practice. We have also assumed
that governments have access to the data they would need to implement an e¤ective NV rule.
This requires the ability to detect when a non-contracted policy measure is used in a way that
denies market access, which ultimately comes down to being able to measure changes in trade
volumes and prices with reasonable accuracy; but it is far from obvious that the necessary data
on services trade are currently available. To re‡ect these and other possible limitations that
were omitted from our Benchmark Model, we now consider the implications of imposing further
constraints on the set of service-sector policy options available to governments.

5.1. The Discriminatory Domestic Sales Tax Instrument

While import tari¤s are by de…nition not available in the context of Mode 3 services trade, we
have derived our benchmark results under the assumption that the domestic government has
access to a tari¤-equivalent policy: a discriminatory tax on the sales of foreign service providers
in the domestic market. In principal there is no reason that governments could not use these
GATT/WTO practice to address primarily the introduction of such commercial measures, and see Staiger and
Sykes (forthcoming) for an analysis of the possible o¤-equilibrium importance of the non-violation doctrine with
regard to regulatory measures as well.



                                                      29
kinds of tax instruments, and indeed in the context of goods trade GATT’s Article III national
treatment obligation explicitly rules out the use of such taxes, suggesting that in the context
of goods trade governments might regularly resort to these kinds of taxes in the absence of
an obligation not to do so. And yet, in the context of services such taxes are rarely if ever
observed.
       This is not to say that the sale of services cannot be or is not taxed. In the United States,
for example, Hendrix and Zodrow (2003) describe the wide variation across states in the con-
temporary pattern of services taxation generally:

            “Public utilities o¤er a good example of the variation in the tax treatment of
         services across states. Many states tax most utility services, including those provided
         to businesses, and all states tax at least some. ... Roughly three-quarters of the
         states tax local telephone services, with about half extending the sales tax to long-
         distance services. Cable television is taxed in roughly half of the states.”
            “Sales taxation of other services varies to an even greater degree. Almost all
         states tax rentals of tangible personal property to some extent...re‡ecting the popu-
         larity of taxes that may be exported to nonresidents, and most states tax admissions
         to amusements. However, repairs of tangible personal property are taxable in only
         about half of the states, and only roughly a quarter of states tax repairs of real
         property. About half of the states tax custom programmed computer programs (al-
         though virtually all tax packaged software). Relatively few states tax professional
         services, especially medical services, which are exempt largely on grounds that they
         are a “merit good”that should remain untaxed. ...”(Hendrix and Zodrow, 2003, p
         413 [footnotes omitted])

       More generally, the broad-based feasibility of the taxation of services, including the ex-
emption of select services from taxation that might arguably re‡ect Pigouvian “merit good”
consideration, is well-illustrated by a proposal to broaden the taxation of services in the state
of Florida.18 As Hendrix and Zodrow (2003) observe:
  18
      By assumption, the Pigouvian considerations associated with the Mode 3 service in our model take the form
of negative externalities, and hence call for Pigouvian taxes. But nothing in our formal analysis would change
if, for the particular service under consideration, we allowed the externality to become positive under e¢ cient
standards, in which case (rE ) would be negative, the e¢ ciently regulated service would exhibit features similar
to a “merit good,” and the e¢ cient sales tax would become a subsidy. To the extent that the sales tax re‡ects



                                                       30
           ...If the current proposal for state taxation of services in Florida were enacted, the
      state would be among the states with the most comprehensive coverage of services.
      The current proposal— like the law enacted in 1987— would extend the sales tax to
      a broad range of services. Services that would be taxed include advertising, legal
      services, accounting services, transportation and construction services, automobile
      repair, recreational services, personal grooming services, and investment counsel-
      ing. In contrast to the situation in most states under which services are subject to
      taxation only if they are speci…cally enumerated as taxable, the Florida proposal
      takes the more comprehensive approach of specifying that services are taxable unless
      speci…cally exempted. Exempt services include medical and health services, edu-
      cational and social services, communication services, and services that employees
      provide for their employers. (Hendrix and Zodrow, 2003, pp. 413-414).

The Florida proposal is comprehensive in its approach, suggesting the feasibility of services
taxes generally. And interestingly, Hendrix and Zodrow do note in the …rst-quoted passage
above that some service taxes are borne heavily by non-residents, making them an especially
popular form of taxation. But none of these examples …t the description of discriminatory
taxes against foreign service providers.19
    These observations suggest that as a practical matter, the taxation of services is broadly
feasible when applied to service providers on a nondiscriminatory basis, but sales taxes that
discriminate against foreign service providers are probably best thought of as unavailable to the
importing government (perhaps for reasons of high transaction costs).20 Formally, we introduce
terms-of-trade motives, these motives would continue to push for a higher tax or lower subsidy than e¢ cient
levels, and an e¢ cient agreement would then lower the tax or raise the subsidy to the e¢ cient Pigouvian level
(see also note 21).
  19
     It is not uncommon to observe discriminatory quotas applied to foreign service providers, and one might
invoke the logic of “tari¤-quota equivalence” to argue that such quotas serve as the analog of discriminatory
sales taxes. But these are typically quotas that limit the number of foreign service providers that can operate in
a market, not the quantity of output that foreign service providers can produce, and so tari¤-quota equivalence
arguments would typically not apply.
  20
     There are a variety of reasons why the transaction costs associated with sales taxes that discriminate against
foreign service providers may be high relative to the transaction costs associated with non-discriminatory sales
taxes. For example, ownership structures can be altered after entry, and so in order to collect sales taxes at
di¤erent rates from domestic and foreign service providers, the reported nationality of ownership would have to
be certi…ed on an ongoing basis, an adminstrative task that could be especially costly in light of the small scale
of many service providers. More generally, discriminatory sales taxes would create additional opportunities for
tax-avoidance and give rise to the associated costs of preventing such behavior.




                                                        31
this policy constraint into the Benchmark Model with the assumption that

                                                  tf        0:                                       (Assumption 1)

Under Assumption 1, the domestic government still has a rich set of service-sector policy in-
struments that include a nondiscriminatory sales tax, separate and potentially discriminatory
regulations applied to domestic and foreign service providers, and distinct levels of compliance-
cost-reducing investment in the implementation and design of each standard; but it no longer
has access to a tari¤-equivalent policy instrument for (Mode 3) service-sector intervention.
   Recalling from (3.9) that only the sum of the domestic and foreign discriminatory taxes
(but not their individual levels) is pinned down by the conditions for e¢ ciency, it is clear that
Assumption 1 does not alter the conditions that e¢ cient policies must meet. And recalling that
under politically optimal policies tf is not utilized in any event (tPf O = 0), it is clear that the
political optimum de…ned in (4.1) is still e¢ cient under Assumption 1, hence the purpose of a
trade-in-services agreement is unchanged under Assumption 1.
   But now, without its tari¤-equivalent policy instrument, the domestic government will be
forced to rely on its other policies as second-best means to manipulate the terms of trade, and
the Nash policies under Assumption 1 are de…ned by
                                                             1
                                   tfN =      (    1) SfN + SfN ;                                              (5.1)
                                                             2
                                          1                        1
                                   tN   =     [ (rN ) + ( N )] + SfN ;
                                          2                        2
               @ (rN )       @ (rN )        1       N       N         N       @ (rN )
                                        =        [Sf    ( (r )       ( ))]            ;
                 @r            @r         2SdN                                  @r
               @ ( N)        @ ( N)           1       N        N        N      @ ( N)
                                        =          [S f   ( (r   )    (   ))]           ;
                 @             @            2SfN                                  @
                     @ (IdN ) N               1                                               @ (IdN )
                              Sd   c =          [SfN              ( (rN )       (   N
                                                                                        ))]            ; and
                       @Id                    2                                                 @Id
                 "                  #
                     @ (IfN ) N           1                                             @ (IfN )
                              Sf   c    =   [SfN                    N
                                                                 ( (r )     (   N
                                                                                    ))]          :
                      @If                 2                                              @If

Comparing (3.9) and (5.1), it is clear that operating under the policy constraint implied by
Assumption 1, the domestic government will be led in the Nash equilibrium to impose a higher-
than-e¢ cient standard on foreign service providers and a lower-than-e¢ cient standard on do-
mestic service providers, to make smaller-than-e¢ cient compliance-cost-reducing investments
in the design and implementation of the standard applied to foreign service providers and

                                                       32
higher-than-e¢ cient compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and implementation
of the standard applied to domestic service providers, and to set the domestic sales tax above
the Pigouvian level.21 In short, under Assumption 1 the domestic government’s motives to
manipulate the terms of trade will spread ine¢ ciency to all of its Nash policies.
       Two important points, one positive and one normative, follow from the Nash equilibrium
conditions under Assumption 1 as re‡ected in (5.1). First, as a positive matter, if (5.1) de-
scribes the starting point from which governments would have considered the design of a trade-
in-services agreement, the strategy of borrowing heavily from the broad features of GATT –
and therefore focusing market access negotiations on a single policy instrument while putting in
place various rules to prevent governments from back-sliding on the market access commitments
implied by their negotiated bindings with the substitution of new protective behind-the-border
measures – no longer seems like an obvious and natural, or even viable, way to proceed, cer-
tainly not to the same degree that would have been suggested if governments were starting
from the Nash equilibrium conditions of the Benchmark Model in (3.12). Rather, with (5.1) as
their starting point and facing evident behind-the-border policy distortions spread throughout
the domestic service market, a decision to adopt a deep-integration approach to services liber-
alization seems almost inevitable. Hence, according to our Benchmark Model augmented with
Assumption 1, the lack of an e¤ective tari¤ or tari¤-equivalent policy instrument for (Mode 3)
service-sector intervention could go a long way in accounting for the striking di¤erences in the
architecture of GATS and GATT.
       A second point that follows from (5.1) is normative: even when the Benchmark Model
is augmented with Assumption 1, a modi…ed shallow-integration approach to service-sector
liberalization could still work. In particular, suppose that governments agreed to the across-
the-board NT, TBT and NV rules described above. And with some abuse of notation, let
us now use the superscript “N ” to denote the “non-cooperative” policy choices under these
across-the-board rules but prior to any negotiated market access commitments. Then under
Assumption 1 and subsequent to the introduction of the NT, TBT and NV rules but prior to any
negotiated market access commitments, it is straightforward to derive that the non-cooperative
  21
    As described in note 18, if the service under consideration were assumed to exhibit features of a “merit good”
under e¢ cient regulation, then its consumption would carry with it a positive externality so that (rE ) < 0.
In this case, [ (rN ) + ( N )] would also be negative provided rN and N are not too far from rE , and hence
the expression for tN in (5.1) could be positive, negative or zero depending on the strength of the motives for
terms-of-trade manipulation captured by the term 21 SfN . Nevertheless, as we state in the text the term 12 SfN
ensures that tN will be set above the Pigouvian level.


                                                       33
policy choices will be described as follows:


                                                             1
                                   tfN =       (  1) SfN + SfN ;                             (5.2)
                                                             2
                                                   1
                                    tN   = (rN ) + SfN ;
                                                   2
                 @ (rN )      @ (rN )                   @ ( N)    @ ( N)
                                         = 0 and                         = 0;
                   @r           @r                         @         @
                                                  "                #
                    @ (IdN ) N                       @ (IfN ) N
                             Sd     c    = 0 and               Sf c = 0:
                      @Id                             @If

Similarly to our discussion around (4.3) and (4.4) and despite the lack of a discriminatory
sales tax instrument implied by Assumption 1, the NT rule ensures that the non-cooperative
regulatory standards will be set e¢ ciently and the TBT rule ensures that the non-cooperative
compliance-cost-reducing investments in the design and implementation of the standards will
be set at e¢ cient levels as well, and the ine¢ ciencies in the non-cooperative service-sector
policy choices will be limited to higher-than-e¢ cient levels for the tax instruments tfN and tN .
From here, and proceeding along similar lines to our earlier description of shallow integration,
market access negotiations that bind tfN and tN at levels that would imply an e¢ cient volume
of services trade could, in combination with the NV rule to prevent back-sliding on these market
access commitments with the substitution of new protective regulatory standards (see also note
17), allow governments to achieve the e¢ ciency frontier.
   We summarize with:

Proposition 3. According to the Benchmark Model augmented by Assumption 1, when the
domestic government lacks a discriminatory sales tax and therefore a tari¤-equivalent policy for
use in the service sector, it exerts its power over the terms of services trade in the Nash equi-
librium by distorting all of its (behind-the-border) policies; the purpose of a trade-in-services
agreement is to remove the terms-of-trade driven distortions from all of the domestic and for-
eign policies and raise trade volumes, and a deep-integration approach therefore seems natural.
Nevertheless, a ‘GATT-like’shallow integration approach to services trade liberalization, which
relies on across-the-board NT, TBT and NV rules combined with market access negotiations
to bind the levels of taxation in the domestic service market, could in principle be used by
governments to negotiate from ine¢ cient Nash policies to the e¢ ciency frontier.


                                                   34
5.2. The Foreign Tax/Subsidy Instrument

In deriving our benchmark results we have assumed that the foreign government can levy a tax
tf on its service providers’sales in the domestic market (tax if positive and subsidy if negative),
and we have observed that this is simply an export tax/tari¤ by another name. And in fact, that
the foreign government has access to this tari¤-equivalent policy is required for the derivation
of our benchmark results: no other policy instrument (e.g., a foreign pro…ts tax, or a subsidy
to foreign investment) will do.22 But in reality there is a distinction between an export tax
and a policy such as tf , because unlike an export tax which is collected at the foreign border,
a policy such as tf is available to the foreign government only if it can administer a program of
sales tax/subsidies to its service …rms within the jurisdiction of the domestic government. In
practice, arrangements of this kind are rarely if ever observed, presumably for reasons relating
to a combination of high transaction costs and national sovereignty issues. So it is important
to consider how our benchmark results would be altered if the foreign government did not have
access to this policy instrument.
       Formally, to consider the implications of the policy constraint that intervention with tf is
not feasible for the foreign government, we introduce into our Benchmark Model the following
assumption:
                                                    tf        0:                               (Assumption 2)

Observe that under Assumption 2 the foreign government is now passive in the domestic service
market under consideration. This is not crucial for the results we emphasize in our discussion
below – all that is required is that the foreign government does not have access to a policy
described by tf –but it does make the discussion very transparent.
       For simplicity, we will impose Assumption 2 but relax our prior Assumption 1. Relaxing
Assumption 1 is convenient, because the e¢ ciency frontier can then still be reached in the
presence of Assumption 2, owing to the fact that, as we have emphasized, (3.9) implies that
only the sum of the domestic and foreign discriminatory taxes (but not their individual levels)
is pinned down by the conditions for e¢ ciency. In particular, under Assumption 2 the e¢ cient
  22
    More speci…cally, our benchmark results require that the foreign government has access to a tari¤ equivalent
policy as long as the foreign government would utilize this policy instrument in the political optimum, which will
be the case provided that (i)      > 1, and (ii) the foreign government does not possess a lump-sum instrument
with which to redistribute toward its service providers located in the domestic market.




                                                         35
policies are given by

                                            tE
                                             f =   (        1) SfE ;                                        (5.3)
                                            tE = (rE );
                   @ (rE )        @ (rE )                          @ (   E
                                                                             )   @ (   E
                                                                                           )
                                          = 0 and                                              = 0;
                     @r             @r                               @             @
                                                            "                    #
                         @ (IdE ) E                             @ (IfE ) E
                                  Sd        c = 0 and                    Sf      c = 0:
                          @Id                                    @If
   We can now make an initial observation: in the presence of Assumption 2, and as long as the
foreign government objectives include political economy motivations, the problem for a trade-in-
services agreement to solve can no longer be given a terms-of-trade interpretation. To establish
this, we need only demonstrate that the politically optimal policies are not e¢ cient under
Assumption 2. Note that, as only the domestic government is policy active under Assumption
2, the politically optimal policies are now de…ned by supposing hypothetically that the domestic
government acts as if Wq~w0      0 when choosing unilaterally its policies, taking tf                 0 as given.
This yields the following expressions for politically optimal policies under Assumption 2:

                                       tPf O = 0;                                                           (5.4)
                                     tP O = (rP O );
               @ (rP O )       @ (rP O )                            @ ( P O)       @ ( P O)
                                          = 0 and                                           = 0;
                 @r              @r                                   @              @
                                                             "                      #
                   @ (IdP O ) P O                                @ (IfP O ) P O
                              Sd        c     = 0 and                       Sf      c = 0:
                     @Id                                           @If

   Comparing (5.3) and (5.4), it is immediately apparent that the policy limitation embodied
in Assumption 2 interferes with the e¢ ciency of politically optimal policies unless                     = 1 (in
which case the politically optimal policy for the foreign government would be laissez faire in
any event). With        > 1 it follows that tPf O > tE
                                                     f : even with terms-of-trade motives eliminated

from the unilateral policy choices of the domestic government, the domestic sales tax on foreign
service providers is too high relative to the e¢ cient level, because the desire of the foreign
government to subsidize its foreign service providers in the domestic economy has not been
taken into account in the politically optimal choice of tf (and by Assumption 2 the foreign
government has no sales tax/subsidy instrument of its own with which to satisfy this desire).
Hence, the ine¢ ciency associated with Nash policy choices cannot be given a terms-of-trade
interpretation under the policy constraint embodied in Assumption 2.

                                                       36
   It is well known in the context of the terms-of-trade theory that placing constraints on
the trade policy instruments available to governments can change the problem for a trade
agreement to solve (see Ossa, 2011, and the discussion in Bagwell and Staiger, 2012, 2015 and
forthcoming). The new point we emphasize here is that, in the context of Mode 3 services
trade, there are especially good (e.g., jurisdictional) reasons to expect that governments will
not possess complete sets of trade tax/subsidy instruments, and hence good reasons to expect
that the problem for a trade agreement to solve will diverge from the terms-of-trade problem
that arguably dominates in the context of goods trade.
   Two further points now also follow. A …rst point is that the critical role of government
market power over the terms of trade, essential for identifying a problem for a trade-in-services
agreement to solve in our benchmark results, disappears under Assumption 1: that is, under
Assumption 1 and provided      > 1, there would be a reason for an agreement to liberalize trade
in Mode 3 services even if all countries were small.
   To see this …rst point, let us consider a small-country thought experiment, in which the
domestic “country”is actually a domestic region composed of a continuum of identical domestic
countries and likewise that the foreign “country” is a foreign region composed of a continuum
of identical foreign countries, but everything else in the model is unchanged. Focusing on the
domestic region (the only policy active region under Assumption 2), it then follows that no
single country in the domestic region can impact the terms of trade q~w0 with its individual
policy choices, and so the Nash conditions for a representative domestic government are


                                        dP~         d~qd
                                     WP~     + Wq~d        = 0;                              (5.5)
                                        dtf         dtf
                                        dP~         d~qd
                                    WP~      + Wq~d        = 0;
                                         dt          dt
                                        dP ~        d~qd
                               Wr + WP~      + Wq~d        = 0;
                                         dr         dr
                                        dP ~        d~qd
                               W + WP~       + Wq~d        = 0;
                                         d          d
                                        dP ~        d~qd
                              WId + WP~      + Wq~d        = 0 and
                                        dId         dId
                                        dP~         d~
                                                     qd
                              WIf + WP~      + Wq~d        = 0:
                                        dIf         dIf
And in this setting, the conditions for e¢ cient policy intervention for a representative domestic

                                                37
government are

                                         dP~          d~qd         qf0
                                                                  d~
                                     WP~       + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0;                                (5.6)
                                         dtf          dtf       f dt
                                                                    f

                                         dP~          d~qd         qf0
                                                                  d~
                                     WP~       + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0;
                                          dt           dt       f dt

                                         dP~          d~qd         qf0
                                                                  d~
                                Wr + WP~       + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0;
                                          dr          dr        f dr

                                         dP~          d~qd         qf0
                                                                  d~
                                W + WP~        + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0;
                                          d           d         f d


                                         dP~          d~qd         qf0
                                                                  d~
                               WId + WP~       + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0; and
                                         dId          dId       f dI
                                                                     d
                                         dP~          d~
                                                       qd         d~
                                                                   q 0
                                                                     f
                               WIf + WP~       + Wq~d      + Wq~0        = 0:
                                         dIf          dIf       f dI
                                                                     f

Clearly, the Nash choices in (5.5) will satisfy the conditions for e¢ ciency in (5.6) if and only if
Wq~0 = 0, so that the last term on the left-hand-side of each condition in (5.6) is zero. But it is
   f

direct to show that Wq~0 = (           1) SfN when this derivative is evaluated under Assumption 2,
                           f

and hence the Nash choices will be e¢ cient if and only if               = 1.
       Evidently, under the policy constraint described in Assumption 2 and provided                         > 1,
the purpose of a trade-in-services agreement is not simply to eradicate the exercise of market
power from the service-sector policy choices of governments, and even small countries who have
no ability to alter their terms of services trade may have reason to engage in liberalization
under the agreement. This point may take on special importance in the context of services
trade, where policies toward service providers are often determined and implemented at the
local/state government level. When obstacles to trade arise at the subsidiary government level,
the market power wielded by the relevant government decision makers over the terms of trade of
foreign service providers may be quite limited.23 According to our Benchmark Model, this would
then limit the amount of liberalization in services needed to bring countries to the international
e¢ ciency frontier, at least as compared to goods trade liberalization, for the simple reason
  23
     A related point is that Mode 3 foreign service providers employ mostly domestic nationals, and this may also
limit the ability of the domestic government to e¤ectively use its power over the terms of trade to shift the costs
of its policy intervention onto foreigners. In particular this could be the case if, contrary to the assumptions of
our Benchmark Model, domestic workers developed …rm-speci…c human capital from which they earned rents.
In this case, the domestic nationals employed by a Mode 3 foreign service provider in the domestic market
would share in the surplus earned by the foreign …rm, and this would diminish the e¤ectiveness with which the
domestic government could use its power over the terms of trade to take foreign surplus and thereby shift the
costs of its policy intervention onto foreigners.


                                                        38
that the (state and local) governments who set policies for trade in services are less likely to
wield market power over world prices than are the (national) governments who set trade policy
in goods markets.24 . But when the Benchmark Model is augmented with Assumption 2, this
conclusion no longer follows. And as a result, a number of the more speci…c design features
associated with the way market access bargaining is often organized in GATT (e.g., request-
o¤er bilateral bargaining protocols organized along the lines of the principal supplier rule) may
not work well in the context of a trade-in-services agreement.25
       A second point also follows from the ine¢ ciency of the political optimum under Assump-
tion 2: even outright prohibitions of service trade in the Nash equilibrium may be subject to
liberalization under a trade-in-services agreement. This follows because the Nash equilibrium
and the political optimum coincide whenever Nash policy choices prohibit trade (re‡ecting the
fact that, as we have observed, Wq~0w =         q~f0 and Wq~w0 = q~f0 , and that prohibitive Nash policies
imply q~f0 = SfN = 0). When the political optimum is e¢ cient, as in our Benchmark Model
and as with the terms-of-trade theory when applied to goods trade, the Nash equilibrium will
then also be e¢ cient whenever Nash policy choices prohibit trade, and there is nothing for a
trade agreement to do. But under Assumption 2, the political optimum is no longer e¢ cient,
as we have shown, and so the Nash equilibrium will then also be ine¢ cient whenever Nash
policy choices prohibit trade; and hence even outright prohibitions on foreign service providers
may be subject to liberalization in a trade-in-services agreement. This point takes on special
signi…cance in the context of services, where as we have noted governments are often beginning
their market access negotiations with prohibitions in place.
       Finally, and importantly, augmenting the Benchmark Model with Assumption 2 does not
weaken the case for shallow integration of services trade that emerges from the Benchmark
Model. The only implication of Assumption 2 for our earlier discussion of shallow integration
in the context of the Benchmark Model is that the particular level of market access commitments
and implied import volume needed to reach the e¢ ciency frontier would be altered. The rest
of the earlier discussion would remain in tact.
  24
     There is a growing body of evidence in the context of goods trade that market power over foreign exporter
(“world”) prices is fairly wide spread across countries and products, and evidence as well that the patterns
of GATT/WTO market access liberalization in goods re‡ect the reduction or elimination of tari¤s embodying
these motives, as the terms-of-trade theory predicts (see Bagwell, Bown and Staiger, forthcoming, for a recent
review of this literature).
  25
     The GATS bargaining protocol adopted for the now-suspended Doha Round was modeled on the request-
o¤er bilateral bargaining practice used in many of the GATT rounds, but unlike in GATT, the principal supplier
rule played no explicit role in the GATS bargaining protocol (see Feketekuty, 2008).


                                                     39
       We summarize with:

Proposition 4. According to the Benchmark Model augmented by Assumption 2, when the
foreign government lacks a discriminatory sales tax and therefore a tari¤-equivalent policy for
use in the domestic service sector, and as long as the foreign government objectives include
political economy motivations, the problem for a trade-in-services agreement to solve can no
longer be given a terms-of-trade interpretation; as a consequence, even small countries may
have reason to engage in liberalization under a trade-in-services agreement, and even outright
prohibitions may be the subject of liberalizing market access negotiations. The case for shallow
integration of services trade remains the same as in the Benchmark Model.

5.3. Other Limitations on Policy Options

We now brie‡y consider the impact of imposing several other limitations on the policy options
assumed in our Benchmark Model.


The Nondiscriminatory Domestic Sales Tax Instrument Our Benchmark Model as-
sumes that the domestic government has access to a nondiscriminatory sales tax t for use in the
domestic service industry under consideration. We have discussed evidence on the availability
of such taxes, and have argued that it is reasonable to assume that governments do indeed have
such policy options available to them.
       Here we raise a di¤erent question: Can sales taxes be as …nely tuned to individual service
industries as the regulatory standards r and ? Our Benchmark Model assumes that they
can, a feature that is important for our …nding that an NT rule channels terms-of-trade ma-
nipulation motives into the setting of the nondiscriminatory sales tax and ensures that the
non-cooperative regulatory standards will be set e¢ ciently. And it is not obvious that a consid-
eration of transaction costs would invalidate this assumption: Why would the transaction costs
associated with applying distinct sales tax rates across a collection of service industries be any
higher than the transaction costs associated with applying distinct regulatory standards across
those industries?26
  26
    In this sense, Mode 3 services are again very di¤erent from traded goods, where as Staiger and Sykes (2011)
observe the transaction costs associated with imposing distinct tari¤ rates at the border on imports of narrowly
de…ned goods is quite clearly far lower than the transaction costs that would be incurred by imposing di¤erent
sales tax rates across the same set of goods.



                                                      40
      Nevertheless, it is not hard to see that the logic of shallow integration we have described
above would still survive, even if our Benchmark Model were augmented to re‡ect an assumption
that the nondiscriminatory tax had to be applied to a more aggregate set of service industries
than the regulatory standards. There would have to be some modi…cations to this logic: in the
absence of su¢ ciently …nely tuned tax policies, governments would now have to make market
access commitments on some regulatory measure in each industry; but once that market access
commitment is made, attaining e¢ cient choices for the remaining regulatory measures in the
industry could be handled with the presence of the NT, TBT and NV rules, just as before. The
one caveat to this statement is that there would need to be greater reliance on the NV rule.


The National Treatment Rule Our shallow integration analysis relies on an implicit as-
sumption that an NT requirement for regulatory measures cannot be circumvented by legal
arti…ce. For example, the GATS national treatment obligation (when it exists) requires a mem-
ber to a¤ord “treatment no less favourable than it accords to its own like services and service
suppliers”(see GATS Art. XVII(1)). If governments can manipulate the concept of “likeness”
excessively, they may be able to discriminate in regulatory standards between closely competing
foreign and domestic service suppliers and an NT obligation may accomplish little (see Mattoo
(2000)). Little case law exists on the concept of “likeness” in service sectors, but what little
exists suggests that distinctions in the way providers are taxed or regulated may a¤ect the
determination of likeness if they a¤ect the competitive relationship between suppliers.27 If the
NT obligation as to regulatory standards is easily circumvented as a legal matter, the utility of
a shallow integration approach will be undermined.


The Non-Violation Rule For our results on shallow integration, we have assumed implic-
itly that governments have access to the data they would need to implement an e¤ective NV
rule. This requires that governments have the ability to detect when a non-contracted policy
measure is used by a trading partner in a way that denies market access, a task that ultimately
comes down to being able to measure and monitor changes in import volumes and prices with
reasonable accuracy.
      While detailed and comprehensive data on trade in goods has been around since the be-
ginning of GATT, for Mode 3 services, where the imports do not cross international borders,
 27
    See Argentina – Measures Relating to Trade in Goods and Services, WT/DS453/AB/R, adopted May 9,
2016.


                                                41
satisfying these data needs presents a special challenge. As Maurer et al (2008) discuss, de-
tailed data on Mode 3 services trade can be found in the Foreign A¢ liates Trade in Services
(FATS) statistics, but very few countries currently produce these statistics. In fact, Maurer et
al report that until recently the United States was the only country compiling FATS statistics.
This is beginning to change, but as Maurer et al (p. 164) conclude, when it comes to data on
Mode 3 service trade ‡ows it is still the case that “the lack of data reliability and inter-country
comparability is almost a general rule.”
   According to our …ndings here, the fragmentary nature of the data on Mode 3 service
trade ‡ows currently available could represent a signi…cant roadblock in the way of a shallow-
integration approach for services trade liberalization, beyond the challenges faced in the context
of goods trade, and could as a result help explain the broad di¤erences in the approach to
integration taken by GATT and GATS. However, as explained by Maurer et al, following the
entry into force of GATS there has been an increasing call for detailed and comprehensive
data on trade in services; and e¤orts are under way, sponsored by the WTO and others, to
develop and collect such data. While successful e¤orts to compile this data would no doubt
provide a valuable input into deep-integration bargaining under the current GATS structure,
our …ndings suggest that these e¤orts might also be instrumental in facilitating consideration
of alternative approaches to integration of services trade more along the lines of the shallow
integration approach that has proven to be successful for GATT.


6. Conclusion

The terms-of-trade theory of international trade agreements focuses on tari¤ agreements cov-
ering trade in goods, and o¤ers an explanation for core features of the GATT’s “shallow inte-
gration”approach to goods trade liberalization. Tari¤s play almost no role in services markets,
however, and the existing models cannot account for the dramatically di¤erent approach to
services trade liberalization taken by GATS. We show that the key features of GATS, including
its emphasis on “deep integration”–sector-by-sector negotiations on behind the border policy
instruments – can be accounted for when the terms-of-trade theory is augmented with a set
of restrictions, motivated by salient features of services trade, on the policy instruments and
trade data available to governments. This is the main positive message of our paper. Using our
augmented terms-of-trade theory, we also …nd that a shallow-integration approach to services
trade liberalization, suitably modi…ed to …t the needs of the services trade context, may indeed

                                                42
be possible. The current, deep integration, approach of GATS raises signi…cant challenges for
negotiations seeking to expand market access, challenges that would not arise under shallow
integration. With continued improvements in the data on services trade, we therefore interpret
this second …nding as pointing toward a possible way forward for achieving success in future
e¤orts to liberalize trade in services. This is the main normative message of our paper.
       The benchmark model on which we build our analysis abstracts from a number of compli-
cations that are likely to be important features of the world in which real trade agreements
operate, such as …rms that wield market power and governments that possess private infor-
mation. In the context of goods trade, some of these features have been shown to introduce
substantial quali…cations into the case for shallow integration (see, for example, the recent
surveys of this literature in Lee, forthcoming and Ederington and Ruta, forthcoming). For
our purposes here, however, where we seek to account for the di¤erences in approach between
GATT and GATS, the important question is whether any of these quali…cations are more likely
to arise in the context of services trade.
       In this regard, the most salient alternative to the account we have put forth in this paper
may come from the “o¤shoring” model developed by Antràs and Staiger (2012a,b). Antràs
and Staiger show that the case for shallow integration is undermined when international prices
are determined by bilateral bargains between individual buyers and sellers, rather than by
anonymous industry-wide market clearing conditions as in the standard terms-of-trade theory.
And they observe that in light of its often highly specialized nature, services trade may represent
a sector where this form of price-determination is especially prevalent.28 These two accounts
have distinct normative implications: according to the o¤shoring model of Antràs and Staiger,
the deep-integration approach of GATS is an inevitable consequence of the nature of price
determination for services trade, while according to the account we have provided here the
possibility of shallow integration for services trade exists. We view the task of distinguishing
between the relevance of these and other (possibly complementary) explanations of the striking
di¤erences between GATT and GATS as an important avenue for future research.
  28
    The case for shallow integration is also undermined in the commitment theory of trade agreements (see, for
example, the discussion of this in the recent review of Bagwell, Bown and Staiger, forthcoming, and see Fiorini
and Lebrand, 2016 for an application of the commitment theory to services trade). But again, for our purposes
the key question is why the commitment theory (and its implication of deep integration) should be relevant for
services trade while the terms-of-trade theory (and its support of shallow integration) should be relevant for
goods trade. Without a compelling answer to this question, we do not see the commitment theory as providing
a promising account of the di¤erences between GATT and GATS. See also Mattoo (2015) for a dissenting view
on market-access-centered approaches to negotiated services trade liberalization.


                                                      43
References

 [1] Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012a. “Trade agreements and the nature of price
    determination.”American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102(3): 470-6.

 [2] Antràs, Pol and Robert W. Staiger. 2012b. “O¤shoring and the role of trade agreements.”
    American Economic Review 102(7): 3140-3183

 [3] Bagwell, Kyle, Bown, Chad and Robert W. Staiger. Forthcoming. “Is the WTO Passé?”
    Journal of Economic Literature.

 [4] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 1999. “An Economic Theory of GATT.”American
    Economic Review.89(1), pp. 215-48.

 [5] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2001. “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and
    International Economic Institutions.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 519-562.

 [6] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading System
    (Cambridge MA: MIT Press).

 [7] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2012. “Pro…t Shifting and Trade Agreements in
    Imperfectly Competitive Markets.”International Economic Review 53(4): 1067-1104.

 [8] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2015. “Delocation and trade agreements in imper-
    fectly competitive markets.”Research in Economics 69(2): 132-56.

 [9] Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. Forthcoming. “The Design of Trade Agreements.”
    in Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds) Handbook of Commercial Policy, Elsevier.

[10] Bagwell, Kyle and Alan O. Sykes. 2004. “Chile - Price Band System and Safeguard Mea-
    sures Relating to Certain Agriculture Products.”World Trade Review 3(3): 507-28.

[11] Blanchard, Emily J. 2007. “Foreign direct investment, endogenous tari¤s, and preferential
    trade agreements.”BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 7.

[12] Copeland, Brian and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. “The Basic Economics of Services Trade.”in
    Aaditya Mattoo, Robert M. Stern and Gianni Zanini (eds) A Handbook of International
    Trade in Services, Oxford University Press.


                                             44
[13] Due, John F., and John L. Mikesell. 1994. Sales Taxation, State and Local Structure and
    Administration. 2d ed. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press.

[14] Ederington, Josh and Michele Ruta. Forthcoming. “Non-Tari¤ Measures and the World
    Trading System.” in Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds) Handbook of Commercial
    Policy, Elsevier.

[15] Feketekuty, Geza. 2008. “Appendix: A Guide to Services Negotiations.”in Aaditya Mattoo,
    Robert M. Stern and Gianni Zanini (eds) A Handbook of International Trade in Services,
    Oxford University Press.

[16] Fiorini, Matteo and Mathilde Lebrand. 2016. “The Political Economy of Services Trade
    Agreements.”mimeo, European University Institute.

[17] Francois, Joseph and Bernard Hoekman. 2010. “Services trade and policy.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 48(3): 642-92.

[18] Hendrix, Michele E. and George Zodrow. 2003. “Sales Taxation of Services: An Economic
    Perspective.”Florida State University Law Review, Vol 30, pp 411-433.

[19] Johnson, Harry. 1953-54. “Optimum Tari¤s and Retaliation.”Review of Economic Studies
    21: 142-53.

[20] Lee, Gea M. Forthcoming. “Subsidies and Countervailing Duties.” in Kyle Bagwell and
    Robert W. Staiger (eds) Handbook of Commercial Policy, Elsevier.

[21] Mattoo, Aaditya. 2000. “MFN and the GATS,”in Thomas Cottier and Petros C. Mavroidis
    (eds.), Regulatory Barriers and the Principle of Non-Discrimination in World Trade Law:
    Past, Present and Future, The World Trade Forum Vol. II. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
    Michigan Press.

[22] Mattoo, Aaditya. 2015. Services Trade and Regulatory Cooperation. E15 Expert Group on
    Services: Think Piece. July.

[23] Maurer, Andreas, Marcus, Yann, Magdeleine, Joscelyn and Barbara d’Andrea. 2008. “Mea-
    suring Trade in Services.”in Aaditya Mattoo, Robert M. Stern and Gianni Zanini (eds) A
    Handbook of International Trade in Services, Oxford University Press.


                                            45
[24] Ossa, Ralph. 2011. “A ‘new-trade’theory of GATT/WTO negotiations.” Journal of Po-
    litical Economy 119(1): 122-52.

[25] Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 1996. Toward a Positive Theory of the Most
    Favored Nation Obligation and its Exceptions in the WTO/GATT System, International
    Review of Law and Economics 16: 27-51.

[26] Schwartz, Warren F. and Alan O. Sykes. 2002. “The Economic Structure of Renegotiation
    and Dispute Resolution in the World Trade Organization,” The Journal of Legal Studies
    31(1): S179-S204.

[27] Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2011. “International trade, national treatment, and
    domestic regulation.”Journal of Legal Studies 40(1): 149-203.

[28] Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. 2013. “Non-Violations.” Journal of International
    Economic Law 16(4): 741-775.

[29] Staiger, Robert W. and Alan O. Sykes. Forthcoming. “How important can the non-violation
    clause be for the GATT/WTO?.”American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.




                                             46
