NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHERE DO STUDENTS GO WHEN FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES LOSE FEDERAL
AID?
Stephanie R. Cellini
Rajeev Darolia
Lesley J. Turner
Working Paper 22967
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22967

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016
We thank Mary Ann Bronson, Celeste Carruthers, David Deming, staff at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia, and seminar participants from the AEA annual meeting, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Washington DC Economics of Education Working Group, APPAM annual meeting,
AEFP annual meeting, University of Missouri, University of Kentucky, Syracuse University, and
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Policy Summit for useful discussions and comments.
John Soriano, Andrew Sullivan, and Heath Witzen provided excellent research assistance. This
paper is based upon work supported by the Association for Institutional Research, the National
Science Foundation, the National Center for Education Statistics, and the National Postsecondary
Education Cooperative under Association for Institutional Research Grant Number RG14-5352.
Over the past three years, other research on for-profit colleges by Cellini has been funded by the
Smith Richardson Foundation and the George Washington Institute of Public Policy. She has at
various times served as a consultant or expert in investigations and litigation involving for-profit
institutions. Opinions reflect those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
granting agencies or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22967.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Stephanie R. Cellini, Rajeev Darolia, and Lesley J. Turner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Where Do Students Go when For-Profit Colleges Lose Federal Aid?
Stephanie R. Cellini, Rajeev Darolia, and Lesley J. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 22967
December 2016
JEL No. H52,I22,I23,I28
ABSTRACT
Recent policy debates have focused on whether restricting for-profit institutions’ access to federal
student financial aid could reduce student loan defaults without restricting prospective students’
access to higher education. We examine the effects of similar restrictions imposed on over 1,200
for-profit colleges in the 1990s. Using variation in the timing and magnitude of sanctions linked
to student loan default rates, we estimate the impact of the loss of federal aid on the enrollment of
Pell Grant recipients in sanctioned institutions and their local unsanctioned competitors. On
average, sanctioned for-profit colleges experience a 40 percent decrease in annual enrollment in
the five years following sanction receipt. Enrollment losses due to for-profit sanctions are offset
by enrollment increases within local community colleges. For-profit sanctions also produce
negative enrollment spillovers on unsanctioned for-profit competitors, and we provide evidence
that these effects are likely due to improved information about local higher education options
and/or reputational spillovers to for-profit institutions offering similar programs. Given these
offsetting effects, we estimate that within the average county, the public sector absorbs 40 to 60
percent of the total enrollment decline generated by an additional for-profit sanction. Overall,
market enrollment declines by just 3 percent. Finally, we provide suggestive evidence that
students induced to enroll in community colleges following a for-profit competitor’s sanction are
less likely to default on their federal loans.
Stephanie R. Cellini
Trachtenberg School of Public Policy
and Public Administration
George Washington University
805 21st Street NW, #601M
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
scellini@gwu.edu
Rajeev Darolia
Truman School of Public Affairs
and College of Education
University of Missouri
216 Middlebush Hall
Columbia, MO 65211
Rajeev.Darolia@uky.edu

Lesley J. Turner
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115E Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
turner@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

After more than a decade of substantial growth, for-profit higher education has been the target of increased
scrutiny, new regulation, and heated debate in recent years.1 For-profit colleges may expand the market for
higher education and provide important pathways to college for underserved students, but high student loan
default rates, accusations of unethical marketing practices, and allegations of financial aid fraud sparked
a wave of government investigations beginning in 2010 (U.S. Government Accountability Office 2010; U.S.
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions 2010). Under the Obama administration,
the U.S. Department of Education (ED) imposed “Gainful Employment” (GE) regulations that sought to
restrict low-performing for-profit colleges’ access to federal student aid (U.S. Department of Education 2010).
ED also imposed sanctions on two large national for-profit chains - Corinthian Colleges and ITT Technical
Institute.2 Both companies subsequently filed for bankruptcy, shuttering hundreds of campuses across the
country, and leaving behind tens of thousands of students (Fain 2014a; Stratford 2015; Smith 2016). The
Trump administration has signaled a reversal of these policies by reopening negotiated rulemaking and
proposing the elimination of accountability measures under GE (Fain 2018), but the fate of the rule, and
with it for-profit institutions and their students, remains uncertain. As these policies are debated, a key
concern is how students will fare if colleges lose access to federal student aid or are otherwise induced to close
by federal regulation. Previous research shows that restrictions on federal student aid at for-profit colleges
led to enrollment declines within sanctioned institutions (Darolia 2013), but a key unanswered question for
assessing the welfare implications of such restrictions is whether students in affected institutions enroll in
other institutions or forgo college.
In this paper, we seek to answer this question by providing the first assessment of the impact of federal
student aid loss imposed on a given for-profit college on the overall enrollment and distribution of students
across higher education sectors. Specifically, we quantify the extent to which threatened restrictions to aid
for an additional for-profit institution affects enrollment in nearby unsanctioned competitor institutions. To
carry out our analysis, we use variation due to regulations imposed in the late 1980s and early 1990s that
were similar to the restrictions and regulations imposed in recent years and at the root of current policy
debates. As in the current case of GE, the previous round of regulations restricted institutions’ eligibility
to disburse federal student aid to students if the institutions’ alumni had difficulty repaying their student
1 For-profit institutions currently enroll over 1.3 million students, down from a peak of 2 million students in 2010. Authors’
calculations using Table 303.10 of U.S. Department of Education (2016).
2 Regulators threatened to cut off the colleges’ access to federal student aid programs for misrepresenting job placement rates of graduates (Corinthian) and failing to comply with accreditation standards (ITT
Tech).
See http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/us-department-education-heightens-oversight-corinthian-colleges and
http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/department-education-bans-itt-enrolling-new-title-iv-students-adds-tough-newfinancial-oversight for details.

2

loans. While these cohort default rate (CDR) regulations applied to all colleges that participated in federal
aid programs, the vast majority of affected institutions were for-profit institutions. The CDR regulations
led to widespread enrollment declines and institutional closures in this sector.
We use a generalized difference-in-differences strategy and comprehensive institution-level administrative
data to estimate the first causal effects of how restrictions on institutional eligibility for student aid affect
market-level access to higher education and the distribution of students across local public, private nonprofit,
and private for-profit institutions. We focus on students who are most affected by access to federal aid – those
receiving means-tested federal Pell Grants. Thus, we directly examine whether vulnerable students, whose
enrollment decisions may be especially tied to student aid access, are disproportionately affected by federal
regulation. Our use of administrative data on Pell Grant recipient enrollment also represents an improvement
over the data used in prior estimates of the effects of for-profit sanctions on enrollment (i.e., Darolia 2013)
and in examinations of the for-profit sector more generally before 2000, since the institution-level data most
commonly used – ED’s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) – excludes a large number
of for-profit institutions that were in operation and potentially sanctioned in the early 1990s. This more
comprehensive data is especially important when analyzing the market-level response to sanctions.
In order to fully assess the effects of federal aid restrictions on students, we need to understand whether
students who would have attended sanctioned institutions ultimately switch institutions or forgo postsecondary education altogether. We empirically measure the extent to which a local higher education market
contains alternatives to sanctioned for-profit institutions for federal grant recipients. The time period we
study is prior to widespread broadband penetration, so most prospective two-year students’ choice sets were
limited to colleges in their immediate vicinity.3 We can therefore assess the consequences of institution
closures and the loss of federal student aid on the college-going of the most vulnerable students.
On average, sanctioned for-profit institutions experienced a 40 percent decline in their own enrollment
in the five years following sanction receipt. An additional for-profit sanction increases each local community
college’s enrollment by about 6 percent. Across all community colleges within a local higher education
market, the increase in enrollment, albeit small relative to community colleges’ overall size, was enough to
completely compensate for the sanctioned for-profit’s enrollment decline. We also find evidence of negative
enrollment spillovers within the for-profit sector. Unsanctioned for-profit institutions experience declines in
Pell Grant recipient enrollment when an additional for-profit institution in the same market is sanctioned.
After taking into account these negative enrollment spillovers, we estimate that public community colleges
absorbed 40 to 60 percent of the overall enrollment decline in the for-profit sector from an additional for3 We use counties to proxy for local higher education markets, though results are substantively similar if we use radius-based
(15 or 30 miles) market measures.

3

profit sanction. Overall, each additional for-profit sanction led to an approximately 3 percent decrease in
aggregate observed enrollment within the local higher education market.
To explore the welfare effects of students switching from for-profit to public institutions, we present
descriptive evidence on how sanctions correspond to student borrowing and loan default within a local higher
education market. We find that sanctions are associated with sizable reductions in county-wide borrowing
and default in the for-profit sector. Despite increasing public sector enrollment, for-profit sanctions do not
increase community college students’ borrowing or defaults. Back-of-the-envelope estimates suggest that
roughly 70 percent of the students induced to stop borrowing by switching sectors would have defaulted on
their loans in the absence of sanctions. Therefore, even with the decrease in aggregate market enrollment
after a for-profit sanction, many vulnerable students were shifted to colleges where they were likely to reduce
borrowing and be less likely to default.
Examining the mechanisms driving the negative spillovers to for-profit competitors, we find evidence
of reputational effects within fields of study. In most cases, negative enrollment spillovers are larger in
magnitude for institutions within the same field (e.g., beauty, business) as the sanctioned for-profit institution
relative to institutions that specialize in other fields or those with more diversified program offerings. This
provides suggestive evidence that sanctions improve student information about the quality and costs of
colleges in the sector or field, leading students to alter their choices.
Our findings contribute to a growing body of research on for-profit postsecondary education. Several
recent studies describe for-profit business practices and missions, advising systems, students, faculty work,
and costs.4 Researchers generally find similar or negative returns to for-profit attendance college attendance
relative to other sectors (e.g., Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012; Cellini and Chaudhary 2014; Lang and
Weinstein 2013; Cellini and Turner 2016). These findings are supported by Darolia et al. (2015) and Deming
et al. (2016) who use resume audit study experimental designs and find that for-profit attendance weakly
decreases interview requests. Our paper also contributes more broadly to research on the supply side of
the market for higher education. The question of whether for-profit and public institutions compete for
students is independently important given the overlap in programs offered by two-year public and forprofit institutions (e.g., Cellini 2009) and disparate costs (e.g., Laband and Lentz 2004; Cellini 2012). Two
recent papers examine enrollment spillovers between the for-profit and public sectors due to changes in
prices, resources, or institutional availability and find evidence of substitution (Goodman and Henriques
4 For research on for-profit institutions’ business practices, see Breneman, Pusser and Turner (2006); Kinser (2007); and
Tierney and Hentschke (2007). Rosenbaum, Deil-Amien and Person (2006) examine for-profit institutions’ advising systems.
Chung (2012) and Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) provide information on the characteristics of for-profit students while
Lechuga (2008) focuses on for-profit faculty. Gilpin, Saunders and Stoddard (2015) examine whether for-profit colleges are
responsive to labor markets. Finally, Laband and Lentz (2004) and Cellini (2012) assess the costs related to receiving a
for-profit postsecondary education.

4

2015; Armona, Chakrabarti and Lovenheim 2016). Similarly, our analysis contributes to broader debates
in education policy, as issues of competition and public-private crowd-out arise in debates over universal
preschool, charter schools, and voucher programs (e.g., Bassok, Fitzpatrick and Loeb 2014; Epple, Figlio
and Romano 2004).
Finally, this study contributes to the broader literature on the effects of federal student aid policy. Research on the impact of federal student aid on enrollment and persistence has produced mixed results. Pell
Grant aid does not appear to increase college entry among traditional-aged students (e.g., Kane 1995; Rubin
2011; Turner 2014; Carruthers and Welch 2015), although it may enhance enrolled students’ attainment
(Denning 2016; Denning, Marx and Turner 2017; Marx and Turner 2018) and older individuals’ initial
enrollment decisions (Seftor and Turner 2002). Moreover, in addition to extensive margin enrollment effects, financial aid has the potential to affect students’ intensive margin where and when college decisions
(e.g., Leslie and Brinkman, 1987; Hoxby and Avery 2004). Focusing on student loans, Dunlop (2013) and
Wiederspan (2016) show that access to federal loan aid increases low-income community college students’ educational attainment, while Marx and Turner (2017) provide experimental evidence that borrowing increases
community college students’ attainment and likelihood of transferring to a four-year institution.
Several studies provide evidence that institutions respond to federal student aid by altering tuition or
institutional grants (e.g., Singell and Stone 2007; Turner 2012; Turner 2014). For-profit institutions may have
particularly strong reactions to changes in access to federal aid programs, as these institutions may receive
up to 90 percent of their revenue from federal student aid. Cellini (2010) finds that increases in Pell Grant
generosity are correlated with for-profit college openings, particularly in areas with high concentrations of
low-income students. Cellini and Goldin (2014) estimate that aid-eligible for-profit programs charge about
78 percent more than similar programs in for-profit institutions that are not eligible to disburse federal
student aid.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe federal student aid programs
and the standards that institutions must meet to maintain eligibility to disburse federal aid, and discuss our
primary sources of data. Section 3 describes our identification strategy and sample. In Section 4, we present
estimates of the impact of sanctions on enrollment in sanctioned institutions and their competitors and in
Section 5, we provide descriptive evidence of effects on borrowing and default. Section 6 concludes.

2

Institutional Background and Empirical Setting

College students receive substantial sums of aid from the federal government. The largest federal financial
aid programs, including Pell Grants, work-study, and Stafford Loans, are authorized under Title IV of the

5

Higher Education Act of 1965 and subsequent amendments (hereafter, Title IV). Title IV programs provide
subsidies to low-income college students. At their recent peak, for-profit colleges received as much as a
quarter of aggregate Pell Grant and subsidized student loan aid, nearly double the sector’s enrollment share
(Baum and Payea 2013).
Colleges must comply with a set of administrative and fiscal requirements to disburse Title IV aid to
students. Until the recent GE regulations passed under the Obama administration, the most stringent
student performance-based requirement relied on CDRs. During the time period we study, CDRs were
defined as the percentage of an institution’s former borrowers who default on their federal student loans
within two years of entering repayment. Institutions were required to maintain CDRs less than 25 percent
in any three-year period and less than 40 percent in any given year. In the absence of a successful appeal,
institutions violating these thresholds lost access to student loans, and potentially all federal student aid,
for at least the remainder of the year and the following two fiscal years.5 Between 60 and 90 percent of all
sanctioned institutions appealed this decision. We do not observe whether a sanction was ultimately applied
(either due to an unsuccessful appeal or lack of an appeal) prior to the 1996-97 (1997) academic year, but
of the sanctions threatened between 1997 and 2000, 95 percent ultimately resulted in federal aid loss.
CDR regulations were enacted in 1989 in response to concerns of poor student outcomes and abuse
of federal student aid programs in the for-profit sector (U.S. General Accounting Office 1988; Fraas 1989;
Dynarski 1991). While the regulations applied to all institutions, a disproportionate number of for-profits
were affected. Prior to the regulation, close to 3,000 for-profit institutions participated in Title IV federal
student aid programs. The first CDR-driven sanctions were announced in September 1991. By September
1995, over 1,200 for-profit institutions and a handful of institutions in other sectors had been sanctioned
(Figure 1).6
Although ED did not gather complete or systematic data on for-profits in the 1980s and 1990s in the
IPEDS, research using these data from the time period suggests that the market for sub-baccalaureate
education in the late 1980s had many important similarities to the market today. Using the 1989 IPEDS
5 Exceeding the 25 percent threshold for three consecutive cohort years resulted in loss of access to loans (and potential loss of
access to Pell Grants beginning with the 1997 cohort). Exceeding the 40 percent threshold resulted in “limitation, suspension,
or termination” of all Title IV aid programs. CDR thresholds were higher in the early years of enforcement. For instance, in
1991, institutions had to maintain CDRs below 35 percent for the 1987, 1988, and 1989 repayment cohorts and below 60 percent
for the 1989 cohort. In 2012, the ED moved to a three-year CDR measure and higher sanction thresholds: institutions with
CDRs exceeding 30 percent for three consecutive years lose eligibility to disburse both federal Pell Grants and federal loans,
while institutions with CDRs exceeding 40 percent in any single year lose access to federal loans. Appendix Table B.1 displays
the full set of sanction triggers and penalties by year.
6 Between 2003 and 2013, only 27 institutions received CDR-related sanctions. Of these, 23 ultimately avoided federal aid
loss due to successful appeals. Despite heightened concern about the loan repayment challenges of for-profit college students,
most for-profits avoided CDR sanctions in recent years, possibly due to strategic behavior in managing defaults (as discussed
in letters between Secretary of Education Arne Duncan and Senator Tom Harkin dated December 12, 2012, and February 27,
2013). The December 12 letter notes that for-profit colleges “manipulate their Office of Postsecondary Education Identification
(OPE-ID) numbers to avoid potential sanctions, including loss of federal financial aid eligibility. These tactics help colleges
artificially avoid violating restrictions on high default rates.”

6

and related NPSAS data, Apling (1993) reports that, as is the case today, for-profit “proprietary schools”
enrolled a disproportionate share of women, minority students, and older students in programs ranging from
cosmetology to computer science that were typically less than two years in length. Most proprietary schools
were small, though a few large institutions existed. Unlike today’s chains that enroll tens or even hundreds
of thousands of students, however, the largest institutions enrolled roughly 12,000 students. While online
education was not prevalent in the early 1990s, some schools offered correspondence courses by mail. Apling
(1993) reports that in 1988, 235 proprietary schools with median enrollment of 800 delivered at least some
coursework by mail. However, many of these schools were not eligible for federal aid under Title IV; only
68 institutions with home school programs were accredited (and therefore potentially eligible for Title IV),
suggesting that relatively few federal aid recipients pursued correspondence education beyond county borders
in the early 1990s.
Drawing on our own Pell Grant data that more accurately capture enrollment in Title IV for-profit
institutions, we show that in the years prior to the implementation of the CDR regulations, the share of
Pell Grant recipients attending for-profit institutions steadily increased from the mid-1970s, peaking at 27
percent in 1988, while the share of these students enrolled in public institutions concurrently fell from 70
to less than 60 percent (Figure 2). Following the implementation of the CDR regulations, the for-profit
share of Pell Grant recipients fell over the next decade to a low of 13 percent in 1998, while the public
share of Pell Grant recipients increased over this same period. This shift in the sector of enrollment for Pell
Grant recipients was not due to a decline in Pell Grant take-up, as aggregate enrollment grew steadily over
this period (Appendix Figure C.1). These patterns provide suggestive evidence that as many sanctioned
for-profit institutions lost eligibility to disburse federal student aid, at least some of the low-income students
that would have enrolled in these institutions shifted to the public sector.
The climate of rapid for-profit college growth, questionable practices in this sector, and subsequent
regulations in the late 1980s and early 1990s bears a strong resemblance to the current U.S. higher education
landscape. After the growth in the for-profit sector during the first decade of the 2000s, renewed concern
over student outcomes led to the 2014 GE regulations. Under GE, eligibility for federal student aid would
be based on graduates’ loan payment-to-earnings ratios, calculated at the program level.7 At the time
the regulation was issued, ED estimated that about 1,400 programs (99 percent of which were in forprofit colleges) would fail GE standards, impacting approximately 840,000 students.8 Under the Trump
7 Specifically, payment-to-earnings ratios are categorized as pass (average loan payments are less than 8 percent of total or
20 percent of discretionary earnings), zone (average loan payments are 8–12 percent of total or 20–30 percent of discretionary
earnings), or fail (average loan payments are greater than 12 percent of total or greater than 30 percent of discretionary
earnings). Programs become ineligible to disburse Title IV funds if they fail this measure in two out of of any three consecutive
years or are in the zone for four consecutive years.
8 See
http://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/obama-administration-announces-final-rules-protect-students-poorperforming-career-college-programs for details.

7

administration, implementation of the rule has been delayed and a new negotiated rulemaking process is
underway to consider various modifications. While proponents argue that the GE standards will protect
vulnerable students from profit-seeking firms that do not prioritize students’ interests, opponents argue that
the rules will limit underserved students’ access to higher education (Fain 2014b; Gleason and Mitchell 2014;
Mitchell and Zibel 2014; Fain 2018). An understanding of whether and how the loss of federal aid for
for-profit colleges affects postsecondary enrollment is essential for predicting the impacts of GE and similar
regulations that disproportionately impact the for-profit sector.

2.1

Conceptual Framework

We begin with a basic model of college choice loosely following Long (2004) and Jacob, McCall and Stange
(forthcoming). Student i chooses from j ∈ J m colleges in local higher education market m. Institutions
are characterized by the expected out-of-pocket price paid by the student Pij , academic characteristics Aj
(e.g., programs, quality, or reputation), and distance Dij to the institution. Prices vary both across and
within institutions and depend on student characteristics Xi (e.g., family income, academic ability, in-state)
and college characteristics Zj (e.g., listed tuition, sector). A student’s income is denoted Ii , such that
Ii − Pij represents consumption of all other goods and εij is an unobserved individual-specific preference for
institution j. Both A and P are functions of S, where Sj = 1 when institution j receives a CDR sanction
and is unable to give out federal student aid. An institution’s reputation also may depend on whether other
institutions in the same market and sector c ∈ {public, nonprof it, f or-prof it} have also been sanctioned
(S−jc ).
Individuals assess their expected utility from attending each institution Uij , while also considering the
option of attending no postsecondary education, and choose the option that maximizes their utility, where:

Uij = α0 (I (Xi ) − P (Xi , Zj , Sj )) + α1 A (Zj , Sj , S−jc ) + α2 Dij + γXi + εij .

(1)

When an institution is sanctioned, it affects students’ college choice decisions through three channels. First,
CDR sanctions may impact a student’s expected cost of attendance. The amount that a student pays outof-pocket for college equals the gross cost of attendance, less available financial aid. A sanctioned institution
loses eligibility to disburse federal loans, and in some cases, Pell Grants and other federal aid. Sanctioned
institutions could provide funds to offset the loss of aid from federal sources, but Turner (2014) and Cellini
and Darolia (2017) find that for-profit colleges typically provide very little institutional aid. As a result,
current and prospective students of sanctioned institutions are likely to experience an increase in their
expected out-of-pocket college costs (P ). Students could absorb these costs, for example, by taking on more

8

expensive private student loans or increasing work hours. They may also choose to forgo a college education
or may switch to a lower-cost competitor institution. Even if a sanction is not upheld, the threat of a sanction
might still affect students’ expectations of their future cost of continuing in a threatened institution.
Second, sanctions may provide information to prospective students on the quality of a particular institution or sector, reducing perceived academic quality (A) and lowering the potential utility from attendance.
Institutions sanctioned under the CDR regulations have, by definition, a high percentage of students who
cannot repay their student loans. Prospective students may consider a sanction to indicate poor quality
and therefore estimate a lower probability of their own success and lower expected lifetime benefits from
attendance at the sanctioned institution. Such a calculation would lead to a lower probability of enrolling
in college j and would induce students to enroll in a competing institution rather than forgo education altogether, unless suitable alternative institutions or programs are unavailable locally or offer much lower utility
than nonenrollment. A key implication for our study is that these reputational effects of a sanction may also
spill over onto institutions that students view as similar — leading students to switch to local institutions
in a different sector or a different field of study. For example, students may downgrade their impression of
other institutions in the same sector (e.g., other for-profits when a for-profit college is sanctioned) or other
institutions that are perceived to be related (e.g., another local branch of an institution within the same
“chain”). Prospective students also may consider a sanction of an institution that specializes in a field of
study to indicate poor job prospects in that field. For these reasons, we explore whether spillovers are more
pronounced among chains or among institutions with similar fields of study.9
Finally, sanctions may affect the supply of education. Sanctioned institutions may be unable to support
their operations if reductions in student enrollment are sufficiently large, leading some sanctioned institutions
to close. This in turn limits prospective students’ choice sets and induces further switching to unsanctioned
competitor institutions or leaving higher education altogether. Our reduced form estimates of the impact of
sanctions on enrollment in a local market will encompass all three of these effects. We focus our analyses on
students who are likely to only seek out local college options — those that attend colleges that offer two-year
and less-than-two-year degrees — and approximate a student’s choice set with counties.10
The extent to which students are dissuaded from education or diverted to a different institution following
a sanction depends on the availability of institutions offering similarly appealing programs, prices at these
institutions, and whether students are fully informed of their options beyond the sanctioned school. All
9 Unfortunately, given idiosyncratic reporting of chains, it is difficult to identify branches in our data (for example, some
colleges may have separate Office of Postsecondary Education Identification (OPEID) numbers for each branch campus, while
others have only one OPEID for all branches). However, in light of the fact that there were substantially fewer for-profit chains
in the 1990s (Deming, Goldin and Katz 2012) and that chains are less likely to open multiple branches in the same local market,
we believe that our estimates of spillovers are primarily capturing effects on different colleges with similar features. We expand
upon this point and explicitly test the role of chains in Section 4.3.
10 Our results are robust to including both two- and four-year colleges (Section 4.2).

9

of these factors relate to the degree of competition between colleges in a given higher education market,
which has been addressed to a limited extent in previous literature. Peltzman (1973) provides a theoretical
framework for modeling how higher education institutions compete for students in an environment with both
federal subsidies (Pell Grants and federal loans) and state subsidies (direct funding for public institutions).
Cellini (2009) provides evidence that public funding for California community colleges drives for-profit colleges out of the local market, with a corresponding increase in community college enrollment. Using national
data, Goodman and Henriques (2015) estimate that the elasticity of for-profit enrollment with respect to
state and local appropriations to public institutions is 0.2.

2.2

Data Sources

We primarily rely on administrative data on Pell Grant recipients and on institutions subject to CDR
sanctions obtained from the ED. The Pell Grant data include the total number of Pell Grant recipients in
each federal-aid eligible institution for the 1973–74 through 2011–12 (hereafter, 1974 through 2012) academic
years. Pell Grant recipient enrollment provides a reasonable proxy for the enrollment of financially vulnerable
undergraduate college students as students with low income and assets (measured by the federal government’s
calculation of need) are eligible to receive Pell Grants. We are particularly interested in these relatively lowincome and low-asset students since they are most likely to be sensitive to the loss of federal student aid and
are also the target of policy efforts to encourage college attendance and completion.11 In addition, although
estimated effects of sanctions on sanctioned schools’ enrollment using IPEDS data in Darolia (2013) are
established internally valid, the IPEDS is missing historical records for a non-trivial number of for-profit
colleges; thus the Pell Grant data used in this study are better suited than for estimating changes to the
total amount and distribution of market-level enrollment during this key time period.
Data on sanctioned institutions include the specific CDR threshold that was violated in all years that
sanctions were applied, and institution-specific default rates for all but the first three cohorts of borrowers
(i.e., those who entered repayment between 1989 and 1991). In most years, institutions had to maintain
CDRs less than 25 percent in any three-year period and less than 40 percent each year. Violation of these
thresholds resulted in loss of at least some federal financial aid in the year the sanction was applied and a
minimum of two additional academic years. Specifically, institutions that were sanctioned due to three years
of CDRs exceeding 25 percent lost eligibility to disburse federal loans but maintained eligibility for grant
programs. Institutions that were sanctioned due to a single year’s CDR exceeding 40 percent could lose
11 The ratio of Pell Grant recipients to IPEDS fall enrollment is approximately 0.2 in two-year public institutions during the
period we examine. While the IPEDS excludes many for-profit institutions that were operating in the 1980s and 1990s, Apling
(1993) reports that close to 50 percent of students enrolled in for-profit schools in fall 1986 received Pell Grant aid (compared
to 12 percent of community college students), suggesting that the share of for-profit students receiving Pell Grants during the
period we examine may have been substantially higher than the share of students receiving Pell Grants in the public sector.

10

eligibility to disburse both grants and loans for an indefinite period. Following the ED’s definition, in our
main specifications, our definition of a sanctioned institution includes both sets of institutions. However, we
also explore heterogeneous effects by sanction type to assess whether the loss of all Title IV aid has a larger
effect on enrollment than the loss of access to loans alone.
Typically, sanctions were effective immediately and restricted aid access for both current and prospective
students. However, a sanctioned institution could appeal its case to ED in a process that typically lasted one
to two years. During this time, the institution was allowed to continue participating in Title IV programs
but would be responsible for repaying any loans disbursed during the appeals period if the sanction was
ultimately upheld. An important limitation of our data is that we cannot observe whether institutions
successfully appealed a sanction before the 1997 academic year.12 Thus, our main estimates can be thought
of as intent-to-treat (ITT) effects that encompass both the impact of the actual loss of federal student aid (in
cases where institutions did not appeal or lost an appeal) and a threatened sanction with no subsequent loss
of aid (due to a successful appeal) on enrollment. To the extent that students and/or institutions respond to
threatened sanctions (even if the sanction is ultimately overturned on appeal), our estimates will represent
the policy relevant treatment effect of federal regulation.
Our data do not contain institutions that do not participate in Title IV federal student aid programs.13
We therefore cannot distinguish between prospective students who forgo higher education in response to
a sanction and those that give up their Pell Grant to attend a nonparticipating institution. One might
interpret such non-Title IV offerings as potentially inferior, since students cannot obtain public financial aid
to attend these institutions and because these programs would be generally unaccredited. Nonetheless, to
the extent that students leaving sanctioned institutions enroll in these non-Title IV institutions, our estimates will understate the extent to which unsanctioned competitors absorb enrollment declines in sanctioned
institutions.
We use counties to proxy for local higher education markets, as in Cellini (2009), and exclude institutions
in U.S. territories.14 We match institutions with counties using their address and/or zip code, when available
in the Pell Grant administrative data or CDR data. For institutions with missing location information in
these data sets, we use the Postsecondary Education Participants System (PEPS) to link institutions to
12 Through a Freedom of Information Act request, we were able to obtain information on institutions that unsuccessfully
appealed their sanctions for the 1990 through 1994 repayment cohort related sanctions. However, this data does not allow us
to distinguish between institutions that successfully appealed their sanction and institutions that never submitted an appeal,
and thus, we cannot determine the set of institutions that were ultimately penalized during these years. We observe all appeals
and outcomes starting with the 1995 repayment cohort (for which sanctions were imposed in 1997).
13 Cellini and Goldin (2014) document the large number of these institutions in the for-profit sector in more recent years.
14 We also examine the robustness of our estimates to alternative definitions of local higher education markets in which we
consider an institution’s competitors to be the set of schools within a 15 or 30 mile radius. As discussed in Section 4.2, we
obtain similar results using county-based and radius-based market measures.

11

counties.15 PEPS also contains information on Title IV institution closures. All institutions that closed
between 1986 and 2010 remain in our sample and are assigned Pell Grant recipient enrollment equal to zero
in the closed years to account for sanction-driven enrollment declines due to closure.

2.3

Trends in Pell Grant Enrollment, Borrowers, and Closures

In the years prior to the implementation of federal regulations that tied CDRs to sanctions (1980–1988), the
overall number of Pell Grant recipients was weakly increasing. The share of Pell Grant recipients attending
for-profit institutions grew from less than 10 percent to just under 30 percent (Figure 2). Over this same
period, the share of these students enrolled in public institutions fell from 75 to just under 60 percent.
Beginning in 1989, when the first set of institution-level CDRs were released, the for-profit share of Pell
Grant recipients fell continuously until 1998, while public institutions enrolled an increasing percentage of
recipients. Total Pell Grant recipient enrollment increased continuously until 1993 and remained constant
for the next nine years (Appendix Figure C.1).
These patterns are even more pronounced among two-year public and for-profit institutions, which experienced the majority of sanctions and/or competitor sanctions (Figure 3). Between 1988 and 1998, the share
of Pell Grant recipients enrolled in two-year for-profit institutions fell by 15 percentage points (close to 60
percent), while the share enrolled in public two-year institutions grew by almost an equal magnitude.
The federal sanctions we focus on were explicitly linked to student loan default rates. Figure 4 displays
the number of borrowers and CDRs across sectors beginning in 1992 (unfortunately, sector-specific CDRs are
not available before 1992). Panel A shows the the share of federal borrowers entering repayment by sector
and cohort year. Echoing the patterns in Pell Grant recipient enrollment, the distribution of borrowers across
sectors shifted during the years when federal sanctions were most prevalent (see Appendix Figure C.2 trends
in the total number of borrowers entering repayment, which is generally increasing from 1996 to present,
and the aggregate default rate, which is steadily decreasing between 1992 and 2005). The share of borrowers
entering repayment from public institutions increased and the share leaving for-profit institutions fell. As
shown in Panel B, the CDRs of for-profit colleges dropped precipitously in the years in which sanctions were
most frequently imposed, while CDRs remained fairly constant in the public and nonprofit sectors.
Finally, we describe trends in institution closures over this period. A large number of for-profit institutions
closed their doors beginning in 1989, the first year that institution-specific CDRs were released. Over the
next decade, more than 2,000 Title IV for-profit institutions closed (Appendix Figure B.1). To further
investigate the correlation between federal sanctions and changes in institution closure rates, we estimate
descriptive hazard models (described in Appendix B). Appendix Figure B.2 displays the correlation between
15 See

http://www2.ed.gov/offices/OSFAP/PEPS/index.html for details.

12

sanction receipt and the cumulative hazard of closure over the following five years. These results suggest
that sanction receipt in the for-profit sector is correlated with an over 40 percent increase in the likelihood
of closure within the next five years.16 Sanctioned nonprofit institutions also have an increased hazard of
closure, while public institutions appear to be unaffected. These results suggest that the “treatment” of an
additional for-profit competitor being sanctioned likely affects institutions through multiple channels, with
detrimental impacts on the prices and reputation of competitors that remain open paired with a reduction
in the number of competitor institutions.

3

Empirical Framework

We use a generalized difference-in-differences framework to estimate the causal effect of sanctions on enrollment within sanctioned schools and their unsanctioned competitors within the same local higher education
market (county). Our main focus is on generating an estimate of the impact of a sanction on overall enrollment to assess whether federal sanctions reduce access to education within a local higher education market.
To do this, we estimate ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the following form:


enrljyτ = β c scjτ × postyτ + γd (s−jdmτ × postyτ ) + αjτ + αy + αt + tαc + jmyτ

(2)

Where j indexes institutions, y indexes calendar years, τ indexes potential sanction years (hereafter “sanctionyears”), m indexes local higher education markets, c ∈ {p, np, f p} indicates the sector to which institution
j belongs (public, nonprofit, and for-profit, respectively), and bold terms represent vectors. The treatments
of interest are scjτ , an indicator for whether institution j in sector c received a sanction in sanction-year τ ,
and s−jdmτ , which indicates the number of institution j’s competitors in sector d ∈ {p, np, f p} that were
sanctioned in sanction-year τ . Both of these terms are interacted with postyτ , an indicator for the year of the
sanction and the five following academic years. Main effects of own and competitor sanctions are accounted
for by institution by sanction-year fixed effects (αjτ ) and fixed effects for the number of years before or after
the sanction (αt , where t = y −τ ) account for main effects of postyτ . Calendar year fixed effects (αy ) account
for year-specific shocks that affect all institutions similarly (e.g., changes in the maximum Pell Grant or rules
dictating Pell Grant eligibility). We include a linear time trend that varies by sector, tαc , to account for
changes in sector-specific features over time (e.g., reductions in state funding for community colleges). jmyτ
is a composite error term.
16 Our measure of closure comes from the PEPS data. The PEPS data allow us to distinguish between closures and mergers,
but only contain information on Title IV institutions. Thus, we do not observe closures for institutions that exit the Title IV
program prior to closing. To the extent that CDR-related federal regulations induced institutions to leave Title IV, Appendix
Figures B.1 and B.2 will underestimate the number of closures and the correlation between sanction receipt and closure.

13

To assess the effect of an additional sanction in sector d on market enrollment, we need to account
for the fact that each sanctioned school may have multiple competitors. Let µdmτ represent the average
number of unsanctioned schools that are competitors of a sector c sanctioned school within a given market
m. We calculate the effect of an additional sanctioned school in sector c on market level enrollment via a
linear combination of estimated coefficients. For instance, with c = f p, the effect of an additional for-profit
sanction on market-wide enrollment will estimated by β̂ f p + µ̂f p,mτ × γ̂f p .
Our key identifying assumption is similar to the assumption of parallel trends in the standard differencein-differences setting, specifically, that no other factors affecting enrollment in either the sanctioned or
competitor institutions were contemporaneous with the timing of sanction receipt or the number of competitors sanctioned within the local higher education market. With respect to identifying effects on sanctioned
institutions own enrollment, this assumption implies that counterfactual Pell Grant recipient enrollment
trends should be similar in institutions that do and do not receive sanctions in the same sector in the years
after the sanction is applied.17 In the case of identifying spillover effects, this assumption implies similar
trends for unsanctioned competitor institutions in the same sector that were in markets that differed only
in the number of sanctioned institutions in a particular sector. A testable implication of this assumption is
that counterfactual enrollment trends for unsanctioned public institutions should be similar in markets that
had n versus n + 1 additional sanctioned for-profit institutions. It is unlikely that competitors anticipate and
preemptively adjust to sanctions that will be imposed on neighboring institutions in future years. However,
in larger markets, schools might be exposed to more sanctioned competitors and it may be the case that
overall enrollment trends in larger versus smaller markets differ. We address this concern in four ways.
First, we include market-specific time-trends in our main specification and show that our results are robust
to removing these trends, allowing these trends to vary between for-profit and other institutions, and by
for-profit field of study.
Second, we estimate event-study models, in which postyτ in equation (2) is replaced by a set of indicators
for years before and after sanction receipt/number of competitors receiving sanctions:

enrljyτ =

n

o
10
10
 k
P
P
β c,k scjτ × 1 [t = k]τ
+
γd (s−jdmτ × 1 [t = k]τ )

k=−10

k=−10

(3)

+ αjτ + αy + αt + tαc + jmyτ
where 1 [t = k]τ indicates the period k years before or after sanction year τ . This allows for an explicit test of
whether enrollment trends in years prior to the sanction are statistically distinguishable for schools that did
17 This

assumption will be violated if institutions endogenously adjust their recruitment, tuition, and institutional aid practices
in anticipation of being sanctioned. Darolia (2013) does not find evidence of an enrollment expectations effect when institutions
exceeded the three year 25 percent CDR threshold for one or two years.

14

and did not receive sanctions (i.e., β c,−10 = ... = β c,−1 = 0) and whether pre-period enrollment trends within
unsanctioned institutions that had one additional sanctioned competitor differed from pre-period trends of
unsanctioned schools with one fewer sanctioned competitor (i.e., γ −10
= ... = γ −1
d
d = 0).
Third, we separate institutions into quartiles based on market size (number of institutions) in 1990, the
year before the first sanctions were imposed. Finally, to address the potential for serial correlation in both
types of treatments, we estimate models in which we restrict our focus to the first “event” experienced by
an institution. An event is either the receipt of sanction or having a sanctioned competitor. As discussed in
Section 4.2, the results of these exercises suggest that our key identifying assumption is not violated.

3.1

Sample definition

We limit our main sample in a few ways. First, our main analyses focus on sub-baccalaureate institutions (institutions offering two-year and less-than-two-year credentials).18 Few for-profit institutions offered
baccalaureate degrees during this time period, and even fewer baccalaureate-granting for-profits received
sanctions.19 Nonetheless, we show that our estimates are robust to the inclusion of four-year institutions
in our sample. We further restrict our analysis to the effects of sanctions imposed between 1991 and 2000,
focusing on changes in enrollment between the five years before and after sanction receipt, with robustness
checks using a ten-year window. Of the total number of threatened sanctions between 1991 and 2012, 99
percent fell within the years we examine. Third, our main sample excludes counties that contain more than
50 two-year institutions (on average, in a given year between 1986 and 2005) as we are unlikely to be able to
detect enrollment spillovers from an additional for-profit sanction in these 12 large markets.20 Our estimates
are robust to the inclusion of all counties in our analysis sample. Appendix A provides a detailed description
of our data sources and main analysis sample.

3.2

Characteristics of Institutions by Sector and Sanction Receipt

Table 1 displays the characteristics of the institutions form the basis of our analytic sample. Beginning in
1991, a given institution could receive up to two CDR-related sanctions (resulting in either loss of loans
and/or loss of all Title IV aid) on an annual basis. Panel A contains information on all school by sanctionyear observations within our sample, regardless of own or competitor sanction receipt. Over the period
18 We cannot distinguish between two-year and less-than-two-year institutions in our main data sources (Pell Grant and CDR
administrative data).
19 Only 4 baccalaureate-granting public institutions, 23 baccalaureate-granting nonprofits, and 10 baccalaureate-granting forprofits were sanctioned. In the year prior to the release of the first set of CDR sanctions (1990), only 6 percent of for-profit
colleges offered four-year degrees.
20 These counties include: Maricopa County (AZ), Los Angeles County (CA), Orange County (CA), San Diego County (CA),
Miami-Dade County (FL), Cook County (IL), Wayne County (MI), New York (NY), Allegheny County (PA), Philadelphia
County (PA), Dallas County (TX), and Harris County (TX). The remaining counties include institutions that received 75
percent of all sanctions imposed on two-year institutions.

15

we examine, 74 percent of all Pell Grant recipients enrolled in sub-baccalaureate schools attended public
institutions, just 3 percent attended a nonprofit schools, and the remaining 24 percent were enrolled in
the for-profit sector (Panel A). In contrast, among students enrolled in sanctioned institutions, only 20
percent attended public community colleges, while 79 percent were enrolled in a for-profit school (Panel
B). Enrollment in unsanctioned schools with at least one sanctioned local competitor was similar to overall
enrollment, with 65 to 71 percent of students attending community colleges and 27 to 31 percent in for-profit
schools (Panels C through E).
Average enrollment in public institutions was increasing over the period we examine, even within sanctioned community colleges. In contrast, the average for-profit institution lost students. The enrollment
declines in sanctioned for-profits and their unsanctioned for-profit competitors were larger in both levels and
percentage terms than overall enrollment declines in this sector.

4

The Impact of Sanctions on Enrollment

We start our analysis of the impact of the threatened loss of aid on overall enrollment in the market by
estimating equation (2). The top row of Panel A in Table 2 contains estimated effects of sanctions on an
institution’s own enrollment in the five years after receiving a sanction. In all three sectors, sanctions result
in enrollment declines, although the reduction is only statistically significant in the case of sanctions applied
to for-profit institutions. This is perhaps not surprising as public and nonprofit institutions were relatively
unlikely to be sanctioned (e.g., Figure 1).
In the five years following sanction receipt, public institutions lose 58 students per year, while sanctioned
nonprofit institutions lose 37 students per year. These statistically insignificant enrollment declines represents
reductions relative to pre-sanction enrollment of 23 percent and 13 percent, respectively. Our main focus is on
sanctions applied to for-profit institutions, as this sector received the vast majority of sanctions. Sanctioned
for-profit institutions lose a statistically significant 98 students per year, on average, in the five years after
sanction receipt – a 40 percent decline from baseline enrollment.
Panel B in Table 2 shows results using a ten-year window. Over this longer time horizon, sanctioned public
institutions experience larger, statistically significant enrollment declines of 138 students, while enrollment
in a sanctioned for-profit drops by 76 students. Enrollment within sanctioned for-profits continues to decline,
albeit at a slower rate, for up to 10 years after the sanction, suggesting effects that persist beyond the period
in which a sanctioned school was directly impacted. One explanation is the increased rate of closure among
sanctioned for-profits. As described in Appendix B, sanctioned for-profits experienced a 40 percent increase
in the cumulative hazard of closure in the five years following sanction receipt.

16

These own-enrollment effects do not take into account spillovers from sanctioned institutions to their
unsanctioned competitors, and these effects are critically important to assessing the overall impact of federal
regulation on students’ access to higher education. The second row of estimates in Panel A of Table 2
represent the spillover effects of sanctions on unsanctioned local competitor institutions in the five years
after a sanction. Spillovers from additional public and for-profit institutions receiving sanctions are small and
statistically insignificant, while each additional sanction applied in the nonprofit sector leads unsanctioned
competitors to absorb an additional 30 students per year, a statistically significant increase. Estimated
enrollment spillovers represent the enrollment gain for a given competitor, but each sanctioned institution
has multiple competitors. Thus, we scale the estimated per-institution enrollment spillovers by the number of
competitor institutions exposed to a sanction to estimate the effect of sanctions on market-wide enrollment.
An additional nonprofit sanction actually increases county-wide enrollment, although this result should be
viewed with caution given that very few nonprofit schools received sanctions. An additional sanction in
either the public or for-profit sector has only small effects on overall county enrollment after taking into
account the number of unsanctioned competitors exposed to a given sanctioned school. In both cases, the
enrollment decrease represents a 3 percent reduction relative to baseline enrollment. When considering a
ten-year time-frame in Panel B, we find similar impacts on the market when a for-profit is sanctioned (a
3 percent reduction), but virtually no change on enrollment when a public institution is sanctioned (-0.3
percent), as competitors see small positive enrollment gains. Together, the results in Table 2 suggest that
many of the students induced to leave sanctioned institutions may have enrolled in other schools. We further
explore the nature of enrollment spillovers in Section 4.1.
We explore the dynamics of enrollment spillovers by estimating event-study models in the form of equation
(3). These results are plotted in Figure 5.21 Each marker represents the estimated effect of one additional
sanctioned public (Panel A), nonprofit (Panel B), or for-profit (Panel C) school sanctioned on enrollment in
the average unsanctioned competitor in the years before or after sanction receipt (with t − 1 serving as the
omitted category), while shaded regions represent 95 percent confidence intervals. Across all three panels,
we observe virtually no significant differences in enrollment in the pre-sanction time period, suggesting that
our assumption of parallel pre-trends holds.22 Turning to the post-sanction years, when a public institution
is sanctioned (Panel A), we observe significant increases in enrollment in competitor institutions beginning
21 Event study estimates of own enrollment effects for for-profit institutions reveal a sharp decline in enrollment in the year of
the sanction and following two years, which is consistent with the period of federal student aid loss associated with a sanction
(Panel C of Appendix Figure C.3). Sanctioned for-profits also appear to have significantly larger enrollment increases over the
10 years prior to sanction receipt than unsanctioned competitors, suggesting that for-profit schools that were especially fast
growing were also generating more student borrowers and/or worse post-college outcomes.
22 Of the 9 pre-sanction coefficients representing the estimated effects of an additional sanctioned for-profit competitor, one is
significantly different from 0 (p = 0.028). However, a test of the joint significance of the pre-period coefficients does not reject
the hypothesis that they are all statistically indistinguishable from 0 (p = 0.619).

17

five years later. Effects of nonprofit sanctions on competitors are noisy and statistically insignificant in
all post-sanction years (Panel B). Notably, Panel C shows that when a for-profit institution is sanctioned,
competitor enrollment initially drops, but recovers around year six. Beginning 8 years after sanction receipt,
enrollment within unsanctioned competitor institutions is significantly higher relative to the year before the
sanction was imposed. We explore potential explanations for this pattern below.

4.1

Unpacking the Effects of Sanctions on Market Enrollment

The small estimated declines in market-level enrollment from an additional for-profit sanction may mask
substantial heterogeneity across competitor sectors. For example, we might expect enrollment spillovers to
be larger for similar institutions due to reputational effects or similarities in course offerings. We explore this
possibility by estimating specifications that allow for heterogeneity in enrollment spillovers from an additional
sanctioned school by competitor sector; results are displayed in Panels B and C of Table 3. We find no
evidence of heterogeneous enrollment spillovers when an additional public institution is sanctioned (column
1). Within the nonprofit sector, we find a significant increase in enrollment (about 30 students) among
unsanctioned nonprofit competitors when an one additional nonprofit in the same market is sanctioned.
We do find evidence of heterogeneous enrollment spillovers from an additional for-profit institution sanctioned (column 3). Panel B shows that, on average, each local public community college enrolls 51 more
students each year when one additional for-profit college within the same market is sanctioned in the five
years after sanction receipt, representing a percent increase. In contrast, the average unsanctioned for-profit
school experiences an annual loss of 13 students (10 percent). Scaling these estimates to the market-level
using the average number of competitors in each sector, we estimate that the average enrollment decline
for a given sanctioned for-profit college (102 students) is effectively absorbed by the 117 student increase in
community college enrollment (i.e., a 51 student increase in each of the 2.3 unsanctioned public competitors
of the average sanctioned for-profit). At the same time, an additional sanctioned for-profit generates an
enrollment decline totaling 177 students across its approximately 14 local unsanctioned for-profit competitors. Combining the direct and spillover effects in the for-profit sector, our estimates suggest an additional
for-profit sanction leads to loss of 279 students, but about 42 percent of these students are absorbed by local
community colleges.23
23 As shown in Appendix Table C.2, estimated effects on ln(enrollment+1) are largely similar. We examine ln(enrollment+1)
rather than ln(enrollment) to be able to capture enrollment declines due to school closures and open schools that lose Title IV
eligibility and thus have 0 Pell Grant recipients. For instance, the estimated 0.72 reduction in log enrollment within sanctioned
for-profits represents a 51 percent decline, which is larger, but comparable to the 41 percent enrollment decline we find in
Table 3. Likewise, we estimate that an additional sanctioned for-profit competitor leads to an 8 percent increase in each local
community college’s enrollment and a 5 percent decrease in each local unsanctioned for-profit competitor’s enrollment. Scaling
the estimated increase of 51 students within a given community college due to an additional for-profit competitor by baseline
community college enrollment suggests these schools experienced a 5.5 percent increase in annual enrollment. Likewise, the
negative spillovers on unsanctioned for-profit competitors due to an additional local for-profit being sanctioned represents a 10

18

Estimates using a 10-year window (Panel C) suggest that, in the longer-run, even more students may be
switching sectors in response to a sanction. Sanctioned for-profits lose 81 students per year, but 72 students
are gained by public competitors, nearly offsetting losses in sanctioned institutions. For-profit competitors
again experience negative spillovers of 15 students. Combining these figures and scaling by the number of
competitors, we estimate that roughly 285 students leave the for-profit sector, but 166 students – about 58
percent – are absorbed by public competitors. These offsetting enrollment gains and losses across sectors
explain the relatively small 3 percent decrease in county-wide enrollment due to an additional sanctioned
for-profit.

4.2

Robustness

In this section, we show that our main estimates are robust to a variety of specifications and sample definitions. We first consider an alternative specification that allows for differences in enrollment responses
to sanctions within unsanctioned competitors based on the size of the population (rather than number of
schools) exposed to sanctions. There is substantial variation in enrollment levels across sanctioned for-profits,
ranging from 0 to over 7000, so an additional for-profit institution receiving a sanction would likely have
larger effects on unsanctioned competitors’ enrollment in markets where sanctioned for-profit enrollment
is larger than average. Thus, we create an alternative measure of the “bite” or magnitude of competitor
sanctions by constructing a measure of the number of students potentially exposed to a sanction within a
given sector and market. We use enrollment within sanctioned institutions in the year before the sanction
was announced, as enrollment in the year of the sanction itself will likely endogenously respond to the loss
(or threat of loss) of federal aid. Focusing on markets in which at least one for-profit sanction, the number
of for-profit students exposed to a sanction ranges from 0 to 8819, with a mean of 648 and median of 285.
Finally, because baseline enrollment within unsanctioned competitors also varies substantially, we estimate
specifications with ln(enrollment + 1) as the dependent variable and likewise, use the log of our measure of
number of students exposed to sanctions.
Spillover effects estimated from this model can be interpreted as enrollment elasticities, specifically, the
elasticity of enrollment for an unsanctioned institution in a given sector with respect to the number of
students who are exposed to sanctions in a given sector. Estimated own enrollment and spillover effects are
presented in Table 4. Sanctioned for-profits experience a 0.72 log point (51 percent) enrollment decrease in
the five years after sanction receipt. The lower panel indicates that a one percent increase in the number of
Pell recipients in the for-profit sector that were exposed to a sanction generates a 0.043 percent increase in
enrollment within a given unsanctioned public sector institution and a 0.021 percent decline in unsanctioned
percent decrease relative to baseline enrollment.

19

for-profits. These results suggest a relatively small enrollment elasticity with respect to enrollment of students
exposed to sanctions in competitor institutions. Given the much larger size of the average community college
in markets with sanctioned for-profits (923), it is not surprising that these schools did not experience large
changes in overall enrollment.
We further test the robustness of our results by estimating own and spillover enrollment effects of sanctions
within markets that vary in size.24 Specifically, we divide our main sample into quartiles based on the total
number of institutions within the local higher education market in 1990 to address the concern that markets
with more schools sanctioned are very different in structure than markets with fewer schools sanctioned.
Results are shown in the first four columns of Table 5. Estimated effects of for-profit sanctions on own and
competitor enrollment levels are relatively similar across markets of different sizes, and the overall reduction
in market enrollment due to an additional for-profit sanction is between a 1 and 7 percent. In all four
quartiles, we find evidence of enrollment decreases within sanctioned for-profits and significant increases in
unsanctioned public competitors from an additional for-profit sanction. Enrollment spillovers of an additional
for-profit sanction on unsanctioned for-profits are negative and statistically significant in all but the smallest
counties that have three or fewer institutions. These results provide evidence that the spillover effects
estimated using our main sample cannot be explained by differences in the size of markets with more versus
fewer sanctioned schools.
The last column of Table 5 focuses on the 12 largest counties with more than 50 two-year institutions that
are excluded from our main sample. Each additional sanctioned for-profit within these very large markets
leads to a 1 percent decrease in overall enrollment. Estimated enrollment spillovers for a given public (forprofit) competitor are smaller than in other markets, most likely due to the large number of such schools
available to absorb students displaced from sanctioned for-profits.
An additional concern might be that differences in employment trends between similar sized counties with
more versus fewer sanctioned schools are contributing to our results. To give an example, if unemployment
is increasing in particular industries that disproportionately employ former for-profit students, for-profit
borrowers might have trouble repaying their loans and enrollment within for-profits might respond to the
lack of employment opportunities related to the programs these schools offer. Table 6 shows that our results
are robust to the inclusion of county by sector linear time trends. The first column presents estimated own
enrollment effects and enrollment spillovers from an additional sanctioned competitor from a specification
that excludes county-specific linear trends, while column 2 duplicates estimates from Table 3. Column 3
24 Our results are robust to the inclusion of the largest counties with more than 50 two-year institutions, where we might
expect a weaker reaction of competitors to sanctioned institutions (Appendix Table C.3). Relative to our baseline results, we
find slightly smaller positive enrollment effects among public competitors of sanctioned for-profits and slightly smaller negative
spillovers to for-profit competitors. However, in aggregate, county-wide enrollment falls by only 1 percent and the public sector
absorbs 43 percent of the enrollment decline within a sanctioned for-profit and its unsanctioned for-profit competitors.

20

includes estimates from specifications that allow county-linear trends to vary between for-profit and other
institutions and column 4 allows county-specific for-profit trends to vary by for-profit industry.25 Estimates
are similar regardless of whether the county time trends are allowed to vary by for-profit or for-profit industry.
Estimated market level enrollment declines from an additional for-profit sanction are smaller without county
specific trends – the opposite of what we would expect to find if counties that had more for-profit sanctions
were also experiencing rising unemployment.
In our next robustness test, we include four-year institutions in our sample. Many selective four-year
public and nonprofit institutions draw students from outside of the local market, and thus, we would not
expect to see a response to changes in local demand. Outside of the for-profit sector, we would not expect
four-year college enrollment to be responsive to sanctions that primarily targeted two-year institutions, and
there were very few for-profits classified as four-year institutions in the 1990s. Nonetheless, we check to be
sure our results are unaffected by the inclusion of these institutions. As shown in Appendix Table C.4, we
obtain similar results when we include this broader group of institutions in our sample and estimate that
each additional for-profit sanction leads to a 1 percent drop in county-wide enrollment.
The estimates we have presented thus far combine the effects of sanctions that cause schools to lose access
to student loans with sanctions that may cause an institution to lose of all Title IV aid. We might expect
stronger effects on enrollment (particularly Pell Grant enrollment) for institutions threatened with the loss
of all Title IV aid, as grant aid directly reduces the net cost of college. Separate estimates by type of sanction
are shown in Appendix Table C.5. Effects of for-profit sanctions on own enrollment are similar for sanctions
with different consequences, but spillovers from the threatened loss of Title IV are larger in magnitude for
both public and for-profit competitors. These findings suggests that the loss of Title IV generates stronger
reputational impacts across sectors than simply the loss of access to loans.
We explore heterogeneity by sanction-year in Appendix Table C.6. The largest decrease in own-enrollment
following a sanction occurs in 1991, the first year that sanctions were imposed. One interpretation of this
finding is that the for-profit institutions that were most affected by a sanction closed or left Title IV, leaving a
(relatively) positively selected sample of for-profits that could potentially be sanctioned in subsequent years.
The finding of both positive spillovers to public institutions and negative spillovers to for-profit competitors
(when an additional for-profit competitor is sanctioned) is consistent with an industry-wide reputational
effect: impacts appear strongest in the first several years of the policy (1991–1995) as potential students
learn more about for-profit colleges, and then (with an exception in 1998) decrease in magnitude when
later-year sanctions are imposed, when many sanctioned and unsanctioned for-profit schools have closed or
left the Title IV program, and (presumably) potential students already gained more information about the
25 Appendix

A.4 describes the industry classifications we use.

21

sector as a whole.
Our main estimates are also robust to alternative definitions of an institution’s local higher education
market. Although counties have been used to proxy for local higher education markets in many previous
papers (e.g., Cellini 2009; Cellini 2010), it is not necessarily the case that current and prospective students
would not search for higher education alternatives across county lines. Thus, we geocode the locations of
institutions in our sample and consider other institutions to be local competitors if they fall within a 15 or
30 mile radius.26 Appendix Table C.7 presents these estimates for all schools that we were able to geocode
and schools that are in our main sample. The similarity of these estimates to our main results suggests that
using counties to proxy for local higher education markets is a reasonable practice.

4.3

Mechanisms

As discussed previously, when a local for-profit college is sanctioned and its students are exposed to a loss
of federal student aid, we would expect to see weakly positive enrollment changes in other institutions and
sectors, as these schools have become relatively cheaper. Thus, the negative spillovers we find for competing
for-profit institutions in the same county are surprising. One explanation is that — not unlike today —
the reputation of the sector was tarnished when individual institutions were sanctioned. To explore this
hypothesis we conducted an archival analysis of newspaper records.27 We found several national news stories
on cohort default rates and the problems of student loan repayment in “private trade schools.” Perhaps more
relevant to our study were numerous stories in local newspapers reporting on sanctions and the closure of
local institutions. We present select quotations in Appendix D. These quotes suggest that when one school
gets sanctioned, other private trade schools may suffer; for example, after a local competitor shut down in
1991, a for-profit college founder suggested that the image of the local trade school industry “has taken a
pretty heavy beating. Any damage to any private career school affects every other school” (Morgan 1991).
Our archival analysis also suggested that spillovers might be more likely among branches of the same
chain of institutions. To assess this empirically, we code chains by matching names of colleges in more than
one location. Our match is necessarily imprecise, but we are able to identify at least a subset of chains with
multiple locations in the same county (see Appendix A.3). We would be most concerned that our negative
within-county spillovers are driven by two locations of the same chain in a given county, but just 6 percent of
all for-profits had multiple locations in same county during the 1990s. Of the 9,688 unique for-profit schools
located in markets within which at least one for-profit competitor was sanctioned, only 137 (1 percent)
belonged to the same chain as the sanctioned school. Thus, it is unlikely that preemptive actions taken
26 A

small number of institutions could not be geocoded and thus are excluded.
ran queries in Lexis-Nexis using the names of the 20 largest sanctioned for-profit colleges as well as 10 other randomly
selected smaller sanctioned for-profits.
27 We

22

by unsanctioned locations within a chain that also contains sanctioned institutions in the same county can
explain the negative spillovers. We confirm this hypothesis in Table 7, which presents point estimates from
a specification that allows spillover effects of an additional for-profit competitor sanction to vary by whether
the sanctioned competitor belonged to the same chain. The point estimate is positive and not statistically
distinguishable from either zero or the estimated spillover effect on other unsanctioned for-profits.
While chain-wide responses to a single location being sanctioned cannot explain our finding of negative
enrollment spillovers in unsanctioned for-profits, it may be that reputational effects are stronger among
institutions that offer programs in fields similar to those offered by sanctioned institutions. For example, an
article describing a local sanctioned beauty school noted,”[h]air-dressing schools are also prevalent on state
and national lists,” perhaps leading students away from other for-profit cosmetology schools in the local
market. To asses spillovers by field, we grouped for-profit colleges into five broad “field” categories using
keywords appearing in college names, with the remainder whose names do not indicate a particular field
depicted as “General” for-profits, as described in Appendix A.4.
For-profit institutions vary substantially in size across field of study.28 For example, in 1990, schools
classified as offering beauty programs enrolled 46 students on average, while general for-profits had 284 Pell
grant recipients. Thus, we test for heterogeneity in spillovers by field of study using the same specification
that generated results for Table 4. Specifically, we estimate the effect of the log number of Pell Grant
recipients potentially exposed to a sanction (i.e., that were enrolled in a sanctioned institution in the year
prior to sanction receipt) on ln (enrollment).
Enrollment responses to sanctions vary significantly across fields (p < 0.001). The largest own enrollment
declines due to sanction receipt occur among general for-profits (0.90 log points or 59 percent), and those
focusing on computing/business (1.56 log points or 79 percent), culinary/arts/hospitality (1.65 log points or
81 percent), and engineering/mechanical trade programs (1.08 log points or 66 percent). Beauty schools also
experience significant enrollment decreases, albeit of a smaller magnitude (0.47 log points or 37 percent),
while enrollment losses in sanctioned health-focused for-profits are not statistically distinguishable from zero.
Across all for-profit fields, own enrollment effects are negative, and jointly significant (p < 0.001).
As might be expected, sanctions applied to general for-profits generate significant positive enrollment
spillovers to public institutions, which typically offer a range of fields. More surprisingly, sanctions applied
to beauty-focused for-profits also produce significant spillovers to public schools that are of a similar magnitude, despite the fact that many community colleges do not offer cosmetology programs. Although estimated
28 Appendix Table A.1 shows that total number of unique for-profit institutions and average enrollment by field of study,
the number and average enrollment of sanctioned for-profit institutions by field, and the number and average enrollment of
unsanctioned for-profit competitors of different-field sanctioned for profits and same-field sanctioned for-profits, by field. The
final two columns display characteristics of public competitors of sanctioned for-profits, by field.

23

enrollment gains from a marginal increase in the number of students exposed to sanctions are jointly significant (p < 0.001), we cannot reject that effects are statistically different across the broad for-profit industry
categories we examine (p = 0.630).
Supporting the argument that within-field reputations matter, in every field but health (which did not
experience significant own enrollment declines from sanctions), spillovers from sanctioned for-profit competitors in the same field are negative and larger in magnitude than spillovers from sanctioned for-profits in
other fields. The largest field-specific spillovers are in the culinary/arts/hospital and engineering/mechanical
trade fields. A one percent increase in the number of Pell Grant recipients exposed to sanctions within
these sectors leads to a 0.20 and 0.25 percent enrollment decline within other local culinary/arts and engineering/mechanical trades schools, respectively. Unsanctioned beauty schools also experience a significant
enrollment loss when an additional beauty school competitor is sanctioned, with a 1 percent increase in the
number of beauty school students exposed to sanctions leading to a 0.03 percent decline in unsanctioned competitor beauty schools’ enrollment. Across all fields, effects of for-profit sanctions on unsanctioned for-profit
competitors are jointly significant (p < 0.001). None of the estimated enrollment spillovers to unsanctioned
for-profit competitors in different fields are statistically significant and we cannot reject a test that the
coefficients are jointly insignificant (p = 0.724).
Although not definitive, the direction and magnitudes of these results suggest that reputational effects
within fields may be at play, at least for some fields. A final, optimistic interpretation of the negative spillovers
to competitor for-profits is that sanctions may have improved student information about the quality and
costs of colleges in this sector, leading students to make more informed choices. We cannot assess this
hypothesis directly, but we examine patterns of student outcomes on default and borrowing in section 5 that
provide suggestive evidence that this may be the case.

5

Descriptive Evidence on Borrowing and Default

In the previous section, we show that when for-profit institutions are threatened with federal sanctions,
their own enrollment falls, enrollment in competitor for-profit institutions likewise decreases, and public
institutions absorb these students. However, it is unclear whether this reallocation of students across sectors
in response to for-profit sanctions represents a gain in private or social welfare. Ideally, we would compare
attainment and earnings outcomes of students affected by sanctions to their outcomes in the absence of
sanctions. Given data limitations, we can only proxy for student outcomes by examining changes in borrower
and defaults across sectors in response to sanctions. Specifically, we estimate market-level regressions by
regressing the total number of borrowers or defaulters within a market on the number of institutions, N , in

24

market m and sector c that had ever been sanctioned as of year t and market and year fixed effects:

c
c
Ymt
Ncmt + δm + δt + νmt .
= γmt

(4)

We examine whether the changes in enrollment that occurred following for-profit sanctions are correlated
with changes in borrowing and repayment outcomes. Because entry into repayment lags enrollment, we lag
our measure of the number of institutions in a market that were threatened with sanctions by two years.
Unfortunately, since we first observe borrowers and defaulters beginning with the 1992 cohort, we cannot
identify the effects of earlier sanctions.
As shown in Panel A of Table 9, each additional sanctioned institution is significantly correlated with
a decrease in the number of borrowers in a local higher education market. Specifically, the point estimate
in column (1) indicates that 44 fewer students took on federal loans — a 12 percent decline from baseline
borrowing — when one additional institution was sanctioned in any sector. The reduction was driven by
a drop in borrowers entering repayment from nonprofit and for-profit institutions in response to sanctions
in these same sectors. Specifically, 26 fewer nonprofit students borrowed following a nonprofit sanction and
59 fewer for-profit students borrowed following a for-profit sanction. Community colleges appear to gain 24
percent of the would-be for-profit borrowers (e.g., Panel A, column (2), last row) suggesting that a large
number of students who were shifted to community colleges following the sanction of a for-profit institution
also shifted out of borrowing. The decline in borrowing in nonprofit institutions following a nonprofit sanction
does not appear to be absorbed by any other sector. Finally, public sector sanctions are associated with an
increased number of for-profit borrowers. This correlation may be due to prospective or current community
college students shifting into for-profit institutions after losing access to federal student aid within the public
sector, although we do not find a corresponding increase in Pell Grant recipient enrollment.
In Panel B of Table 9, we examine the correlation between sanctions and defaults. The dependent variable
is the number of students who entered repayment and defaulted on their federal loans within two years in the
specified sector. As shown in column (1), one additional institution receiving a sanction results in 31 fewer
borrowers defaulting within two years. Own sector sanctions in all three sectors correlate with significant
reductions in defaults. Despite the small increase in the number of borrowers attending community colleges
following a for-profit sanction indicated in Panel A, defaults in the public sector do not change (Panel B,
column (2), last row).
Finally, to get a rough estimate of the share of students induced to stop borrowing who would have
eventually defaulted in the absence of federal sanctions, we can compare the changes in the number of
borrowers in Panel A to the changes in the number of defaulters in Panel B. Comparing these estimates from

25

column (1) suggest that roughly 70 percent of the students induced to stop borrowing would have defaulted
on their loans in the absence of threatened sanctions.

6

Conclusions

In recent years, expansive growth followed by increased scrutiny of the for-profit sector has led to the closure
of several large for-profit college chains and debates over new regulations that may further restrict federal
student aid at many other institutions in this sector. To shed light on how these changes might affect
aggregate college enrollment and the distribution of students across sectors, this study draws on historical
data from a time when policymakers implemented similarly restrictive regulations. We use these cohort
default rate regulations with a generalized difference-in-differences design to assess whether and how student
enrollment shifts within and across sectors when (primarily) for-profit institutions lose eligibility for federal
student aid due to federal sanctions.
We find that Pell Grant recipient enrollment falls in for-profit institutions that are threatened with the loss
of federal aid. Compared to previous research that examines all students (Darolia 2013), the magnitude of
our results suggests that the enrollment of vulnerable students — recipients of the means-tested Pell Grant
— is more strongly affected by federal aid loss. Further extending the literature, our results reveal that
when a for-profit college is sanctioned, enrollment in other local competitor for-profit colleges also declines.
Archival news analysis and analysis by field suggests that — much like today — the whole sector suffers
the reputational impacts of federal sanctions placed on individual institutions. While the enrollment decline
from an additional for-profit sanction is completely absorbed by the public sector, once negative enrollment
spillovers to unsanctioned local for-profit competitors are accounted for, we estimate that about 40 to 60
percent of all for-profit students deterred from going to college in the sector shift to public community
colleges. On net, we find evidence that the threatened sanction of a for-profit institution reduces aggregate
enrollment in a local market by about 3 percent.
Overall, our results suggest several important implications for the sub-baccalaureate market. First, it is
evident that most students in sanctioned for-profit institutions can and do find programs to fit their needs in
the public sector. Our results compliment the findings of Cellini (2009) and Goodman and Henriques (2015),
in that there appears to be strong competition for students across sectors at the two-year college level. Second,
capacity constraints at lower-cost competitor public institutions did not appear to be a concern in the time
period and context that we study, as public institutions were generally able to accommodate students who
switched sectors in response to federal sanctions. However, declining public support for community colleges
and concerns over capacity constraints in some states may suggest a weaker public sector response in more

26

recent years.29 On the other hand, the growth of distance learning in both public and for-profit institutions
will likely loosen capacity constraints and at the same time allow students to shift to a much broader set of
institutions outside of their local higher education market.
But is the shift of students from for-profit to public institutions and the loss of some enrollment in
the local market welfare enhancing? Our descriptive analysis reveals some suggestive evidence of improved
student outcomes in the form of lower student loan borrowing and defaults as students shifted into public
institutions in response to sanctions on for-profit colleges in the 1980s and 1990s. Added to this, the body of
literature on for-profit student outcomes indicates that students in for-profit institutions experience similar
(at best) and typically worse labor market outcomes than students in public institutions (e.g., Cellini and
Turner 2016 Cellini and Chaudhary 2014; Darolia et al. 2015; Deming et al. 2016; Cellini and Turner 2016;
Lang and Weinstein 2013) and have little earnings gain, if any, over individuals who do not attend college
at all (Cellini and Turner 2016). Considering both the private and social costs of a for-profit vs. public
education, Cellini (2012) finds that while direct public subsidies are higher for community colleges than for
for-profits, the cost to students of tuition and borrowing in the for-profit sector far outweigh the taxpayer
cost differential, as two-year public institutions charge about one-fifth the tuition of two-year for-profits
(U.S. Department of Education 2015). On net, the costs to students and taxpayers together are about
$15,600 lower in the public sector per student per year (Cellini 2012), suggesting that shifting students from
the for-profit to the public sector may indeed be welfare enhancing by both reducing costs and increasing
benefits.
Although we study an earlier time period, our results can inform current debates surrounding accountability in higher education and restrictions on access to federal student aid for low-performing for-profit colleges.
They suggest that restrictions on federal aid – such as those debated as part of the Gainful Employment
rule in recent years – would likely result in only small declines in overall college-going. A large number of
students would likely find programs to meet their needs in public institutions, yielding better outcomes for
students and taxpayers.

References
Apling, Richard. 1993. “Proprietary Schools and Their Students.” Journal of Higher Education, , (4): 379–416.
Armona, Luis, Rajashri Chakrabarti, and Michael F. Lovenheim. 2016. “How Does For-profit College
Attendance Affect Student Loans, Defaults and Earnings?” Working paper.
Bassok, Daphna, Maria Fitzpatrick, and Susanna Loeb. 2014. “Does State Preschool Crowd-Out Private
Provision? The Impact of Universal Preschool on the Childcare Sector in Oklahoma and Georgia.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 83: 18–33.
29 See

for example Bohn, Reyes and Johnson (2013) and Keller (2011) on capacity constraints in California community colleges.

27

Baum, Sandy, and Kathleen Payea. 2013. “Trends in Student Aid: 2013.” New York, NY: The College Board.
Bohn, Sarah, Belinda Reyes, and Hans Johnson. 2013. “The Impact of Budget Cuts on California’s Community
Colleges.” San Francisco, CA: Public Policy Institute of California.
Breneman, David W., Brian Pusser, and Sarah E. Turner, ed. 2006. Earnings from Learning: The Rise of
For-Profit Universities. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Carruthers, Celeste K., and Jilleah G. Welch. 2015. “Not Whether, but Where? Pell Grants and College
Choices.” Working paper.
Cellini, Stephanie, and Rajeev Darolia. 2017. “High Costs, Low Resources, and Missing Information: Explaining
Student Borrowing in the For-Profit Sector.” ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science.,
, (1): 92–112.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2009. “Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out: The Impact of Public Subsidies on
the Two-Year College Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 1–30.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2010. “Financial Aid and For-Profit Colleges: Does Aid Encourage Entry?” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 29(3): 526–552.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg. 2012. “For-Profit Higher Education: An Assessment of Costs and Benefits.” National
Tax Journal, 65(1): 153–180.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, and Claudia Goldin. 2014. “Does Federal Student Aid Raise Tuition? New Evidence
on For-Profit Colleges.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(4): 174–206.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, and Latika Chaudhary. 2014. “The Labor Market Returns to a For-Profit College
Education.” Economics of Education Review, 43: 125–140.
Cellini, Stephanie Riegg, and Nicholas Turner. 2016. “Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and
Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data.” NBER working paper 22287.
Chung, Anna. 2012. “The Choice of For-Profit College.” Economics of Education Review, 31(6): 1084–1101.
Darolia, Rajeev. 2013. “Integrity Versus Access? The Effect of Federal Financial Aid Availability on Postsecondary
Enrollment.” Journal of Public Economics, 106: 101–114.
Darolia, Rajeev, Cory Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, and Francisco Perez-Arce. 2015. “Do
Employers Prefer Workers Who Attended For-Profit Colleges? Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 34(4): 881–903.
Deming, David, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. “The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector:
Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 139–164.
Deming, David J., Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The
Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market: An Experimental Study.” American Economic Review,
106(3): 778–806.
Denning, Jeffrey T. 2016. “Born Under a Lucky Star: Financial Aid, College Completion, Labor Supply, and
Credit Constraints.” IZA Discussion Paper no. 10913.
Denning, Jeffrey T., Benjamin M. Marx, and Lesley J. Turner. 2017. “Borrowing Trouble? Human Capital
Investment with Opt-In Costs and Implications for the Effectiveness of Grant Aid.” NBER working paper 23860.
Dunlop, Erin. 2013. “What Do Stafford Loans Actually Buy You? The Effect of Stafford Loan Access on Community
College Students.” CALDER working paper 94.
Dynarski, Mark. 1991. “Analysis of Factors Related to Default.” Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research.
Epple, Dennis, David Figlio, and Richard Romano. 2004. “Competition between Private and Public Schools:
Testing Stratification and Pricing Predictions.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(7–8): 1215–1245.
Fain, Paul. 2014a. “Corinthian’s Cloudy Future.” Inside Higher Ed, June 20.

28

Fain, Paul. 2014b. “Nowhere to Go.” Inside Higher Ed, May 27.
Fain, Paul. 2018. “Gainful-Employment Rule Without Sanctions?” Inside Higher Ed.
Fraas, Charlotte J. 1989. “The U.S. Department of Education’s Student Loan Default Reduction Initiative: Background and Analysis.” Washington, D.C: Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service.
Gilpin, Gregory, Joseph Saunders, and Christiana Stoddard. 2015. “Why Has For-Profit Colleges Share of
Higher Education Expanded So Rapidly?” Economics of Education Review, 53–63.
Gleason, Stephanie, and Josh Mitchell. 2014. “Corinthian Colleges Warns of Possible Shutdown.” Wall Street
Journal, June 19.
Goodman, Sarena F., and Alice M. Henriques. 2015. “The Effect of Shocks to College Revenues on For-Profit
Enrollment: Spillover from the Public Sector.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-025. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Hoxby, Caroline M., and Christopher Avery. 2004. “Do and Should Financial Aid Decisions Affect Students’
College Choices?” In College Choices: The New Economics of Choosing, Attending, and Completing College. , ed.
Caroline M. Hoxby. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Jacob, Brian, Brian McCall, and Kevin Stange. forthcoming. “College as Country Club: Do Colleges Cater
to Students’ Preferences for Consumption?” Journal of Labor Economics.
Kane, Thomas J. 1995. “Rising Public College Tuition and College Entry: How Well Do Public Subsidies Promote
Access to College?” NBER working paper 5164.
Keller, Josh. 2011. “Facing New Cuts, California’s Colleges Are Shrinking Their Enrollments.” Chronicle of Higher
Education, January 13.
Kinser, Kevin. 2007. “Dimensions of Corporate Ownership in For-Profit Higher Education.” Review of Higher
Education, 30(3): 217–245.
Laband, David N., and Bernard F. Lentz. 2004. “Do Costs Differ Between For-Profit and Not-for-Profit Producers of Higher Education?” Research in Higher Education, 45(4): 429–441.
Lang, Kevin, and Russell Weinstein. 2013. “The Wage Effects of Not-for-profit and For-profit Certifications:
Better Data, Somewhat Different Results.” Labour Economics, 24(C): 230–243.
Lechuga, Vicente M. 2008. “Assessment, Knowledge, and Customer Service: Contextualizing Faculty Work at
For-Profit Colleges and Universities.” Review of Higher Education, 31(3): 287–307.
Leslie, Larry L., and Paul T. Brinkman. 1987. “Student Price Response in Higher Education: The Student
Demand Studies.” Journal of Higher Education, 58(2): 181–204.
Long, Bridget Terry. 2004. “How Have College Decisions Changed Over Time? An Application of the Conditional
Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2): 271–296.
Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2017. “Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on Borrowing
and Educational Attainment.” NBER working paper 24060.
Marx, Benjamin M., and Lesley J. Turner. 2018. “Borrowing Trouble? Human Capital Investment with OptIn Costs and Implications for the Effectiveness of Grant Aid.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
10(2): 163–201.
Mitchell, Josh, and Alan Zibel. 2014. “For-Profit Colleges Face Test From Washington.” Wall Street Journal,
June 20.
Morgan, Babette. 1991. “Vatterot College Taking Over Draughon.” St. Louis Post Dispatch, 6B.
Peltzman, Sam. 1973. “The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private Expenditures: The Case of Higher
Education.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(1): 1–27.
Rosenbaum, James E., Regina Deil-Amien, and Ann E. Person. 2006. After Admission: From College Access
to College Success. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation Press.

29

Rubin, Rachel B. 2011. “The Pell and the Poor: A Regression-Discontinuity Analysis of On-Time College Enrollment.” Research in Higher Education, 52(7): 675–692.
Seftor, Neil S., and Sarah E. Turner. 2002. “Back to School: Federal Student Aid Policy and Adult College
Enrollment.” Journal of Human Resources, 37(2): 336–352.
Singell, Larry D., and Joe A. Stone. 2007. “For Whom the Pell Tolls: The Response of University Tuition to
Federal Grants-in-Aid.” Economics of Education Review, 26(3): 285–295.
Smith, Ashley A. 2016. “U.S. Cuts Off ITT Tech.” Inside Higher Ed, August 26.
Stratford, Michael. 2015. “Corinthian Closes for Good.” Inside Higher Ed, April 27.
Tierney, William G., and Guilbert C. Hentschke. 2007. New Players, Different Game: Understanding the Rise
of For-Profit Colleges and Universities. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Turner, Lesley J. 2014. “The Road to Pell Is Paved with Good Intentions: The Economic Incidence of Federal
Student Grant Aid.” Working paper.
Turner, Nicholas. 2012. “Who Benefits from Student Aid? The Economic Incidence of Tax-Based Federal Student
Aid.” Economics of Education Review, 31(4): 463–481.
U.S. Department of Education. 2010. “Program Integrity: Gainful Employment.” 75 Fed. Reg. 142 (July 26 2010)
Proposed Rules.
U.S. Department of Education. 2015. “Digest of Education Statistics: 2014.” Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics.
U.S. Department of Education. 2016. “Digest of Education Statistics: 2015.” Washington, DC: National Center
for Education Statistics.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1988. “Defaulted Student Loans: Preliminary Analysis of Student Loan Borrowers and Defaulters.” Briefing Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Postsecondary Education, Committee
on Education and Labor, House of Representatives Publication No. HRD-88-112BR.
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2010. “For-Profit Colleges: Undercover Testing Finds Colleges Encouraged Fraud and Engaged in Deceptive and Questionable Marketing Practices.” Publication No. GA-10-948T.
U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions. 2010. “For Profit Higher Education:
The Failure to Safeguard the Federal Investment and Ensure Student Success.” U.S. Senate Committee on Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions.
Wiederspan, Mark. 2016. “Denying Loan Access: The Student-Level Consequences When Community Colleges
Opt Out of the Stafford Loan Program.” Economics of Education Review, 51: 79–96.

30

Figures and Tables

600
400
200
0

Number Sanctioned

800

Figure 1: Sanctions by Sector and Year

1990

1995

2000
Calendar Year

Public

2005

Nonprofit

2010

For-profit

Source: Sanction administrative data. Notes: Sample includes all two- and four-year institutions with federal borrowers entering
repayment. Dark bars represent two-year institutions, light bars represent four-year institutions.

.6
.5
.4
.3
.2

12

10

20

08

20

06

20

04

20

02

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

78

19

76

19

19

19

74

0

.1

Share of Pell Recipients

.7

.8

Figure 2: The Distribution of Pell Grant Recipients across Sectors by Year

Year
Public

Nonprofit

For-profit

Source: Pell Grant administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year institutions with Pell Grant enrollment in
the specified academic year. The short-dashed dark blue line represents the share of Pell Grant recipients enrolled in public
institutions, the long-dashed light blue line represents the share of Pell Grant recipients attending for-profit institutions, and
the long-dashed-dotted green line represents the share of Pell Grant recipients attending nonprofit institutions.

31

.3
.2

12

10

20

08

20

06

20

04

20

02

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

78

19

76

19

19

19

74

0

.1

Share of Pell Recipients

.4

.5

Figure 3: The Distribution of Pell Grant Recipients across Sectors by Year and Level

Year
Public

For-profit

Source: Pell Grant administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year public and for-profit institutions with
Pell Grant enrollment in the specified academic year. Thick lines represent two-year institutions (including less than two-year
institutions), and thin lines represent four-year institutions. Nonprofit institutions’ share is omitted.

32

Figure 4: Borrowers and CDRs by Sector and Year
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0

Share of Borrowers Entering Repayment

A. Federal borrowers

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Year

Public

2004

2006

Nonprofit

2008

2010

For-profit

.2
.15
.1
0

.05

Two-Year CDR

.25

.3

B. Cohort Default Rates

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

Year

Public

Nonprofit

2004

2006

2008

2010

For-profit

Source: CDR administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year institutions with CDR data. Panel A displays
the share of federal borrowers entering repayment in the specified cohort-year by sector. Panel B displays the ratio of total
federal borrowers who defaulted within two years of entering repayment to the total number of federal borrowers who entered
repayment in the specified cohort-year.

33

20
10
0
-10
-40

-30

-20

Point estimate, 95% CI

30

40

50

Figure 5: Effect of Sanctioned Competitor Institutions on Pell Enrollment
A. Competitor ×# Sanctioned Publics

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

6

8

10

Point estimate, 95% CI

-60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

B. Competitor ×# Sanctioned Nonprofits

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

6

8

10

0
-20

-10

Point estimate, 95% CI

10

20

C. Competitor × # Sanctioned For-profits

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

6

8

10

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample is limited to two-year institutions with a
Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. Sample is limited to institutions in counties with fewer than 50
institutions (on average, across years). Closed institution enrollment is set to zero. Point estimates and 95 percent confidence
intervals from a regression of Pell Grant recipient enrollment on the number of public, nonprofit, and for-profit competitors
in the local higher education market that received a sanction in the sanction-year, interacted with years before/after sanction
34also include indicators for sanction receipt by sector interacted
receipt (with t − 1 serving as the omitted category). Regressions
by years before/after sanction receipt, institution by sanction-year fixed effects, year fixed effects, years before/after sanction
receipt fixed effects, and sector and county linear trends. See Section 3 for additional details.

Table 1: Characteristics of Institutions by Sector and Sanction Receipt
(1) Public

(2) Nonprofit

(3) For-profit

Average Pell Grant recipient enrollment
Pre-sanction (t - 5 to t - 1)
Post-sanction (t = 0 to t + 5)

642
802

65
65

110
89

Share of Pell recipients (t - 1)

0.74

0.03

0.24

14,673

5,410

33,182

Average Pell Grant recipient enrollment
Pre-sanction (t - 5 to t - 1)
Post-sanction (t = 0 to t + 5)

459
537

159
118

250
139

Share of Pell recipients (t - 1)

0.20

0.01

0.79

Observations (school by sanction year)

280

49

2,085

A. All institutions in sector

Observations (school by sanction year)
B. Sanctioned institutions in sector

C. Unsanctioned competitor of sanctioned public institution
Average Pell Grant recipient enrollment
Pre-sanction (t - 5 to t - 1)
Post-sanction (t = 0 to t + 5)

958
1252

51
65

124
76

Share of Pell recipients (t - 1)

0.71

0.02

0.27

Observations (school by sanction year)

300

167

1,379

D. Unsanctioned competitor of sanctioned nonprofit institution
Average Pell Grant recipient enrollment
Pre-sanction (t - 5 to t - 1)
Post-sanction (t = 0 to t + 5)

911
1276

55
64

103
81

Share of Pell recipients (t - 1)

0.65

0.05

0.31

65

78

398

Observations (school by sanction year)

E. Unsanctioned competitor of sanctioned for-profit institution
Average Pell Grant recipient enrollment
Pre-sanction (t - 5 to t - 1)
Post-sanction (t = 0 to t + 5)

923
1231

52
51

135
97

Share of Pell recipients (t - 1)

0.67

0.02

0.31

Observations (school by sanction year)

2,205

1,374

9,730

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two-year institutions participating
in Title IV programs between 1986 and 2005. Competitor institutions are other two-year institutions in the local higher
education market (county).

35

Table 2: The Impact of Sanctions on Enrollment in Sanctioned and Competitor Institutions
Sanctioned sector:

1. Public

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

-58
(37)
-2
(6)

-37
(27)
30
(10)**

-98
(11)**
-3
(2)

13.6

17.4

Test of equality
(p -value)

A. 5-year pre-/post-sanction window
Post x Threatened sanction
Post x # competitors sanctioned

Number of institutions | threatened sanction
Competitors
9.5
Predicted ∆ county enrollment

-74
(56)

366
(131)**

-154
(40)**

% change (rel to baseline)

-3%

13%

-3%

Counties

1,364

Institutions

5,845

Observations

0.083
0.005

585,915

B. 10-year pre-/post-sanction window
Post x Threatened sanction
Post x # competitors sanctioned

-138
(62)*
14
(8)

-35
(31)
14
(13)

-76
(12)**
-2
(2)

0.258
0.111

Number of institutions | threatened sanction
Predicted ∆ county enrollment

-9
(54)

149
(157)

-118
(35)**

% change (rel to baseline)

-0.3%

5%

-3%

Counties

1,364

Institutions

5,845

Observations

1,118,565

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample is limited to two-year institutions with a
Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. Institutions in counties with more than 50 institutions (on
average, across years) are excluded. Closed institution enrollment is set to zero. Estimates from a regression of Pell Grant
recipient enrollment on whether the institution received a sanction in the sanction year, interacted with post-sanction receipt
and sector, number of public, nonprofit, and for-profit competitor institutions that received sanctions in the sanction year,
interacted with post-sanction receipt, institution by sanction-year fixed effects, year fixed effects, years since sanction fixed
effects, and sector and county linear trends. See Section 3 for additional details. Robust standard errors clustered by county in
parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

36

Table 3: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Sanctions on Enrollment by Competitor Sector
Sanctioned sector:

1. Public

Test of equality
(p -value)

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

1.4
1.9
10.2

2.3
1.5
13.6

-36
(26)

-102
(11)**

0.029

9
(32)
18
(14)
-8
(10)

116
(113)
30
(14)*
20
(14)

51
(13)**
-1
(3)
-13
(3)**

0.450

0.138

0.730

0.741

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
additional sanction

-73
(53)

391
(132)**

-161
(36)**

% change (rel to baseline)

-3%

14%

-3%

A. Number of institutions | threatened sanction
Public competitor
1.4
NP competitor
0.8
FP competitor
7.3
B. 5-year pre-/post-sanction window
Post x Threatened sanction

-44
(36)
Post x # competitors with threatened sanction
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit
Test of equality (p- value)

0.093
0.091

585,915

Observations
C. 10-year pre-/post-sanction window
Post x Threatened sanction

-118
(62)+
Post x # competitors with threatened sanction

-36
(30)

-81
(12)**

0.281

65
(58)
19
(16)
1
(14)

56
(163)
31
(20)
9
(15)

72
(19)**
-5
(5)
-15
(4)**

0.991

0.422

0.741

0.741

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
additional sanction

-7
(59)

198
(144)

-128
(32)**

% change (rel to baseline)

-0.3%

7%

-3%

x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit
Test of equality (p- value)

Observations

0.181
0.263

1,118,565

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample is limited to two-year institutions with
a Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. Institutions in counties with more than 50 institutions
(on average, across years) are excluded. Closed institution enrollment is set to zero. Estimates from a regression of Pell
Grant recipient enrollment on whether the institution received a sanction in the sanction year, interacted with post-sanction
receipt and sector, number of public, nonprofit, and for-profit competitor institutions that received sanctions in the sanction
year, interacted with post-sanction receipt and sector, institution by sanction-year fixed effects, year fixed effects, years since
sanction fixed effects, and sector and county linear trends. See Section 3 for additional details. Robust standard errors clustered
by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

37

Table 4: The Impact of Sanctions and the Size of the Population Exposed to Sanctions on ln(Enrollment)
1. Public

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

Test of equality
(p -value)

-0.109
(0.078)

-0.651
(0.400)

-0.719
(0.065)**

<0.001

Post x ln(recpients exposed to sanctions in sector)
x Public
-0.010
(0.019)

0.0003
(0.025)

0.043
(0.008)**

0.018

Sanctioned sector:
Post x Threatened sanction

x Nonprofit

-0.008
(0.017)

0.040
(0.020)*

0.026
(0.012)*

0.136

x For-profit

-0.014
(0.011)

0.028
(0.019)

-0.021
(0.006)**

0.084

0.962

0.571

<0.001

Test of equality (p- value)

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample. Estimates from a regression
of ln (enrollment + 1) on whether the institution received a sanction in the sanction year, interacted with post-sanction receipt
and sector, ln (enrollment + 1) within public, nonprofit, and for-profit sanctioned institutions in the market in the year prior
to sanction receipt, interacted with post-sanction receipt and sector, institution by sanction-year fixed effects, year fixed effects,
years since sanction fixed effects, and sector and county linear trends. and specification description. Robust standard errors
clustered by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

38

Table 5: Robustness of the Impact of Sanctions on Institutions and Competitors:
Heterogeneity by County Size
(1) 1st
quartile

(2) 2nd
quartile

(3) 3rd
quartile

(4) 4th
quartile

(5) Large
markets

-21
(10)*
x Nonprofit
-27
(27)
x For-profit
-56
(21)**
[0.321]
Post x # public competitors sanctioned
x Public
-112
(94)
x Nonprofit
73
(32)*
x For-profit
45
(15)**
[0.169]
Post x # NP competitors sanctioned
x Public
-21
(41)
x Nonprofit
19
(11)+
x For-profit
68
(42)
[0.293]
Post x # FP competitors sanctioned
x Public
104
(47)*
x Nonprofit
-295
(247)
x For-profit
-9
(16)
[0.080]

-51
(98)
-32
(61)
-98
(19)**
[0.551]

-146
(70)*
-123
(65)+
-91
(20)**
[0.691]

-62
(105)
35
(28)
-109
(20)**
[<0.001]

-310
(203)
-158
(89)+
-116
(46)*
[0.602]

95
(77)
109
(64)+
-14
(26)
[0.106]

-65
(28)*
23
(25)
11
(20)
[0.076]

34
(64)
28
(27)
-8
(12)
[0.405]

-1
(60)
-25
(25)
6
(12)
[0.505]

63
(65)
20
(19)
-64
(49)
[0.274]

631
(400)
25
(30)
-26
(29)
[0.187]

-76
(84)
47
(24)+
50
(15)**
[0.338]

-132
(209)
-11
(21)
23
(20)
[0.262]

104
(26)**
-33
(18)+
-42
(15)**
[<0.001]

53
(20)**
-2
(7)
-8
(4)+
[0.013]

30
(13)*
5
(3)
-8
(3)**
[<0.001]

17
(8)*
2
(2)
-4
(1)**
[<0.001]

-23
(20)

-138
(59)*

-63
(56)

-202
(77)**

-336
(108)**

-4%
956
1,446
149,116

-7%
276
1,594
159,423

-1%
93
1,482
146,410

-2%
42
1,406
138,908

-1%
12
1,233
120,780

Post x Threatened sanction
x Public

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
adtl for-profit sanctioned
% change (rel to baseline)
Counties
Institutions
Observations

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
Quartiles are defined in terms of the baseline (1990) number of schools in a given county: 1st quartile = <4 schools, 2nd quartile
= 4-10 schools, 3rd quartile = 11 - 24 schools, 4th quartile = 25-58 schools. Large markets are those that are dropped from
main sample (>50 schools per year on average. Brackets contain p-values from a test of the equality of effects of sanctions or
competitor sanctions across sectors. Robust standard errors clustered by institution in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +
p<0.1.

39

Table 6: Robustness of the Impact of Sanctions on Institutions and Competitors: County-Linear Trends
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-55
(41)
-35
(20)+
-88
(11)**
[0.420]

-44
(36)
-36
(26)
-102
(11)**
[0.138]

-60
(28)*
-75
(57)
-81
(11)**
[0.037]

-60
(28)*
-75
(57)
-75
(11)**
[0.033]

20
(40)
15
(11)
-2
(10)
[0.607]

9
(32)
18
(14)
-8
(10)
[0.730]

7
(25)
51
(26)*
-10
(7)
[0.039]

7
(25)
51
(26)*
-11
(6)+
[0.045]

125
(118)
10
(14)
11
(9)
[<0.001]

116
(113)
30
(14)*
20
(14)
[<0.001]

136
(98)
96
(32)**
12
(11)
[0.005]

136
(98)
96
(32)**
12
(12)
[0.005]

71
(15)**
3
(1)*
-8
(2)**
[0.495]
-36
(42)
-1%

51
(13)**
-1
(3)
-13
(3)**
[0.450]
-161
(36)**
-3%

23
(9)**
-18
(11)
-7
(2)**
[0.414]
-153
(39)**
-3%

23
(9)**
-18
(11)
-7
(2)**
[0.415]
-148
(38)**
-3%

Post x Threatened sanction
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

Post x # public competitors sanctioned
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

Post x # NP competitors sanctioned
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

Post x # FP competitors sanctioned
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
adtl for-profit sanctioned
% change (rel to baseline)

X

County linear trends
County x for-profit trends

X

County x for-profit x industry trends

X

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative
data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
0.409090909
Brackets contain p-values from a test of the equality
of effects of sanctions or competitor sanctions across sectors.
0.590909091

40

Table 7: The Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment: Heterogeneity by Chain Status
Sanctioned sector:

For-profit

Post x Threatened sanction

-102
(11)**

Post x # competitors with threatened sanction
x Public

51
(13)**

x For-profit
x Same chain as sanctioned competitor(s)

-1
(20)

% change (rel. to baseline)

-2%

x Different chain

-13
(3)**

% change (rel. to baseline)

-11%

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
See Appendix A.3 for description of the classification of for-profit chains. Estimated main effects of public and nonprofit
sanctions, spillover effects due to public and non-profit sanctions, and spillovers from sanctioned for-profits with respect to
nonprofit enrollment are not reported. Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +
p<0.1.

Table 8: The Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment: Field of Study Analysis
3. Beauty FP

4. Comp/Bus
FP

5. Cul/Arts
FP

6. Mech/Eng
FP

Test of joint
sig. (p -val)

-0.657
(0.402)

-0.467
(0.069)**

-1.564
(0.201)**

-1.646
(0.435)**

-1.083
(0.297)**

<0.001

0.028
(0.013)*

-0.012
(0.022)

0.029
(0.009)**

0.025
(0.018)

0.016
(0.031)

0.028
(0.019)

<0.001

x Same industry

-0.013
(0.025)

0.021
(0.048)

-0.026
(0.013)*

-0.050
(0.038)

-0.290
(0.046)**

-0.221
(0.082)**

<0.001

x Different industry

-0.009
(0.012)

0.00004
(0.023)

-0.020
(0.014)

0.007
(0.014)

0.002
(0.020)

-0.006
(0.025)

0.724

[0.884]

[0.706]

[0.758]

[0.195]

[<0.001]

[0.008]

Sanctioned sector:
Post x Threatened sanction

1. General FP 2. Health FP
-0.895
(0.207)**

Post x ln(receipients exposed to sanction)
x Public
x For-profit

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
See Appendix A.3 for a description of the classification of for-profit industries. Robust standard errors clustered by county in
parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

41

Table 9: Correlations between Sanctions and the Number of Borrowers and Defaulters
Dependent variable =
Borrowers/defaulters in sector

(1) All

(2) Public

(3) Nonprofit

(4) For-profit

382

123

13

246

Public

-10
(14)

-3
(3)

34
(17)*

Nonprofit

14
(20)

-26
(8)**

-107
(113)

For-profit

14
(4)**

-0.2
(0.3)

-59
(8)**

18,466

18,466

18,466

18,466

139

22

3

113

Public

-5
(2)*

-1
(1)

12
(7)+

Nonprofit

1
(3)

-10
(2)**

-67
(62)

For-profit

0.3
(0.5)

-0.2
(0.1)*

-33
(4)**

18,466

18,466

18,466

A. Borrowers
Baseline number (1992)
Number of sanctioned schools (t-2 )
All sectors

Observations

-44
(10)**

B. Defaulters
Baseline number (1992)
Number of sanctioned schools (t-2 )
All sectors

Observations

-31
(4)**

18,466

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample includes counties with two-year institutions
participating in Title IV that enrolled Pell Grant recipients at any point between 1988 and 2005. Ordinary least squares
estimates of the impact of an additional two-year institution in the specified sector ever being under threat of a sanction at
t − 2. Panel A dependent variable is the total number of federal borrowers formerly enrolled in a two-year institution entering
repayment in a county and year in the specified sector, 1992–2005. Panel B dependent variable is the total number of federal
borrowers formerly enrolled in a two-year institution entering repayment in a county and year in the specified sector who
defaulted on their loans within two years, 1992–2005. Clustered standard errors by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05,
+ p<0.1. Regressions also include county and year fixed effects.

42

A
A.1

Data Appendix
Administrative data sets

1. Data on cohort default rates (CDR) for the academic years 1992 through 2009. Default rates are
calculated for the cohort that has been in repayment for two fiscal years (e.g., the 1992 default rate
applies to the cohort of borrowers that entered repayment in FY 1990). There is one original file for
every year, which contains information on the institution (name, address, type) and the default rates
for the three preceding years. We use the most updated information on default rates. For example,
the default rate corresponding to the year 2001 appears in the 2001, 2002, and 2003 original files and
we use the information that appears in the 2003 file.
2. Data on sanctions due to CDR violations for the cohort years (academic years) 1989 (1991)
through 2008 (2010). There is one observation per institution-cohort year for the set of institutions
that had at least one borrower entering repayment in the cohort year. This data includes the sanction
trigger and penalty (e.g., Table C.1) by institution and cohort year.
3. Data on Pell Grant recipients and total amount disbursed per institution and year for the academic
years 1974 through 2012. There is one original file for every year and each file contains information on
the institution’s location, number of recipients, and total amount disbursed.
4. Postsecondary Education Participants System (PEPS) data includes information pertaining
to an institution’s location, sector, participation in Title IV programs, closure date (if participating in
Title IV programs at the time of closure), and provides a crosswalk between earlier institution identifiers
(“Pell IDs”) and modern institution identifiers (“OPEIDs”). These data cover all institutions that ever
participated in Title IV.
5. Postsecondary Career School Survey (PCSS) data was fielded by ED for the purpose of collecting information on postsecondary institutions offering vocational education programs in 1976, 1978,
1980, and 1981. It contains information on location, sector, and programs offered by schools in this
sector. See https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/2382 for additional details.

A.2

Analysis data set construction

We first created the single file containing the annual CDR information for all institutions, covering academic
years 1992-2010, and a single file containing the annual information on sanctions due to CDR violations for
all institutions, covering academic years 1991-2010. Schools are identified by their federal OPEIDS.

43

We took several steps to clean and harmonize the Pell Grant data across years. First, prior to 2000,
school are identified by their “Pell ID”, which in many, but not all cases, is the same as the OPEID. We use
the crosswalk between pre-2000 school identifiers (“Pell ID”) and current school identifiers (OPEID) from
the PEPS data to synchronize school identifiers across years and create a single file containing the Pell Grant
recipient information for all institutions between 1974 and 2012. Despite the fact that we are able to match
most schools over time, there are a small number of cases in which we cannot match a school’s Pell ID to
its OPEID or the OPEID changes between two consecutive years. We recode these cases to have a single
OPEID when between the two years in which the OPEIDS differ, institutional records show the same name
and address.
Because the Pell Grant administrative data does not provide separate records for Title IV branch campuses in the early years of the program, we combine recipients from branch and main campuses under the
main campus OPEID in years in which this information is available.30 There are also instances in which recipients from separate institutions within a larger system are combined and reported under only one OPEID
(that in other years refers to a specific institution). This primarily occurs in the public sector (e.g., the
Indiana Ivy Tech community college system, which includes 14 separate Title IV institutions, reports all
recipients under one OPEID in some years), but there are two large for-profit chains that suffer from this
issue (ITT Tech and DeVry). To deal with the fact that this variation in reporting leads to large changes
in enrollment that are unrelated to actual enrollment changes, we impute recipients for locations in years in
which Title IV enrollment is not separately reported. We use the most recent year in which recipients are
reported for specific institutions and calculate the share of all recipients contained within each institution
relative to the total number of recipients summed over the set of schools that are reported under a single
OPEID in other years. Then, in years in which recipients are not reported for separate institutions, we
allocate the total number of recipients reported under the single OPEID based on these baseline shares.
At most, less than 3 percent of schools have imputed recipients in a given year. Finally, there are cases
in which a given institution will have two separate OPEIDS with the same name and location in a given
year. These are primarily small programs offered within hospitals that have separate OPEIDS for nursing
and other medical technology fields in early years of the Pell Grant data. We collapse duplicate records that
have the same address and name into a single observation, summing across Pell Grant recipients. We add
closure dates and fill in missing addresses and other information using PEPS data.
We restrict our sample to include all schools with a record in either the Pell Grant administrative data
30 Note that a Title IV branch campus is a separate location of an institution that is covered under the main institution’s
program participation agreement with ED. These are generally much smaller sites that serve a specific purpose or population
(e.g., incarcerated adults, high school students, etc.). Title IV branch campuses are distinct from community college systems or
for-profit chain that contain multiple institutions because in such cases, each location will have its own program participation
agreement and a unique OPEID.

44

or the CDR administrative data in at least one year between 1981 and 2010 (which provides a window
of 10 years before the first sanctions and after the last sanctions). We classify schools by control (public,
nonprofit, for-profit) and level (2-year, 4-year) using the Pell, CDR, and PEPS administrative data. Of
10,089 institutions in the sample, 51 remain unclassified. This is because the Pell Grant data does not have
a reliable measure of institutional sector before 1983. We use data from the PCSS to determine the sector
of a subset of these institutions. Only some schools in the PCSS have OPEIDS, and some schools without
OPEIDS are present in the main data set. In these cases, we match records based on institution name and
location. We drop the remaining 13 schools not assigned to a sector from our sample. None of these schools
contain Pell Grant recipients or after 1982 have CDR records in any year. We assume that the 56 schools
without any information on degrees granted are two-year institutions.
A small number of institutions are listed as belonging to different sectors over time. In some cases, this
may represent true transitions between nonprofit and for-profit status. However, institutions that are listed
as public schools in most years are misclassified with the same frequency. When there are discrepancies in a
given institution’s reported sector, we use the modal value of this variable. Less than 1 percent of institutions
are affected.
Institutions are assigned to counties by zip codes. Specifically, we link institutions to county Federal
Information Processing Standard (FIPS) codes using a zip code–FIPS code crosswalk. Since our sample
spans three decades, we use the 2010 county definitions to ensure that institutions are consistently assigned
to local markets. FIPS codes were manually entered for the 32 institutions that were had invalid or missing
zip codes. We are unable to match four small institutions in our sample to a county and thus, we drop these
schools. None of these schools have Pell Grant recipient enrollment after 1991. In the years in which these
schools were serving Pell Grant recipients, total enrollment ranged from 3 to 49 students.

A.3

Chains coding and descriptive statistics

Chains are identified through institution names in 1990 - the year prior to the release of the first round of
sanctions. We focus on this year because it should most accurately predict an institution’s name during the
years in which sanctions were applied but does not suffer from the potentially endogenous response on the
part of sanctioned institutions to join, leave, or form a chain. Unfortunately, there is not a reliable indicator
for whether an institution belongs to a chain during the period we examine. We assume that two or more
institutions belong to a chain if they have the same name, allowing for variation in the spelling of common
words (e.g., Sch versus School, Tech versus Technology) and taking into account the fact that school names
that include many very common words (e.g., American Beauty College) will not represent two locations of

45

the same chain unless other criteria are met (e.g., all instances are within the same state or group of adjoined
states).
In 1990, we estimate that 32 percent of two-year for-profit institutions (containing 44 percent of Pell
Grant recipients enrolled in the two-year for-profit sector) belonged to a chain that had at least two schools.
The average for-profit chains had 4 locations with a total of 726 Pell Grant recipients enrolled in 1990. In
contrast, the average single-location for-profit enrolled 118 Pell Grant recipients.
Almost half of all chains (45 percent) contained only two institutions, while the largest chain had 35
locations. We classify chains by whether they had locations in multiple states. While only 37 percent of
two-year for-profit chains were multi-state, the schools belonging to these chains contained 73 percent of
all Pell Grant recipients enrolled in a for-profit chain. Single-state chains had an average of 3 locations
containing a total of 355 recipients while multi-state chains contained 6 schools enrolling 1674 students, on
average.

A.4

Field of study coding and descriptive statistics

Unfortunately, there is not reliable information available on programs offered by most for-profit institutions
during the 1980s and 1990s. While the IPEDS collects information on degrees and credentials received by CIP
code, as discussed above, many for-profits schools are absent from the IPEDS during the period of interest.
We assign for-profit institutions to six mutually exclusive field of study categories based on a school’s name.
Because listed names of institutions change over time, especially in the for-profit sector, and because the
decision of what programs to offer could be endogenous to sanction receipt, we classify institutions based on
their name in 1990, the year prior to the first sanctions were released.
Beauty/cosmetology for-profit schools are those with any of the following terms in their names: aesthetic, barber, beaut, bty, coiffures, cosm, comtlgy, culture, dermaogic, electrology, esthetics, hair, hrdrsng,
"hr ds", nail, salon, skin, spa, style, styling, vogue. We also include schools in the Wilfred, Aveda, and Paul
Mitchell chains as these institutions offered only cosmetology programs.
Health for-profit institutions are those that are not classified as beauty schools and have any of the
following terms in their names: acupuncture, anesth, body, cancer, chiropractic, counseling, cyotech, dental,
denturist, diagnostic, dietetic, doctor, drug, fitness, eeg, electrolysis, heal, histotech, histologic, hlth, holistic,
hosp, laboratory, massage, med, midwifery, muscle, myomassology, myotherapy, nurse, nursing, nrsg, nrs,
nutrition, ofradio, oncology, opthalmology, optometry, optician, paramed, pedodontic, pharmacy, physician,
psycholgy, radiologic, rad-tech, reserve, resp, shiatsu, sonograph, surgical, therap, ultrasoundm, xray, x-ray.
Institutions that would be classified as both beauty and health related based on their names are placed in

46

the beauty category.
Computing, business, and business technology focused for-profits are those that are not classified as
health or beauty and have names containing any of the following terms: accounting, accountancy, banking,
business, buisness, busn, "bus clg", commerce, commercial, comput, cmptr, court, data, electology, fiber,
financial, law, legal, management, network, office, paraprof, processing, program, "sch of bus", secretar,
steno, software, technolog, "word process", workforce. Schools that are classified as both computing and
health are placed in the health category.
Hospitality, culinary, arts, and personal service oriented for-profits are those that are not classified
as health, computing, or beauty and have with any of the following terms as part of their names: art, acting,
actor, animal, audio, baking, ballet, bartend, brdcst, broadcast, canine, casino, chauffeurs, cinema, conservatory, cooking, creative, culinary, culture, cuisine, dance, dealing, dealer, design, drama, draft, drawing,
dog, equestrian, film, fash, floral, food, funeral, gaming, golf, horse, hospitality, hotel, jewelry, k-9, luthiary,
modeling, mortician, mortuary, motel, movement, music, nanny, painting, paper, pastry, pet, photo, piano,
printing, recording, reporting, restaurant, restoration, scriptwriting, sewing, sound, studio, symphony, tailor,
taxidermy, theater, theatre, television, travel, tv, upholstery, video.
Mechanical, trades, engineering, and transportation focused for-profits are those that are not
classified as beauty, health, computing, or hospitality focused schools and have any of the following terms
in their names: aero, airline, appliance, auto, aviation, boat, construction, diamond, diesel, drafting, driver,
driving, electron, engineer, flght, flight, gunsmith, heating, indus, locksmith, mechanic, microwave, motorcycle, seaboard, refrigeration, repair, tractor, trailer, transport, transmission, truck, vehicle, wastewater,
watch, weld, yacht.
We classify schools that do not fall into one of the five categories as general for-profits. This category
includes institutions that offer many different programs (that may align with the above categories) and
specialized institutions for which we were not able to determine the types of programs offered from the
school’s name.

47

Table A.1: Descriptive statistics by field
Baseline (1990)

General
Beauty, cosm.
Culinary, arts, hosp.

N

Av enrollment

Sanctioned*
N

Av enrollment

Unsanctioned FP comp* of
sanctioned FP in any industry
N

Av enrollment

Unsanctioned FP comp* of
sanctioned FP in same industry
N

Av enrollment

Unsanctioned pub comp* of
sanctioned FP in industry:
N

Av enrollment
1,188

690

284

427

485

2,641

161

1,196

169

774

1,767

46

1,287

118

4,078

46

2,981

42

1,635

1,107

125

91

30

298

472

59

26

162

65

1,451

Health

144

166

50

519

684

113

52

185

106

1,312

Business, computing

449

281

224

560

1,485

215

365

169

452

1,122

Mech., transp., engin.

109

199

67

503

370

183

43

135

131

983

Notes: See section A.4 for description of industry categories and classification. * Includes multiple obs of same school if sanctioned more than once or competitor sanctioned
more than once; average enrollment is in t − 1.

48

A.5

IPEDS data set construction

We used data from the annual fall enrollment and institutional characteristics (IC) Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System IPEDS files to measure total undergraduate enrollment by sector, county, and year.
Institutions were allocated to counties using a crosswalk between county FIPS codes and institutions’ zip
codes and states. Information on institutional control and level (four-year, two-year, or less than two-year)
was used to allocate institutions to sectors. Fall enrollment was summed across all institutions in a sectoryear-county combination. Figure A.1 displays total fall undergraduate enrollment in IPEDS institutions
between 1988 and 2012 (solid line, right y-axis) as well as the distribution of IPEDS undergraduates across
sectors (left y-axis).

18
.6

16

.5

14

.4
.3

12

.2

10

12
20

06

04

02

08

20

20

20

20

98

96

94

92

00

20

20

19

19

19

19

90
19

19

88

0

10

.1

Share of Undergraduates

.7

Total Undergraduates (Millions)

.8

20

Figure A.1: IPEDS Undergraduate Enrollment by Sector

Year
Public
For-profit

Nonprofit
All undergraduates

Notes: Sample limited to counties with at least one Pell Grant recipient enrolled in a two-year institution (including less than
two-year institutions) between the 1988 and 2003 academic years. Fall undergraduate enrollment from IPEDS fall enrollment
files. Years represent academic years (e.g., 1988 = 1987–88 academic year).

A.6

Pre-2000 representation of for-profit institutions with Pell Grant recipients
in IPEDS

Theoretically, the IPEDS universe includes all institutions in a given year that participated in Title IV
programs. However, prior to 2001, the IPEDS data omits a large number of for-profit institutions that
show-up in administrative data as enrolling Pell Grant recipients. For example, the Digest of Education
Statistics reports 323 for-profit institutions in 1988 (U.S. Department of Education, 2015, Table 317.10)
while the Pell Grant administrative data includes 2,791 for-profit institutions with at least one Pell Grant
recipient enrolled in the same year. Some of these extra institutions may represent “branch campuses,”
which may be grouped with “parent campuses” in the IPEDS. However, the treatment of branch and parent

49

campuses cannot account for the discrepancy between for-profit enrollment reported in the IPEDS and Pell
Grant enrollment calculated from administrative data. As shown in Figure A.2, the number of Pell Grant
recipients enrolled in two-year for-profit institutions exceeded the total number of undergraduates these
institutions enrolled in 1988 by more than 300 percent.31 For-profit institutions that were sanctioned and/or
closed in the early 1990s are the most likely to be missing from the IPEDS.
Public and nonprofit institutions that participated in Title IV programs in the 1980s and 1990s appear
to be better represented in the IPEDS. The number of Pell Grant recipients enrolled in two-year institutions
in these sectors is always less than total undergraduate enrollment. The number of institutions in the
IPEDS closely matches the number of institutions in the Pell Grant administrative data. For example,
in 1988, the IPEDS data reports 1,673 nonprofit institutions and 1,591 public institutions, while the Pell
Grant administrative data contain 1,752 nonprofits and 1,825 public institutions. Due to the large amount
of measurement error in the IPEDS data relating to for-profit institutions, we limit our analyses that use
IPEDS data to focus on public and nonprofit institutions.

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0

Ratio: Pell Grant recipients to UG enrollment

Figure A.2: Pell Grant Enrollment as a Percentage of Total IPEDS Enrollment by Sector:
Two-Year Institutions

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

Year

Public

Nonprofit

1998

2000

2002

For-profit

Notes: Sample limited to counties with at least one Pell Grant recipient enrolled in a two-year institution (including less than
two-year institutions) between 1988 and 2003. Undergraduate enrollment from IPEDS fall enrollment files.

31 Results are quite similar when the sample is expanded to include four-year institutions. This is because very few for-profit
institutions in the 1980s and 1990s were classified as four-years.

50

B

Closures

To further investigate the correlation between federal sanctions and changes in institution closure rates, we
estimate a descriptive hazard model:

Pr (closedjt = 1|closedjt−1 = 0) =

5
X


γ ck sanctcj,t−k + δc + δt + δm + νjmt .

(5)

k=0

Here, we model the hazard that institution j closes in year t (conditional on remaining open until year t − 1)
as a function of the institution’s sector c ∈ {public, nonprof it, f or-prof it} in year (t), market (m), and
being sanctioned in the current or past five years (k).32 We include fixed effects for each sector δc , year
δt , and market δm . We estimate several variations of equation (5). First, we examine the two types of
sanctions schools can receive (i.e., loss of only loans versus loss of Title IV aid) separately. Second, we allow
for heterogeneity by for-profit field of study.

250
200
150
100
50
0

Institutions Reported as Closed

300

Figure B.1: Institution Closures by Sector and Year

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Year

Public

2002

Nonprofit

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

For-profit

Source: PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year institutions that had an active Title IV program
participation agreement at the time of closure.
32 We have estimated models that include up to seven years of lags but only the first five years following a sanction have a
statistically significant association with institution closure.

51

.4
.3
.2
.1
-.1

0

Cumulative hazard of closure

.5

Figure B.2: The Impact of Sanctions on the Cumulative Hazard of Closure by Sector

-1

0

1

2

Years since sanction

Public

Nonprofit

3

4

5

For-profit

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two-year institutions with a Title
IV program participation agreement. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a regression of the cumulative hazard of
closure on any sanction receipt interacted with years since the sanction was received and sector; regressions also include year
and county fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by institution.

52

C

Additional Figures and Tables

7
6
5
4
3
2

12

10

20

08

20

06

20

04

20

02

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

80

19

78

19

76

19

19

19

74

0

1

Pell Grant Recipients (Millions)

8

9

Figure C.1: The Number of Pell Grant Recipients by Year

Year

Source: Pell Grant administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year institutions with Pell Grant enrollment
in the specified academic year. The solid line represents the total number of students receiving Pell Grants. The shaded area
represents the years that we focus on in our main analyses.

.14
.12

Share Defaulting

3

.08

.1

2.5

.04

.06

2
1.5

.02

1

0

11

10

20

20

09

20

08

07

20

20

06

20

05

20

04

20

03

02

20

01

20

00

20

99

20

98

19

97

19

96

19

19

95

19

94

93

19

19

19

92

0

.5

Federal Borrowers (Millions)

3.5

4

.16

Figure C.2: The Number of Federal Borrowers by Cohort Year

Year
Borrowers

Share defaulting

Source: CDR administrative data. Notes: Sample includes two- and four-year institutions with CDR data. The solid line indicates the total number of federal borrowers (in millions) used to construct schools’ cohort default rates by cohort (corresponding
to the left axis) and the dashed line indicates the share of federal borrowers in a give cohort that defaulted within two years of
entering repayment.

53

50
0
-300 -250 -200 -150 -100 -50

Point estimate, 95% CI

100

150

200

Figure C.3: Effect of Sanctions on Pell Enrollment in Sanctioned Institutions
A. Sanctioned Publics

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

6

8

10

6

8

10

6

8

10

150
100
50
0
-50
-200 -150 -100

Point estimate, 95% CI

200

250

300

B. Sanctioned Nonprofits

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

150
100
50
0
-50
-200 -150 -100

Point estimate, 95% CI

200

250

300

C. Sanctioned For-profits

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

Years since sanction

4

Notes: Point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals from a regression of Pell Grant recipient enrollment on the number
of public, nonprofit, and for-profit competitors in the local higher education market that received a sanction in the sanctionyear, interacted with years before/after sanction receipt (with t − 1 serving as the omitted category). Regressions also include
indicators for sanction receipt by sector interacted by years before/after sanction receipt, institution by sanction-year fixed
effects, year fixed effects, years before/after sanction receipt fixed effects, and sector and county linear trends. See Section 3 for
additional details.

54

Table C.1: Sanction Triggers and Penalties
Cohort
year

Year informed
of sanction

Range of aid loss if
app. immed.

1989

1991

1991-1993

1990

1992

1992-1994

1991

1993

1993-1995

1992

1993

1994

1995

1994-1996

1995-1997

Trigger

Penalty

>=35% in 1987, 1988, 1989
>60% for 1989
>=35% in 1988, 1989, 1990
>55% in 1990
>40% in 1990, <5 pp gain 1989-1990
>=30% in 1989, 1990, 1991
>50% in 1991
>40% in 1991, <5 pp gain 1990-1991
>=25% in 1990, 1991, 1992
>45% in 1992
>40% in 1991, <5 pp gain 1991-1992
>=25% in 1991, 1992, 1993
>40% in 1993
>=25% in 1992, 1993, 1994
>40% in 1994
>=25% in 1993, 1994, 1995
>40% in 1995
>=25% in 1994, 1995, 1996
>40% in 1996
>=25% in 1995, 1996, 1997
>40% in 1997

Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans, potential or immediate loss of Pell
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV

55

1994

1996

1996-1998

1995

1997

1997-1999

1996

1998

1998-2000

1997

1999

1999-2001

1998

2000

2000-2002

>=25% in 1996, 1997, 1998
>40% in 1998

Immediate loss of loans, potential or immediate loss of Pell
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV

1999

2001

2001-2003

2000

2002

2002-2004

2002
2006

2004
2008

2004-2006
2008-2010

>=25% in 1997, 1998, 1999
>40% in 1999
>=25% in 1998, 1999, 2000
>40% in 2000
>=25% in 2000, 2001, 2002
>40% in 2006

Immediate loss of loans, potential or immediate loss of Pell
Limitation, suspension, or termination of Title IV
Immediate loss of loans, potential or immediate loss of Pell
Immediate loss of loans
Immediate loss of loans and Pell
Immediate loss of loans

2007

2009

2009-2011

>40% in 2007

Immediate loss of loans

2008

2010

2010-2012

2009

2011

2011-2013

2010

2012

2012-2014

2011

2013

2013-2015

>=25% in 2006, 2007, 2008
>40% in 2008
>=25% in 2007, 2008, 2009
>40% in 2009
>=25% in 2008, 2009, 2010
>40% in 2010
>=25% in 2009, 2010, 2011
>40% in 2011

Move to 3 year cdrs
2012
2015

2015-2017

>=30% in 2010, 2011, 2012
>40% in 2012

Subject to
Appeals
sanction

Sanctions
maintained

178
75
121
558
404
455
652
376
433
222
330
157
236
109
138
66
42
13
10
2
6
1
4
1
1
1

235
0
130
4
42
7
9
2
5
1
4
1
1

226
109
135
62
36
6
8
2

2

2

0

Immediate loss of loans and pell
Immediate loss of loans
Immediate loss of loans and Pell
Immediate loss of loans
Immediate loss of loans and Pell
Immediate loss of loans
Immediate loss of loans and Pell
Immediate loss of loans

2
3
4
1
1
1
6
2

2
3
4
1
1
1
6
2

0
1
0
0
0
0
2
1

Loss of loans and/or Pell
Loss of loans

8
10

4
0
3
1
0
0

Source: CDR and sanction administrative data. Notes: Sample includes all institutions that were sanctioned. Information on appeals and appeal outcomes were provided in
response to a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request to ED. No institutions triggered sanction threats for the 2001, 2003, 2004, and 2005 cohorts.

Table C.2: Impact of Sanctions on ln(Enrollment)
Sanctioned sector:
Post x Threatened sanction
% increase

1. Public

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

Test of equality
(p -value)

-0.118
(0.072)

-0.652
(0.365)+

-0.717
(0.066)**

<0.001

-11%

-48%

-51%

0.007
(0.142)

0.081
(0.017)**

Post x ln(recpients exposed to sanctions in sector)
x Public
-0.090
(0.077)
% increase

-9%

1%

8%

x Nonprofit

-0.028
(0.095)

0.078
(0.174)

0.061
(0.022)**

% increase

-3%

8%

6%

x For-profit

-0.044
(0.054)

0.115
(0.116)

-0.047
(0.012)**

% increase

-4%

12%

-5%

Test of equality (p- value)

0.962

0.571

<0.001

0.018

0.136

0.084

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

56

Table C.3: Impact of Threatened Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment: All Counties
Sanctioned sector:

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

Test of equality
(p -value)

-91
(61)

-103
(15)**

0.486

13
(39)
-4
(15)
-1
(8)

-63
(145)
-2
(20)
24
(11)*

34
(9)**
1
(2)
-6
(1)**

0.749

0.918

0.130

<0.001

4
6.2
39.5
599
(435)

4.0
4.7
35.4
-169
(30)**

4%

-1%

1. Public

Post x Threatened sanction

-57
(37)
Post x # competitors with threatened sanction
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit
Test of equality (p- value)

Number of institutions | threatened sanction
Public competitor
2.1
NP competitor
1.6
FP competitor
15
Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
-46
adtl sanction
(86)
% change (rel to baseline)

-1%

Counties

1,380

Institutions

7,176

Observations

0.956
0.022

714,637

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: Sample is limited to two-year institutions with a
Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. See Table 3 for sample and specification description. Robust
standard errors clustered by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

57

Table C.4: Robustness of the Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment: All Institutions
2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

Test of equality
(p -value)

-191
(74)**

-115
(12)**

0.177

54
(36)
-0.2
(13)
-17
(11)

53
(64)
0.4
(12)
13
(13)

46
(10)**
-1
(3)
-15
(3)**

0.974

0.151

0.472

<0.001

Number of institutions | threatened sanction
Public competitor
2
NP competitor
2.6
FP competitor
7.7
Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
-77
additional sanction
(70)

2.1
4.8
12
84
(187)

3.2
4.6
14.3
-183
(41)**

1%

-2%

Sanctioned sector:

1. Public

Post x Threatened sanction

-59
(36)
Post x # competitors with threatened sanction
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit
Test of equality (p- value)

% change (rel to baseline)

-2%

Counties

1,553

Institutions

7,719

0.996
0.118

782,892

Observations

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for specification. Sample includes twoand four-year institutions with a Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. Institutions in counties with
more than 50 institutions (on average, across years) are excluded. Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

58

Table C.5: The Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment:
Heterogeneity by Sector and Type of Sanction
1. Public

2. Nonprofit

3. For-profit

Test of equality
(p -value)

-71
(52)

-3
(28)

-77
(13)**

0.999

-27
(31)
-11
(17)
-0.01
(11)

-20
(49)
7
(10)
18
(10)+

16
(11)
-0.4
(3)
-6
(3)+

0.458

Test of equality (p -value)

0.606

0.324

0.073

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
additional sanction

-122
(76)

194
(138)

-122
(40)**

% change: total enrollment

-4%

6%

-3%

Post x Threatened loss of T4

-23
(27)

-65
(26)*

-65
(13)**

0.371

58
(41)
33
(10)**
-11
(14)

186
(157)
32
(19)+
0.1
(20)

61
(14)**
-2
(3)
-12
(4)**

0.716

Test of equality (p -value)

0.007

0.370

<0.001

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
additional sanction

9
(83)

259
(166)

-101
(42)*

% change: total enrollment

0.4%

8%

-2%

Sanctioned sector:
Post x Threatened loss of loans
Post x Competitor with threatened loss of loans
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

0.591
0.092

Post x Competitor threatened loss of T4
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

Counties

0.007
0.830

1,364

Institutions

5,842

Observations

585,915

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description.
Robust standard errors clustered by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

59

Table C.6: Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment: Heterogeneity by Sanction Year
Year of sanction:

(1) 1991

(2) 1992

(3) 1993

(4) 1994

(5) 1995

(6) 1996

(7) 1997

(8) 1998

(9) 1999

(10) 2000

Public

10

41

38

56

44

32

30

24

4

1

Nonprofit

6

8

10

10

5

4

2

2

2

0

For-profit

123

332

384

462

312

221

138

81

25

7

-190
(46)**
-121
(25)**
-292
(67)**

-111
(56)*
-103
(38)**
-141
(27)**

-44
(50)
-43
(39)
-135
(19)**

-40
(47)
-43
(42)
-87
(15)**

29
(62)
23
(82)
-19
(15)

29
(98)
8
(18)
-28
(16)+

-27
(99)
37
(42)
-26
(18)

9
(87)
29
(51)
-48
(23)*

-120
(59)*
7
(42)
-34
(53)

-130
(2)**

-15
(168)

[0.024]

[0.670]

[0.029]

[0.418]

[0.668]

[0.245]

[0.352]

[0.356]

[0.219]

[<0.001]

90
(23)**

93
(12)**

73
(16)**

44
(13)**

48
(24)*

18
(22)

34
(23)

16
(36)

15
(43)

612
(566)

x Nonprofit

-3
(10)

-2
(3)

2
(4)

3
(3)

5
(3)+

0.2
(6)

-11
(9)

-32
(17)+

-37
(31)

-279
(164)+

x For-profit

-3
(10)

-11
(5)*

-10
(5)*

-9
(4)*

-8
(3)**

-2
(3)

-7
(6)

-24
(8)**

0.1
(16)

-94
(87)

[0.001]

[<0.001]

[<0.001]

[<0.001]

[<0.001]

[0.695]

[0.199]

[0.459]

[0.466]

[0.135]

-153
(193)

-105
(78)

-107
(65)

-107
(65)

-6
(58)

-13
(54)

-60
(93)

-365
(152)*

-44
(99)

61
(199)

-3%

-2%

-2%

-2%

-0.1%

-0.3%

-1%

-9%

-2%

2%

1,323
5,312
58,432

1,326
5,315
58,465

1,326
5,299
58,289

1,330
5,325
58,575

1,332
5,334
58,674

1,333
5,339
58,729

1,335
5,366
59,026

1,337
5,367
59,037

1,339
5,322
58,542

1,342
5,286
58,146

Total threatened with sanction

Post x Threatened sanction
x Public
x Nonprofit
x For-profit

60

Post x # FP competitors sanctioned
x Public

Predicted ∆ county enrollment:
adtl for-profit sanction
% change (rel to baseline)
Counties
Institutions
Observations

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for sample and specification description. Robust standard errors clustered by county in
parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

Table C.7: Robustness of the Impact of Sanctions on Pell Grant Recipient Enrollment to Alternate Market
Definitions
15 mile radius
(1)
(2)
Post x Threatened sanction
x Public

-54
-43
(40)
(40)
x Nonprofit
-86
-36
(60)
(27)
x For-profit
-96
-94
(15)**
(11)**
[0.564]
[0.080]
Post x # public competitors sanctioned
x Public
40
5
(39)
(33)
x Nonprofit
16
14
(11)
(13)
x For-profit
-7
-9
(9)
(10)
[0.113]
[0.219]
Post x # NP competitors sanctioned
x Public
19
62
(138)
(98)
x Nonprofit
5
21
(15)
(12)+
x For-profit
10
20
(7)
(10)*
[0.917]
[0.903]
Post x # FP competitors sanctioned
x Public
30
23
(10)**
(7)**
x Nonprofit
1
-1
(1)
(1)
x For-profit
-3
-5
(1)**
(1)**
[<0.001]
[0.002]
Change in total enrollment: adtl for-profit sanction
-96
-128
(64)
(28)**
Excludes institutions in
X
"large" markets
Institutions
Observations

30 mile radius
(3)
(4)
-51
(37)
-83
(62)
-94
(14)**
[0.516]

-46
(37)
-35
(27)
-95
(11)**
[0.067]

12
(19)
11
(8)
1
(6)
[0.499]

2
(15)
8
(9)
-2
(5)
[0.464]

43
(83)
4
(15)
11
(10)
[0.801]

51
(60)
16
(10)
19
(10)+
[0.812]

17
(4)**
1
(1)
-1
(1)
[<0.001]

10
(3)**
-0.1
(1)
-2
(1)*
[0.001]

-31
(81)

-96
(27)**
X

7,161

5,845

5,845

7,161

682,671

585,915

682,671

585,915

Source: Pell Grant, CDR, sanction, and PEPS administrative data. Notes: See Table 3 for specification. Sample includes
two--year institutions with a Title IV program participation agreement in 1980 through 2010. Robust standard errors clustered
by county in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1.

61

D

Selected Quotations from Local News Sources on For-Profit
College Sanctions

Palm Beach Post, July 18, 1991:
Five West Palm Beach trade schools were named Wednesday by the U.S. Department of Education as having
default rates on guaranteed student loans higher than 35 percent, the maximum permitted. . . .Hair-dressing
schools also are prevalent on state and national lists.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, May 16, 1991:
Vatterott College in St. Ann will take over the instruction of students stranded by the closure of Draughon
Business College in Springfield, Joplin and Independence, Mo., the head of Vatterott College said Wednesday. . . The agreement between the Vatterott and Draughon involves no fee paid by either party, John Vatterott said. But ”we think it’s a good business move” for Vatterott and good for the image of the trade
and career school industry, ”which has taken a pretty heavy beating,” he said. ”Any damage to any private
career school affects every other school,” he said.

Daily Oklahoman, August 11, 1992:
Nearly 600 schools in 40 states and the District of Columbia - including three in Oklahoma - will lose
some federal financial aid or loan programs due to high rates of defaulted student loans, the Department
of Education said Friday. . . In Oklahoma, the following privately owned trade schools were on the list: American Technical Institute of Tulsa, where 76.9 percent of its student loans were in default in fiscal 1990.
-Oklahoma Junior College of Business and Technology, Tulsa, with a 41.8 percent default rate. -Paul’s
Beauty College, Oklahoma City, with a 68.1 percent default rate.

New York Times, July 10, 1990:
The largest chain of private trade schools in New York City has agreed to pay $850,000 for recruiting
violations, the largest penalty ever assessed on a trade-school operator in the state. . . .East Coast Schools
operates 10 schools in New York, among them the Metropolitan Career Institute, the International Career
Institute, the Empire Technical School and the Albert Merrill School. Two schools operated under the
Empire name will be closed under the agreement announced here today.

Newsday (city edition), July 18, 1991:
The U.S. Department of Education has notified 178 trade schools, including 14 in New York City, that they
62

stand to lose their eligibility to participate in the federal student loan program because more than one-third
of their students defaulted on their government-guaranteed loans three years in a row. Many of the schools
are beauty schools - also known as "academies of cosmetology" - but others train truck drivers, bartenders,
secretaries and even card dealers. Many are so dependent on the federal loan program that losing eligibility
may force them out of business.

63

