                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE HIDDEN RESOURCES OF WOMEN WORKING LONGER:
             EVIDENCE FROM LINKED SURVEY-ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                          C. Adam Bee
                                         Joshua Mitchell

                                       Working Paper 22970
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22970


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
US Census Bureau or NBER. We would like to thank Courtney Coile, Claudia Goldin, Larry
Katz, and the other Women Working Longer conference participants for providing feedback and
guidance. We would also like to thank Jon Rothbaum and Trudi Renwick at Census for their
support. For the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) Gold Standard File, we
thank Gary Benedetto and Lori Reeder at Census for their assistance and patience. All results
have been formally reviewed to ensure that no confidential Census Bureau data have been
disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by C. Adam Bee and Joshua Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Hidden Resources of Women Working Longer: Evidence from Linked Survey-
Administrative Data
C. Adam Bee and Joshua Mitchell
NBER Working Paper No. 22970
December 2016
JEL No. D14,D91,H55,J14,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

Despite women’s increased labor force attachment over the lifecycle, household surveys such as
the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC) do not
show increases in retirement income (pensions, 401(k)s, IRAs) for women at older ages. We use
linked survey-administrative data to demonstrate that retirement incomes are considerably
underreported in the CPS ASEC and that women’s economic progress at older ages has been
substantially understated over the last quarter century. Specifically, the CPS ASEC shows
median household income for women age 65-69 rose 21 percent since the late 1980s, while the
administrative records show an increase of 58 percent. Survey biases in women’s own incomes
appear largest for women with the longest work histories. We also exploit the panel dimension of
our data to follow a cohort of women and their spouses (if present) as they transition into
retirement in recent years. In contrast to previous work, we find that most women do not
experience noticeable drops in income up to five years after claiming social security, with
retirement income playing an important role in maintaining their overall standard of living. Our
results pose a challenge to the literature on the “retirement consumption puzzle” and suggest total
income replacement rates are high for recent retirees.

C. Adam Bee
US Census Bureau
Charles.Adam.Bee@census.gov

Joshua Mitchell
US Census Bureau
joshua.w.mitchell@census.gov
I. Introduction

        We begin with a puzzle. Why has the dramatic rise in female lifecycle labor force

participation not been accompanied by an increase in retirement income for women at older

ages?


        The basis for this puzzle is the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic

Supplement (CPS ASEC), the source of the nation’s official income and poverty statistics. We

use it to plot in Figure 1 the rate of retirement income receipt for women age 65 to 69 and age 70

to 74 between 1987 and 2012. 1 As we will discuss in more detail, our measure of retirement

income also includes survivor and disability income but excludes all payments from social

security and veterans benefits. (The sample in Figure 1 is further restricted to women who also

report receiving social security income to focus attention on women who are very likely to be

retired.) For both women age 65 to 69 and age 70 to 74, it is remarkable how little retirement

income receipt has apparently changed in 25 years. The rate of receipt fluctuates within a band of

about 7 percentage points, and it never exceeds 34 percent.


        The lack of any measurable trend comes in spite of many changes during working years

that one might think would alter the trajectory of retirement income, particularly for women.

More recent cohorts of women are attached to the labor force for longer periods of time (Goldin

and Mitchell, forthcoming), are more likely to have careers rather than just jobs (Goldin, 2006),

are more likely to graduate from college (Goldin et al., 2006), and are paid at higher rates

relative to men (DeNavas-Walt and Proctor, 2015). So why would they not be more likely to

have a pension, a 401(k), or an IRA?

1
  For survey years prior to the 1988, our CPS ASEC files do not allow us to define retirement income in a way that
is fully consistent with the 1987 to 2012 reference year period. In 2014, the CPS ASEC underwent a major redesign
that altered the questions relating to retirement income. See Semega and Welniak (2015) and Mitchell and Renwick
(2015) for more details.

                                                       -1-
           We use linked survey-administrative data to argue that surveys such as the CPS ASEC

are increasingly failing to capture much of the retirement income received by women, and this

omission has significant implications for understanding their material well-being in retirement.

We do not mean to suggest that underreporting is unique to women. In fact, in related work (Bee

and Mitchell, in progress), we provide in-depth analysis of underreporting and its causes for the

entire population age 65 and older. However, in keeping with the theme of this volume, we

choose to focus exclusively on women born from the early 1920s to the late 1940s and draw out

implications of their increasing labor force attachment across successive birth cohorts.


           Our main contribution is to highlight that to the extent underreporting is a growing

problem, household surveys will fail to reflect the full consequences of women working longer

and understate the economic progress of women at older ages. We show that underreporting not

only biases trends in income across cohorts but also distorts the relationship between career work

experience and retirement income within a given cohort. Lastly, we show that for recently retired

women, accurate measures of retirement income are crucial for understanding the transition to

retirement. In contrast to previous work, we find very little evidence of total household income

falling for most women as they and their spouses (if present) withdraw from the labor market and

begin to receive social security. 2 Our finding poses a challenge to the literature on the

“retirement consumption puzzle” which seeks to explain household consumption behavior under

the assumption that incomes are falling predictably at retirement.


           We should note that concerns about measuring retirement income in the CPS ASEC are

not new (Czajka and Denmead, 2012). Conceptually, the CPS ASEC aims to capture money

income, or a stream of regular payments. This accounting fits naturally with traditional defined

2
    Using panel tax data, Brady et al. (in progress) also find little evidence of an income drop at retirement.

                                                            -2-
benefit pension plans, which typically provide annuity income, but it is more challenging to

reconcile with defined contribution (DC) retirement plans, where withdrawals are often done on

an as-needed basis. Partly in response to the changing retirement landscape, the CPS ASEC

underwent a major redesign in 2014. That design change was intended to provide more accurate

information on income from defined contribution plans (Mitchell and Renwick, 2015; Semega

and Welniak, 2015). For our purposes, we will consider both annuities and retirement account

withdrawals as income but note that many of the cohorts of women examined in this paper are

likely to have only defined benefit income.


       We begin in section II by briefly reviewing the relevant literature. We next describe the

construction of our newly linked survey-administrative dataset in section III. In section IV, we

document trends in work, social security and retirement income for successive cohorts of women

born between the early 1920s and the late 1940s. In section V, we compare CPS self-reports with

administrative records to demonstrate growing retirement income underreporting rates across

birth cohorts and the consequences for measuring women’s total incomes. In section VI, we

explore the relationship between years of work experience and bias in retirement income

measurement for women born in the late 1940s. In section VII, we examine incomes for women

and their spouses (if present) as they transition to retirement. Section VIII concludes.


II. Prior Work

       The literature on measuring income and well-being in surveys is vast and we do not

attempt an exhaustive review here. Studies most related to our paper reassess the well-being of

the aged in retirement. Cutler and Katz (1991), Hurd and Rohwedder (2006), and Meyer and

Sullivan (2010, 2012) compare consumption- and income-based measures of poverty and find

evidence of considerably more economic progress for the aged when using consumption

                                                 -3-
measures. The lifecycle model motivates a focus on consumption because consumption is more

closely connected to long-run economic status. Consumption may also be preferable if certain

types of income are difficult for survey respondents to report. We contribute to the above studies

by uncovering substantial underreporting of retirement income for women using administrative

records. Our findings thereby help reconcile the differences found between survey-based

measures of consumption and income for the aged.


       Beyond measuring income and consumption at points in time, our findings also relate to

longitudinal studies that examine changes in well-being over time, especially as households

transition into retirement. A number of prominent studies such as Banks et al. (1998) and

Bernheim et al. (2001) have noted that consumption appears to fall sharply at retirement.

Because the standard lifecycle model predicts that forward-looking households should be able to

smooth consumption in response to anticipated declines in income, this apparent empirical

violation gives rise to the “retirement consumption puzzle” and is taken as evidence that

households are myopic and inadequately prepared for retirement. More recent studies have

questioned this initial conclusion.


       Hurst (2008) surveys the recent literature and finds that it is mainly work and food

expenditures that decline while recreational spending and donations to charity actually increase.

Moreover, the decline in food expenditures is offset by an increase in home production and an

increase in shopping for grocery bargains such that actual food consumption does not fall

(Aguiar and Hurst, 2005 and 2007). Although we do not measure consumption directly, our

findings challenge the premise that income falls for most households in retirement. Our

administrative record measure of retirement income plays an important role in obtaining this

result. Even though the composition of consumption may change at retirement, we show that it is

                                                -4-
not possible to test the lifecycle model against alternatives when annual incomes remain steady,

at least for a cohort of recently retired women.


       Lastly, our use of administrative records to validate survey responses contributes to the

large literature on survey measurement error. With the exception of our work in Bee (2013) and

Bee and Mitchell (in progress), few studies have been able to validate retirement income directly.

Studies reviewed in Munnell and Chen (2014) compare survey aggregates to outside sources

such as the National Income and Product Accounts or SOI tax tables (which exclude non-filers)

and conclude that the CPS ASEC is missing substantial amounts of retirement income, usually

with an emphasis on income from defined contribution accounts. But without the ability to link

survey and administrative data, the distributional implications of underreported retirement

income remain strongly disputed. For the cohorts of women examined, we show that correcting

for underreporting does in fact have broad distributional consequences.


       Other studies do address survey measurement error with respect to pensions and

retirement accounts but focus on current workers, comparing survey responses to employer-

provided plan descriptions (Gustman et al., 2010; Mitchell, 1988). These studies reveal that

workers in general do not understand key features of pension plans such as early retirement

options and the distinction between defined benefit and defined contribution systems. Workers

also have trouble reporting participation in defined contribution plans and the amount of their

contributions (Dushi and Honig, 2015; Dushi and Iams, 2010). A lack of financial literacy may

hinder the gathering of accurate information on retirement preparation (Lusardi and Mitchell,

2014 and this volume). It may also provide clues as to why underreporting of incomes in

retirement appears to be a significant problem.



                                                   -5-
III. Data and Methods

        We construct a novel dataset that links survey data with several administrative record

sources. For most of our analysis, the underlying samples are drawn from the Survey of Income

and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is a series of nationally representative samples of

households interviewed over a multi-year period. We use the first waves of the 1984, 1990,

1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 SIPP panels. We use a harmonized version of the SIPP known as the

Gold Standard File. 3 Because we are only using a single wave from each panel, we are treating

the SIPP data as a series of cross-sections, drawing mainly demographic and household

relationship information from the SIPP. The longitudinal dimension of our analysis comes

exclusively from the administrative records with the advantage that we can follow our SIPP

samples forwards and backwards in time without attrition.


        We do not use income data directly from the SIPP because SIPP income data are

collected for a four-month reference period that does not correspond to calendar year information

available in several of our administrative record sources. Instead, we compare annual income

from the linked administrative records to standalone data from the CPS ASEC.


        As mentioned above, the CPS ASEC is the source of the nation’s official income and

poverty statistics. Between February and April of each year, the CPS ASEC surveys a nationally

representative sample of approximately 75,000 households and ascertains income types and

annual amounts for the previous calendar year. We are particularly interested in the extent to

which retirement income is underreported in the CPS ASEC and how that may bias our




3Data from the SIPP Gold Standard File are confidential. All results have been formally reviewed to ensure that no
confidential Census Bureau data have been disclosed.

                                                       -6-
assessment of women’s well-being at older ages. The CPS ASEC asks the following question for

each member of the household related to retirement income:


        “Other than social security or VA benefits, did … receive any pension or retirement

income?”


        If the response is affirmative, then follow-up questions elicit the amount and source of

income. There are two analogous sets of questions about survivor income and disability income

outside of Social Security and VA benefits. We aggregate responses to all three questions in our

definition of retirement income.


        We choose to use the linked SIPP data rather than the linked CPS ASEC for most of our

analysis because the linked SIPP data are available further back in time and allow us to examine

earlier cohorts of women. Furthermore, the SIPP data tend to have higher linkage rates. 4 But

when we examine the most recent birth cohort of women in their older ages in section VI, we

need to use the linked 2013 CPS ASEC rather than the SIPP.


        Our administrative records allow us to examine five types of income that are particularly

important at older ages: earnings (both wages and self-employment), social security benefits,

Supplemental Security Income (SSI), interest and dividends, and retirement income. Data on

earnings, social security benefits, and SSI are obtained from the Social Security Administration

(SSA). Data on taxable and tax-exempt interest and dividends come from IRS Form 1040

records. Not everyone files a 1040 in a given year, but we can assume that those with more than


4
 SIPP and CPS ASEC data are assigned a Personal Identification Key (PIK), which is a confidentiality-protected
version of a social security number. The PIK allows the survey data to be linked to the administrative records. See
Wagner and Layne (2014) for more details. Linkage rates vary across each survey but are generally in the high 80
percent range. In order to account for any differences between the PIK subsample and the overall sample, we run for
each survey a logit model using demographic information to predict the assignment of a PIK and calculate an
estimated propensity score. Then we multiply the survey weight by the inverse of the estimated propensity score.

                                                       -7-
minimal amounts of capital income would be required to file.


       Lastly, retirement income data come from two sources, and are available regardless of

whether or not an individual filed a tax return in a given year. We have discovered data from

Form W-2P “Statements for Recipients of Annuities, Pensions, Retired Pay or IRA payments,”

in SSA administrative records for years 1978 to 1990. These records contain periodic payments

and withdrawals but exclude rollovers and other total distributions that are best thought of as

moving money from one retirement account to another. After 1990, Form W-2P was merged

with IRS Form 1099-R, “Distributions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Sharing

Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc.” We have obtained from IRS the 1099-R information

returns from 1995 onward. Our version of the 1099-R extracts also excludes direct rollovers and

other transactions we would not wish to consider as increasing the resources available to women

in retirement. In short, we have reliable and reasonably consistent retirement income data

spanning 1978 to 1990 and 1995 onward. These data allow us to examine long-run trends in

underreporting of retirement income in the CPS ASEC.


       From each linked survey, we draw a five-year birth cohort group of women such that they

are in their sixties when interviewed. Across all linked surveys, we cover women born from the

early 1920s to the late 1940s. The women in our sample are either the householder or spouse of

the householder. Lastly, for tracking incomes over time, we often require that women survive

until age 70 to maintain a balanced panel. All income amounts are adjusted for inflation using

the CPI-U-RS and are expressed in 2012 dollars.




                                                -8-
       Summary statistics for each of the six birth cohorts groups are shown in Table 1 along

with approximate sample sizes. Across cohorts, college graduation rates have more than doubled

while the share of women who are currently married has declined slightly.


IV. Cohort-Age Patterns


         A. Employment


       We first describe patterns of work at older ages for women born between 1921 and 1948.

Throughout our analysis, employment is defined as having annual administrative earnings (both

W-2 wages and self-employment) of at least the prevailing year’s hourly federal minimum wage

times ten hours per week times 52 weeks per year, as in Goldin and Katz (this volume). Figure 2

plots employment rates for five-year birth cohort groups between ages 55 and 70. Because our

earnings records extend from 1978 until 2012 we are unable to observe the earliest and the latest

cohorts at extreme ages. Nevertheless, a clear pattern emerges.


       Consistent with the theme of this volume, women are working longer—the entire

employment path for a more recent cohort is generally above the employment path of previous

cohorts. Among women born between 1921 and 1925 (the earliest cohort), only 46 percent

worked at age 57. In contrast, for women born between 1944 and 1948 (the most recent cohort)

the employment rate at age 57 was 61 percent. The same pattern holds when women are in their

sixties. At age 64, 24 percent of women born between 1921 and 1925 were working compared

with 39 percent for women born between 1944 and 1948. These employment patterns provide

supporting evidence for the hypothesis that more recent cohorts of women are attached to the

workforce longer and therefore are more likely to be eligible for a pension, and in recent years,

are more likely to be able to make contributions to an employer-sponsored DC plan or to an IRA.


                                                -9-
           We explore how changing demographic characteristics of women affect cohort

employment patterns in Table 2. We run linear probability models for work on a full set of age

fixed effects covering the age ranges where we have a balanced panel across cohorts. We

examine the cohort group coefficients (the 1921 to 1925 cohort is the omitted group) and

compare their magnitudes to a second specification where we control for five categories of

educational attainment—high school dropout (omitted), high school graduate, some college,

college graduate, and advanced degree—and five categories of marital status—never married

(omitted), married, widowed, divorced, and separated. Not surprisingly, higher levels of

educational attainment are strongly associated with labor force attachment. Married, widowed,

and separated women are about 13 to 16 percentage points less likely to work than never-married

women, all else equal. The coefficients on the later cohorts are somewhat muted after controlling

for education and marital status, indicating that some of the trend toward working longer reflects

greater educational attainment and reduced marriage, but there are still important cohort effects

for women born in the 1930s and 1940s. 5


             B. Social Security Receipt


           Figure 3 describes the age pattern of social security income receipt across cohorts. Social

security receipt is defined as having any positive amount of annual OASDI benefits in the

administrative records. At pre-retirement ages, more recent cohorts are actually somewhat more

likely to receive social security than are earlier cohorts. This difference reflects the fact that more

recent cohorts of women are more likely to be eligible for social security disability insurance

(SSDI) due to their longer earnings histories and also because the medical examination process

has become more relaxed (Autor and Duggan, 2006). Starting at age 62, and for those below

5
    Note this is an earlier set of birth cohorts than those in the HRS examined by Goldin and Katz (this volume).

                                                          -10-
what is known at the “full retirement age,” reduced social security retirement benefits are

available. 6 The most recent cohorts of women are less likely to claim social security retirement

benefits before full retirement age. For example, at age 64, 77 percent of women born between

1921 and 1925 received social security benefits but only 62 percent of women born between

1944 and 1948 did. Thus, women are working longer and also claiming social security later.


         Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 explore regression results for social security receipt during

early retirement years—ages 62 to 64. Higher educated women are less likely to claim social

security early. Not surprisingly, widows are 26 percentage points more likely to be receiving

social security benefits than never-married women, all else equal. The cohort effects start

declining for women born in the 1930s and turn sharply negative for the 1944 to 1948 birth

cohorts. Adding controls for education and marital status produces cohort effects that are more

strongly positive, with a smaller drop for the 1944 to 1948 birth cohorts.


          C. Retirement Income Receipt


         Estimates of retirement income receipt from SSA and IRS administrative records are

shown in Figure 4. Recall that annual amounts of pension and annuity income as well as periodic

withdrawals from employer-sponsored DC accounts and IRAs are included in the definition of

retirement income. Transactions that move money from one retirement account to another, such

as rollovers and conversions, are excluded. Also important is that we observe receipt of

retirement income but not the reason for receipt. Some women may be receiving survivor income

that reflects their deceased spouses’ earnings histories rather than their own, although that is less

likely at younger ages. Note that data age gaps in Figure 4 reflect the time period between 1991


6
  The full retirement age is 65 for individuals born before 1938. After 1938, the full retirement age is gradually
increased until it reaches 67 for those born after 1959. See https://www.ssa.gov/planners/retire/retirechart.html.

                                                         -11-
and 1994 during which we do not have retirement income data for all members of a cohort

group. Nevertheless, the combined series provides novel evidence of an important component of

women’s total retirement resources spanning over three decades.


       Rates of retirement income receipt rise substantially with age, for example, from 23

percent to 52 percent for the 1937 to 1941 cohort between ages 60 and 70. Rates also rise across

cohorts. At age 60, the 1921 to 1925 cohort had a rate of receipt of 11 percent while the 1944 to

1948 cohort had a rate of receipt of 29 percent.


       These results provide preliminary evidence that is in stark contrast to the CPS ASEC

numbers shown in Figure 1. While retirement income receipt at advanced ages never exceeds 34

percent in the CPS ASEC (even conditioning on those receiving social security), the

administrative data indicate that no cohort observable at age 70 has a rate of receipt lower than

50 percent. We will provide more direct evidence of underreporting in section V.


       Regression results confirm that educational attainment strongly predicts retirement

income receipt. Widowed women are also more likely than other groups to have retirement

income, which would likely include survivor pension income. For recent observable cohorts, the

rates of receipt between ages 59 and 64 remain about 11 percentage points higher relative to the

1921 to 1925 birth cohorts, after controlling for educational attainment and marital status.


V. Cross-Cohort Patterns in Underreporting


       We now turn to survey underreporting across calendar years and its implication for

measuring the incomes of women across cohorts. Our analysis draws on a series of cross-

sections based on linked SIPP-administrative data. We compare these administrative measures of

income to the standalone CPS ASEC measures. Table 3 illustrates the extent of underreporting in

                                               -12-
1984, 1989, 1995, 2000, 2003, and 2007. We select women from each survey when they are ages

65 to 69. The first rows compare social security receipt and median benefit amounts in the linked

data and the CPS ASEC. Across all years, there is a very close correspondence of both receipt

and benefit amounts. The discrepancy in receipt is not more than 3 percentage points in any year.

Median benefits conditional on receipt are never different by more than 3 percent. The CPS

ASEC appears to capture social security income quite well.


       Retirement income receipt shows a very different pattern. Starting in 1984, receipt rates

are close and actually higher in the CPS ASEC with 29 percent of women in the CPS ASEC

reporting retirement income and 23 percent actually having retirement income in the linked

sample. Moving to later surveys (and therefore more recent cohorts), the linked sample receipt

rates grow rapidly and then reach a plateau, while the CPS ASEC rates remain essentially flat for

the entire time period. By 2007, the CPS ASEC shows a receipt rate of 26 percent while the

linked sample has a receipt rate over 45 percent. In contrast to receipt rates, survey and

administrative measures of (conditional) median amounts continue to track each other reasonably

well, except for a large discrepancy in 2003 that diminishes in 2007.


       Overall, retirement income underreporting appears to occur mostly at the extensive rather

than intensive margin. It is also worth noting that due to its rapid growth, the median amount of

retirement income in recent years is now quite close to the median amount of social security

income—the difference is that social security receipt remains much more widespread despite

retirement income’s growing importance.


       The bottom half of Table 3 summarizes the implications for women’s total household

income. CPS ASEC total income as well as income from five sources (earnings, social security,


                                                -13-
SSI, interest and dividends, and retirement income) are reported. We show income based on

these five sources alone because this is directly comparable to the income available in our

administrative records. At the 25th, 50th, and 75th, percentiles there is a growing dissimilarity

between survey and administrative measures of income that parallels the rise in retirement

income underreporting. 7 For example, the median household income is 11 percent higher in the

linked data than in the CPS ASEC in 1989 ($3,900) but is 45 percent higher in 2007 ($19,000).

Note that these are household incomes, so they reflect the effects of underreporting of all

household members.


        The administrative measures of income seriously change our understanding of the

economic progress of women at older ages across cohorts. Across the 1921 to 1925 and 1939 to

1943 cohorts, the CPS ASEC shows an increase in median household income of 21 percent, but

the linked data reveal the increase was actually 58 percent. The evenness of economic progress

has also been understated. The CPS ASEC shows a monotonic relationship in income growth

across the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of 16 percent, 21 percent, and 25 percent, respectively,

but the corresponding numbers in the linked data are 50 percent, 58 percent, and 52 percent.


VI. Work Experience and Underreporting


        If retirement income underreporting has understated economic progress across cohorts, it

may also affect our understanding of the relationship between work experience and well-being

within a cohort. Table 4 uses administrative records linked to the 2013 CPS ASEC to estimate

the relationship between middle to late career work experience and income at older ages for the

most recent cohort, those born between 1944 and 1948. We have already established that this


7
 We are unable to provide administrative estimates of total income for the 1984 sample at this time, but our
preliminary analysis suggests the survey and administrative estimates are quite close in that year.

                                                       -14-
cohort is working longer, claiming social security later, and is more likely to receive retirement

income than previous cohorts. But there is also significant within-cohort variation.


       Using administrative record earnings histories, we calculate whether each woman earned

enough in a given year for us to deem that she was employed. We then total the years of

employment across the twenty-year period between ages 40 and 59. Next we group women into

four experience categories based on the total number of years worked (0 to 5, 6 to 10, 11 to 15,

16 to 20 years). We show the results for the full sample of women as well as separately by

current marital status. Overall, 58 percent of women in the 1944 to 1948 cohort worked at least

16 out of 20 years with a fairly even split across the other categories. The distribution of work

experience does not vary much by marital status.


       We next examine survey and administrative record measures of retirement income receipt

across the experience distribution. The linked CPS ASEC does show that women whose earnings

records indicate they spent more years in the labor force are more likely to report receiving

retirement income when 65 to 69 years old, with receipt rates rising from 11 percent to 38

percent. But extensive-margin underreporting is present for all four work-experience groups, and

the discrepancy is largest in absolute terms for women who work longer, with actual rates

ranging from 15 percent to 60 percent. Similar patterns are observed when the sample is

restricted to married women, indicating that underreported income is not simply received on

account of a deceased spouse.


       The next columns of Table 4 illustrate the effects of underreporting for women’s own

incomes, across the work-experience distribution. Compared with the administrative records, the

CPS ASEC actually shows a somewhat higher median own income for the lowest experience


                                                -15-
group and only a slightly lower income for the second experience group. For the higher

experience groups, which also have the highest extensive-margin underreporting, the

administrative record incomes are a substantial 17 and 22 percent above the survey incomes.

Qualitatively similar results are found for both currently and not currently married women.


       One implication of these findings is that if future cohorts of women acquire additional

years of work experience, household surveys may miss a larger fraction of their own incomes at

older ages. However, the relationship between women’s work experience and household income

is less straightforward, as there is considerable evidence of income underreporting across most

work experience groups. The relationship is complicated by the fact that underreporting is also

present for other household members who live with women of all experience levels.


       Despite the weaker relationship found between women’s work experience and household

income underreporting, there are still household income anomalies in the CPS ASEC that the

administrative records help to clarify. For example, for married women, survey income does not

rise monotonically with women’s work experience. Women who work 6-10 years have a median

household income of $60,700, while women who work 11-15 years have a median household

income of $58,600. Using the administrative records, median incomes are instead ascending for

the two groups—$64,600 and $71,100.


VII. The Retirement Transition


       We have so far explored how underreporting affects women’s total incomes at a point in

time. We can also exploit the panel nature of the administrative records to track the same

women’s incomes over time. We focus on a period covering the transition to retirement and

examine to what extent women are able to maintain their pre-retirement living standards.


                                               -16-
        We draw a sample of women from the 2008 SIPP panel. We use only the most recent

SIPP panel because we require data on all types of income for many consecutive years. Like our

previous analyses, our sample consists of women who are either the householder or spouse of the

householder, who either themselves or their husband (if present) first claimed social security

between 2003 and 2007, and who were age 60 to 70 when claiming. We further restrict to those

claiming non-disability benefits. Our nine-year panel window runs from three years prior to first

claiming benefits until five years after claiming. We also require women to survive to the end of

the panel window but place no mortality restrictions on the husband, if present. One limitation is

that we only can observe women’s living arrangements at the time of the SIPP interview.

Therefore, for this exercise we choose to track the total incomes of either the married couple or

the not-married women, fixing the marital status at the time of the SIPP interview. However, we

do observe mortality of husbands in the administrative records and we equivalence-adjust total

incomes in each year to reflect whether our unit of analysis has one or two people. 8


        Figure 5a plots the mean of the 45th to 55th percentile of equivalence-adjusted overall

income in each year for the full sample of women. As shown, the mean of the 45th to 55th

percentile is a very close approximation to the median and has the added advantage that it can be

decomposed into income-source subcomponents (also plotted). These subcomponents are social

security income, earnings, interest and dividends, and retirement income. By construction, social

security income is zero in the years prior to claiming and then rises sharply after claiming. Five

years after claiming, average equivalence-adjusted social security benefits, for those in the

middle of the total income distribution, are a little under $19,000. Not surprisingly, income from

earnings declines as women and their husbands transition to retirement. Earnings fall from

8
 We use the same equivalence scale that is used for the Supplemental Poverty Measure. In practice, this simply
means dividing our couples’ incomes by 1.41. See Short (2015).

                                                      -17-
$38,000 to $35,000 in the years before claiming and then accelerate their decline until they are

just under $10,000 five years after claiming. Interest and dividends are a comparatively small

amount of income for most households in all years with a value of just $2,400 five years after

claiming. Average amounts of retirement income, on the other hand, are substantial. Three years

prior to claiming they average close to $11,000, and rise after claiming to nearly $18,000. Thus,

average retirement income and social security amounts are quite comparable for those in the

middle of the overall income distribution.


       When we examine income from all sources combined, we find that median incomes are

surprisingly flat across the full nine-year window, with an approximate value of $48,600 both

one year before claiming and five years after claiming. In other words, there is little evidence of

a drop in median income at retirement and up to five years after retirement. This is in sharp

contrast to several previous studies reviewed earlier that suggest substantial drops in income (and

consumption) at retirement. Indeed, the premise of the retirement consumption puzzle is that

incomes are falling predictably at retirement and that rational, forward-looking households

should be able to smooth consumption in response. Although we cannot measure consumption

changes directly, our finding of steady incomes surrounding retirement challenges this premise.

Crucial to this result is an accurate measure of retirement income from the administrative

records.


       We also plot event studies separately for college graduate and non-college graduate

women and for currently married and not currently married women as shown in Figures 5b

through 5e. While the levels of income are quite different across demographic subgroups, the

same story holds—total incomes do not fall very much, if at all, in retirement. The biggest drop

is for college-educated women where the level of overall income starts higher at around $77,800

                                                -18-
one year before claiming and falls to $74,500 five years after claiming. Even this modest drop

takes several years to materialize—we never observe a sharp fall in incomes. For women without

a college degree, incomes, if anything, rise slightly over the same period from $40,500 to

$41,700. For married women, incomes decline modestly from $59,200 to $57,500 and for not-

married women, incomes rise slightly from $28,800 to $29,400.


       Beyond total incomes, it is interesting to examine the relative importance of retirement

and social security income across demographic groups. Five years after claiming, retirement and

social security income are roughly equally important for middle-income women in the full

sample. That is, they account for 37 percent and 39 percent of total income, respectively, for

women in the middle of the total income distribution. For college graduates, retirement income

accounts for 41 percent of the total compared to 26 percent for social security. For non-college

graduates, social security is the more dominant income source at 46 percent of the total, although

retirement income still makes up an important 34 percent. For married women, the two income

sources are equally important at 32 percent, but for not-married women, social security makes up

51 percent of the total, compared with 28 percent for retirement income.


       Our findings on women’s transition to retirement and the relative importance of

retirement income require two caveats. First, our sample consists of those claiming OASI

benefits. This removes from the sample those who experience permanent health shocks that

would qualify them for SSDI, but who would also likely have declines in their overall incomes.

It also ignores the group that has too little earnings to qualify for any social security and is

instead receiving SSI. Meyer and Mok (2013) show that consumption does in fact decline after

workers become disabled. However, from the perspective of validating the lifecycle model, we

would expect consumption to decline exactly for those who do experience negative permanent

                                                 -19-
income shocks. Thus, the lifecycle model cannot easily be tested against alternatives in this

setting.


           Second, although we have provided strong evidence that women’s incomes do not fall

during the first five years after retirement, this does not necessarily imply that women and their

families have saved adequately for retirement. It is still possible that they could “run out of

money” in future years should they live longer than expected, incur higher out-of-pocket medical

expenses than expected, and have their retirement income exhausted. Relatedly, this analysis

examines women (and their husbands) who retired in the mid 2000s, a time where retirees still

had considerable retirement income from defined benefit plans. Our results may not extrapolate

to future cohorts, who will only have access to defined contribution accounts. Will they save

adequately for retirement during working years and then manage to budget their savings during

retirement, given that annuitization rates in defined contribution accounts remain low (Hurd and

Panis, 2006)?


VIII. Conclusion

           We have shown that as women increased employment across cohorts born from the early

1920s to the late 1940s, they also received greater amounts of retirement income at older ages.

The CPS ASEC, however, fails to reflect the growing importance of retirement income and thus

understates the economic progress of women in retirement. The CPS ASEC has recently been

redesigned to improve measures of income received from several sources including retirement

accounts. It remains an open question whether the redesign will better capture retirement

incomes of future cohorts of women as they continue to work longer.


           We have also shown that recently retired (non-disabled) women do not experience

noticeable declines in total income at retirement. The finding is in sharp contrast to others in the
                                                -20-
literature on the retirement consumption puzzle. Our results cast doubt on the ability to

convincingly test the lifecycle model in this setting. They also imply that total income

replacement rates are quite high, at least five years into retirement. Most employee retirement

plans are currently completing a transition from defined benefit to defined contribution-based

systems. We began with a puzzle that we believe we have solved. We end with the question:

will future cohorts of women continue to maintain their pre-retirement standards of living as we

have shown past cohorts have done?




                                               -21-
                                          References

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2005. “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
    Economy 113(5): 919-48.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
    Review 97(5): 1533-559.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. “The Growth in the Social Security Disability
    Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3): 71-96.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell and Sarah Tanner. 1998. “Is There a Retirement-Savings
    Puzzle?” American Economic Review 88(4): 769-88.

Bee, C. Adam. 2013. “An Evaluation of Retirement Income in the CPS ASEC Using Form
    1099-R Microdata.”
    http://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2013/demo/Bee-PAA-
    paper.pdf

Bee, C. Adam and Joshua Mitchell. (In progress). “Do Older Americans Have More Income than
    We Think?”

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts for the
    Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review
    91(4): 832-57.

Brady, Peter J., Steven Bass, Jessica Holland, and Kevin Pierce. (In progress). “Using Panel Tax
    Data to Examine the Transition to Retirement.”

Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
     Disadvantaged,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1991(2): 1-74.

Czajka, John L. and Gabrielle Denmead. 2012. “Getting More from Survey Income Measures:
    Empirically Based Recommendations for Improving Accuracy and Efficiency.” Working
    paper, presented at 2012 Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology Research
    Conference.
    https://fcsm.sites.usa.gov/files/2014/05/Czajka_2012FCSM_III-D.pdf

DeNavas-Walt, Carmen and Bernadette D. Proctor. “Income and Poverty in the United States:
   2014,” U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports P60-252. 2015.

Dushi, Irena and Howard M. Iams. 2010. “The Impact of Response Error on Participation Rates
    and Contributions to Defined Contribution Pension Plans,” Social Security Bulletin 70(1):
    45-60.




                                              -22-
Dushi, Irena and Marjorie Honig. 2015. “How Much Do Respondents in the Health and
    Retirement Study Know About Their Contributions to Tax-Deferred Contribution Plans? A
    Cross-Cohort Comparison,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 14(3): 203-39.

Goldin, Claudia. 2006. “The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women’s Employment,
    Education, and Family.” American Economic Review 96(2), 1-21.

Goldin, Claudia and Joshua Mitchell. Forthcoming. “The New Lifecycle of Women’s
    Employment: Disappearing Humps, Sagging Middles, Expanding Tops,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives.

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz and Ilyana Kuziemko, 2006. "The Homecoming of American
    College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap," Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 20(4), 133-56.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, 2016. “Women Working Longer: Facts and Some
    Explanations.” (this volume).

Gustman, Alan L., Thomas L. Steinmeier and Nahid Tabatabai. 2010. Pensions in the Health and
    Retirement Study. Harvard University Press.

Hurd, Michael and Constantijn Panis. 2006. "The Choice to Cash Out Pension Rights at Job
    Change or Retirement." Journal of Public Economics 90(12): 2213-227.

Hurd, Michael and Susann Rohwedder. 2006. “Economic Well-Being at Older Ages: Income-
    and Consumption-Based Poverty Measures in the HRS.” Working paper, November.
    https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/working_papers/2007/RAND_WR410.pdf

Hurst, Erik. 2008. “Understanding Consumption in Retirement: Recent Developments,” in J.
    Ameriks and O. Mitchell, eds., Recalibrating Retirement Spending and Saving. Oxford
    University Press.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. “The Economic Importance of Financial
    Literacy: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5-44.

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2016. “Older Women’s Labor Market Attachment,
    Retirement Planning, and Household Debt,” in C. Goldin and L. Katz, eds., Women Working
    Longer, this volume.

Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2010. “Consumption and Income of the Poor Elderly Since
   1960.” Working paper, September. Earlier version available as “Consumption and Income
   Poverty for those 65 and Over.”
   http://www3.nd.edu/~jsulliv4/Elderly_Poverty3.4.pdf

Meyer, Bruce and James X. Sullivan. 2012. “Winning the War: Poverty from the Great Society
   to the Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012(2): 133-200.


                                            -23-
Meyer, Bruce and Wallace K.C. Mok. 2013. “Disability, Earnings, Income, and Consumption.”
   NBER Working Paper 18869.

Mitchell, Joshua and Trudi Renwick. 2015. “A Comparison of Official Poverty Estimates in the
    Redesigned Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement,” SEHSD
    Working Paper #2014-35, January.
    https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2014/demo/SEHSD-
    WP2014-35.pdf

Mitchell, Olivia. 1988. “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions,” Journal of Labor
    Economics 6(1): 21-39.

Munnell, Alicia and Anqi Chen. 2014. “Do Census Data Understate Retirement Income?” Center
   for Retirement Research Working Paper #14-19, December.
   http://crr.bc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/IB_14-19-508.pdf

Semega, Jessica L. and Edward Welniak, Jr. 2015. “The Effects of Changes to the Current
   Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement on Estimates of Income.”
   Paper presented at the 2015 Allied Social Science Association Meetings.
   https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2015/DEMO/ASSA-
   Income-CPSASEC-Red.pdf

Short, Kathleen. 2015. “The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2014,” Current Population Survey
    Reports #P60-254.

Wagner, Deborah and Mary Layne. 2014. “The Person Identification Validation System (PVS):
   Applying the Center for Administrative Records Research and Applications’ (CARRA)
   Record Linkage Software.” CARRA Working Paper Series #2014-01.
   https://www.census.gov/srd/carra/CARRA_PVS_Record_Linkage.pdf




                                            -24-
Figure 1: Trends in Retirement Income Receipt for Women who Receive Social Security




Source: 1988 to 2013 CPS ASEC surveys.

Notes: Sample is all women ages 65 to 69 and 70 to 74 who received social security income in
the reference year. "Retirement Income Receipt" is the fraction of women with positive
retirement, survivor, or disability income in the reference year, excluding social security income
and VA benefits. CPS ASEC survey weights are used in analysis.




                                               -25-
Figure 2: Employment Rates for Women by Age and Cohort




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is all women who are either the SIPP householder or spouse of the householder,
are ages 60 to 64 at time of SIPP interview, and survive until age 70. Women are considered as
working in a given year if their total earnings from wages and self-employment in the
administrative records are at least equal to the prevailing hourly federal minimum wage in that
year times 10 hours per week times 52 weeks per year.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.




                                               -26-
Figure 3: Social Security Receipt Rates for Women by Age and Cohort




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is all women who are either the SIPP householder or spouse of the householder,
ages 60 to 64 at time of SIPP interview, and survive until age 70. Social security receipt in a
given year is defined as having positive annual OASDI benefits in the administrative records for
that year.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.




                                               -27-
Figure 4: Retirement Income Receipt Rates for Women by Age and Cohort




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is all women who are either the SIPP householder or spouse of the householder,
ages 60 to 64 at time of SIPP interview, and survive until age 70. Retirement income receipt in a
given year is defined as having positive annual retirement income in the W-2P records for years
1978 to 1990 and in the 1099-R records for years 1995 to 2012. Retirement income includes
pension/annuity income as well as periodic withdrawals from defined contribution accounts.
Gaps in series refer to years 1991 to 1994 where administrative records are not available.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.


                                               -28-
Figure 5: Mean of the 45th-55th Percentile of Total Income and Its Subcomponents
A. All Women




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is all women from 2008 SIPP panel who are householder or spouse of
householder, either first claimed or their spouse (if present) first claimed social security benefits
between 2003 and 2007, did not claim disability benefits, and survived for full nine-year
window. Total income is the sum for the women and her spouse (if present) of administrative
record amounts of earnings, social security, interest and dividends, and retirement income.
Income amounts are equivalence-adjusted by dividing by 1.41 for married couples. See Short
(2015) for more details. Marital status is determined as of SIPP interview date but is adjusted if
administrative records indicate death of husband. Incomes are inflation-adjusted using the CPI-
U-RS deflator and are expressed in 2012 dollars. Mean of the 45th to 55th percentiles in each year
is calculated as well as the median for total income. Mean amounts of each subcomponent of
total income are also displayed for those with total incomes in the 45th to 55th percentile range.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.

                                                -29-
B. College Graduate Women




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is college graduate women from the 2008 SIPP panel who are householder or
spouse of householder, either first claimed or their spouse (if present) first claimed social
security benefits between 2003 and 2007, did not claim disability benefits, and survived for full
nine-year window. Total income is the sum for the women and her spouse (if present) of
administrative record amounts of earnings, social security, interest and dividends, and retirement
income. Income amounts are equivalence-adjusted by dividing by 1.41 for married couple. See
Short (2015) for more details. Marital status is determined as of SIPP interview date but is
adjusted if administrative records indicate death of husband. Incomes are inflation-adjusted using
the CPI-U-RS deflator and are expressed in 2012 dollars. Mean of the 45th to 55th percentiles in
each year is calculated as well as the median for total income. Mean amounts of each
subcomponent of total income are also displayed for those with total incomes in the 45th to 55th
percentile range.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.

                                               -30-
C. Non-College Graduate Women




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is non-college graduate women from the 2008 SIPP panel who are householder or
spouse of householder, either first claimed or their spouse (if present) first claimed social
security benefits between 2003 and 2007, did not claim disability benefits, and survived for full
nine-year window. Total income is the sum for the women and her spouse (if present) of
administrative record amounts of earnings, social security, interest and dividends, and retirement
income. Income amounts are equivalence-adjusted by dividing by 1.41 for married couple. See
Short (2015) for more details. Marital status is determined as of SIPP interview date but is
adjusted if administrative records indicate death of husband. Incomes are inflation-adjusted using
the CPI-U-RS deflator and are expressed in 2012 dollars. Mean of the 45th to 55th percentiles in
each year is calculated as well as the median for total income. Mean amounts of each
subcomponent of total income are also displayed for those with total incomes in the 45th to 55th
percentile range.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.

                                               -31-
D. Married Women




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is married women from the 2008 SIPP panel who are householder or spouse of
householder, either first claimed or their spouse (if present) first claimed social security benefits
between 2003 and 2007, did not claim disability benefits, and survived for full nine-year
window. Total income is the sum for the women and her spouse (if present) of administrative
record amounts of earnings, social security, interest and dividends, and retirement income.
Income amounts are equivalence-adjusted by dividing by 1.41 for married couple. See Short
(2015) for more details. Marital status is determined as of SIPP interview date but is adjusted if
administrative records indicate death of husband. Incomes are inflation-adjusted using the CPI-
U-RS deflator and are expressed in 2012 dollars. Mean of the 45th to 55th percentiles in each year
is calculated as well as the median for total income. Mean amounts of each subcomponent of
total income are also displayed for those with total incomes in the 45th to 55th percentile range.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.

                                                -32-
E. Not-Married Women




Source: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is women from the 2008 SIPP panel who are not currently married and are the
householder, either first claimed or their spouse (if present) first claimed social security benefits
between 2003 and 2007, did not claim disability benefits, and survived for full nine-year
window. Total income is the sum for the women and her spouse (if present) of administrative
record amounts of earnings, social security, interest and dividends, and retirement income.
Income amounts are equivalence-adjusted by dividing by 1.41 for married couple. See Short
(2015) for more details. Marital status is determined as of SIPP interview date but is adjusted if
administrative records indicate death of husband. Incomes are inflation-adjusted using the CPI-
U-RS deflator and are expressed in 2012 dollars. Mean of the 45th to 55th percentiles in each year
is calculated as well as the median for total income. Mean amounts of each subcomponent of
total income are also displayed for those with total incomes in the 45th to 55th percentile range.

Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the
administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a
PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of
SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the
SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting
weights are used in analysis.

                                                -33-
Table 1: Summary Statistics


  SIPP          Birth Cohort         Approximate          College
  Panel            Group                 N                Graduate         Married
  1984           1921 - 1925              900               0.12            0.72

  1990           1926 - 1930              900               0.11            0.70

  1996           1932 - 1936             1200               0.15            0.74

  2001           1937 - 1941              700               0.20            0.68

  2004           1940 - 1944             1800               0.24            0.68

  2008           1944 - 1948             2400               0.27            0.68
Sources: SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS
administrative records.

Notes: Sample is all women who are either the SIPP householder or spouse of the
householder, ages 60 to 64 at time of SIPP interview, and survive until age 70.
College completion and marital status are measured at time of SIPP interview.
Sample is restricted to those with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows
linking to the administrative records. SIPP sample weights are adjusted to account
for selection into having a PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model for
the presence of a PIK as a function of SIPP demographic characteristics and predict
the estimated propensity score. We then take the SIPP sample weight and multiply
it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting weights are used in
analysis.




                                                 -34-
Table 2: Employment and Income Receipt Regressions


                                                       Receives                  Receives
                            Employed             Social Security Early      Retirement Income
Independent               (Ages 57-64)              (Ages 62-64)              (Ages 59-64)
variable                 (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
Cohort (1921-1925 omitted)
   1926-1930            0.009       0.009         0.052 **     0.049 **
                      (0.021)     (0.021)       (0.022)      (0.021)
   1932-1936            0.093 ***   0.072 ***     0.031        0.049 ***
                      (0.019)     (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.019)
   1937-1941            0.117 ***   0.072 ***     0.023        0.060 ***     0.120 ***   0.092 ***
                      (0.022)     (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.022)       (0.018)     (0.018)
   1940-1944            0.104 ***   0.042 **      0.000        0.049 **      0.146 ***   0.105 ***
                      (0.020)     (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.021)       (0.019)     (0.018)
   1944-1948            0.150 ***   0.079 ***    -0.101 *** -0.039 *         0.148 ***   0.105 ***
                      (0.020)     (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.021)        (0.017)     (0.017)
Marital status (Never married omitted)
   Married                         -0.161 ***                  0.160 ***                -0.101 ***
                                  (0.034)                    (0.038)                   (0.036)
   Widowed                         -0.129 ***                  0.262 ***                 0.083 **
                                  (0.037)                    (0.041)                   (0.042)
   Divorced                         0.006                      0.079 *                  -0.038
                                  (0.038)                    (0.042)                   (0.040)
   Separated                       -0.156 **                   0.082                    -0.110
                                  (0.064)                    (0.081)                   (0.109)




                                                 -35-
Educational attainment (Less than HS grad omitted)
   HS grad                             0.140 ***                  -0.017                        0.088 ***
                                     (0.016)                     (0.017)                      (0.018)
   Some college                        0.181 ***                  -0.081 ***                    0.122 ***
                                     (0.018)                     (0.019)                      (0.018)
   College grad                        0.192 ***                  -0.182 ***                    0.167 ***
                                     (0.024)                     (0.025)                      (0.025)
   Advanced degree                     0.302 ***                  -0.263 ***                    0.258 ***
                                     (0.026)                     (0.028)                      (0.027)
Age fixed effects          yes           yes            yes          yes            yes           yes
   N                    45,656        45,656        17,121        17,121         22,362       22,362
     2
   R                   0.040         0.078         0.055      0.095          0.041       0.078
Source : SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS administrative
records.

Notes : Sample is all women who are either the SIPP householder or spouse of the householder,
ages 60 to 64 at time of SIPP interview, and survive until age 70. College completion and marital
status are measured at time of SIPP interview. In columns (1) and (2) outcome variable is equal to
1 for women who had annual administrative record earnings (combined wages and self-
employment) of at least the prevailing federal hourly minimum wage times 10 hours per week times
52 weeks per year. In columns (3) and (4) outcome variable is equal to 1 for women who had
positive annual administrative record income from OASDI. In columns (5) and (6) outcome variable
is 1 for women who had positive annual administrative record retirement income from either Form
W-2P for years 1978 to 1990 or Form 1099-R for years 1995 to 2012. Sample is restricted to those
with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the administrative records. SIPP
sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a PIK. For each SIPP panel we
estimate a logit model for the presence of a PIK as a function of SIPP demographic characteristics
and predict the estimated propensity score. We then take the SIPP sample weight and multiply it by
the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting weights are used in analysis.

Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the individual level. * denotes statistical significance
at the 10% level; ** at the 5% level; *** at the 1% level.




                                                     -36-
Table 3: Income Receipt and Percentiles by Cohorts of Women Age 65-69

                             Cohort 1 Cohort 2 Cohort 3 Cohort 4 Cohort 5 Cohort 6
               Income year    1984      1989      1995      2000      2003      2007
                 Birth year 1916-1920 1921-1925 1927-1931 1932-1936 1935-1939 1939-1943
Social Security Receipt
     CPS                       0.906     0.882     0.880     0.874     0.863     0.800
     SIPP-Linked               0.886     0.877     0.876     0.889     0.890     0.831

Median Social Security Amount, cond. >0
    CPS                    $ 8,246 $ 7,589        $ 8,920    $ 9,262    $ 9,827    $ 10,438
    SIPP-Linked            $ 8,361 $ 7,727        $ 8,787    $ 8,980    $ 9,742    $ 10,452

Retirement Income Receipt
     CPS                      0.288      0.289       0.268      0.271     0.272      0.260
     SIPP-Linked              0.233      0.323       0.399      0.404     0.435      0.454

Median Retirement Income Amount, cond. >0
    CPS                   $ 5,200 $ 7,429         $ 7,305    $ 8,630    $ 8,668    $ 10,426
    SIPP-Linked           $ 4,934 $ 6,801         $ 6,951    $ 8,628    $ 11,132   $ 11,893

Household Income
  25th percentile
    (1) CPS all sources    $ 18,368    $ 20,458   $ 20,810   $ 22,837   $ 21,893   $ 23,138
    (2) CPS five sources          --   $ 19,400   $ 19,933   $ 21,913   $ 21,210   $ 22,485
    (3) SIPP-linked admin         --   $ 22,436   $ 23,235   $ 28,825   $ 26,063   $ 33,714
    Percent diff (3) / (2)                 16%        17%        32%        23%        50%

  50th percentile
    (1) CPS all sources    $ 33,029    $ 36,050   $ 35,520   $ 40,470   $ 39,453   $ 43,205
    (2) CPS five sources          --   $ 34,780   $ 34,238   $ 39,025   $ 38,310   $ 41,977
    (3) SIPP-linked admin         --   $ 38,689   $ 41,864   $ 50,774   $ 46,755   $ 60,939
    Percent diff (3) / (2)                 11%        22%        30%        22%        45%




                                              -37-
  75th percentile
     (1) CPS all sources $ 55,963      $ 61,774     $ 59,896    $ 68,091     $ 69,011   $ 77,702
     (2) CPS five sources        --    $ 59,696     $ 58,007    $ 65,982     $ 67,367   $ 74,691
     (3) SIPP-linked admin       --    $ 62,374     $ 67,065    $ 79,914     $ 76,049   $ 95,083
     Percent diff (3) / (2)                  4%         16%         21%          13%         27%
Sources : SIPP Gold Standard File linked to Social Security Administration and IRS administrative
records and CPS ASEC.

Notes : Sample is all women who are either the householder or spouse of the householder, ages 65
to 69 at time of interview in either the SIPP or the CPS ASEC. Social security receipt is fraction of
women with positive annual OASDI benefits either in the administrative records or in the CPS
ASEC. Retirement income receipt is fraction of women with positive annual administrative record
retirement income from either Form W-2P for years 1978 to 1990 or Form 1099-R for years 1995
to 2012 or positive amounts of retirement, survivor, or disability income outside of social security
and VA benefits in the CPS ASEC. SIPP sample is restricted to those with a Personal
Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the administrative records. SIPP sample weights are
adjusted to account for selection into having a PIK. For each SIPP panel we estimate a logit model
for the presence of a PIK as a function of SIPP demographic characteristics and predict the
estimated propensity score. We then take the SIPP sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of
the estimated propensity score. Resulting weights along with CPS ASEC sample weights are used
in analysis. “CPS all sources” refers to total income in the CPS ASEC while “CPS five sources”
includes only earnings, social security, SSI, interest and dividends, and retirement income, which are
the same types of income available in the linked SIPP-admin data. Amounts are inflation adjusted
using the CPI-U-RS and expressed in 2012 dollars. Total income amounts are unavailable for 1984.
CPS ASEC retirement income for 1984 includes an estimate of survivor and disability income for
that year which raises the rate by 7 percentage points.




                                                   -38-
Table 4: Income of Retirement-Age Women by Years of Work Experience Between Ages 40 and 59: 2012

                                       Own Retirement                                         Median Household
                                       Income Receipt      Median Own Income                      Income
Work Experience         Distribution                                              Percent                           Percent
Between Ages 40-59      of Sample      CPS       Admin        CPS      Admin     Difference    CPS       Admin     Difference

All Women
    Work 0-5 Years         17%           0.108     0.154      $9,974    $8,692      -13%       $31,220   $39,120       25%
    Work 6-10 Years        11%           0.163     0.272     $12,056   $12,132        1%       $46,406   $52,977       14%
    Work 11-15 Years       15%           0.250     0.426     $16,182   $18,863       17%       $41,867   $52,693       26%
    Work 16-20 Years       58%           0.377     0.598     $26,020   $31,686       22%       $53,875   $64,715       20%
N = 3361

Married Women
    Work 0-5 Years         17%           0.055     0.101      $9,195    $7,684      -16%       $44,339   $50,138       13%
    Work 6-10 Years        12%           0.125     0.228     $11,541   $11,717        2%       $60,674   $64,551        6%
    Work 11-15 Years       14%           0.186     0.353     $13,632   $15,331       12%       $58,597   $71,146       21%
    Work 16-20 Years       56%           0.338     0.572     $21,895   $28,916       32%       $68,995   $82,609       20%
N = 2032




                                                               -39-
Not Married Women (includes cohabitators)
    Work 0-5 Years         15%              0.204      0.250      $11,802    $10,231     -13%        $15,361    $15,211      -1%
    Work 6-10 Years         9%              0.247      0.371      $13,890    $14,227       2%        $18,508    $22,119      20%
    Work 11-15 Years       16%              0.343      0.530      $19,255    $23,075      20%        $24,051    $30,812      28%
    Work 16-20 Years       60%              0.435      0.637      $30,465    $34,781      14%        $36,314    $41,629      15%
N = 1329

Source : CPS ASEC linked to administrative records.

Notes : Sample consists of women ages 65 to 69 in the 2013 CPS ASEC who are either the householder or the spouse of the
householder. Years of work experience between ages 40 to 59 are calculated as the number of years where annual earnings (wages and
self-employment combined) in the administrative records exceed the prevailing hourly federal minimum wage times 10 hours per week
times 52 weeks per year. Marital status is determined as of the CPS ASEC interview date. CPS columns refer to amounts reported on
the 2013 ASEC survey, while Admin columns refer to amounts after substituting values from administrative records. Admin sample is
restricted to CPS respondents with a Personal Identification Key (PIK) that allows linking to the administrative records. CPS ASEC
sample weights are adjusted to account for selection into having a PIK. For each year of the CPS ASEC we estimate a logit model for
the presence of a PIK as a function of CPS ASEC demographic characteristics and predict the estimated propensity score. We then
take the CPS ASEC sample weight and multiply it by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. Resulting weights along with CPS
ASEC sample weights are used in analysis.




                                                                    -40-
