                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 STEPPING ON A RAKE:
                              REPLICATION AND DIAGNOSIS

                                       John H. Cochrane

                                      Working Paper 22979
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22979


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2016, Revised October 2017




Previously circulated as “Stepping on a Rake: Replication and Diagnosis.” Computer programs
and updated drafts may be found at http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/. I thank two
referees, Eric Leeper (the editor), and Zhengyang Jiang for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Stepping on a Rake: Replication and Diagnosis
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 22979
December 2016, Revised October 2017
JEL No. E31,E4,E5

                                           ABSTRACT

The fiscal theory of the price level can describe monetary policy. Governments can set interest
rate targets and thereby affect inflation, with no change in fiscal surpluses. The same basic
mechanism describes interest rate targets, forward guidance, open market operations, and
quantitative easing. It does not require any monetary, pricing, or other frictions. In the presence of
long-term debt, higher interest rates lead to temporarily lower inflation, a challenging sign. I
derive and replicate the results of the Sims (2011) “stepping on a rake” model, which first
produced this negative sign, and produces realistic impulse-response functions. I show that Sims'
result is robust to many model features, but essentially requires long-term debt.


John H. Cochrane
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
john.cochrane@stanford.edu




Computer programs available on my webpage is available at
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/
1. Introduction

   The fiscal theory of the price level does not just describe inflation and deflation driven by
fiscal events. The fiscal theory of the price level also offers a cogent and unified description of
monetary policy: how governments can set interest rate targets; and how governments can affect
inflation and the real economy, by interest rate targets, by forward guidance about interest rate
targets, and by varying the quantity and maturity structure of government debt in open-market
and quantitative-easing operations, all without changes in fiscal surpluses.
   In the presence of long-term debt, an interest rate rise can produce a temporarily lower inflation
rate in this fiscal theory. Higher nominal interest rates mean lower nominal bond prices, which
lower the nominal market value of outstanding government debt. If expected future surpluses do
not change, as I assume of “monetary policy,” and at the existing price level, the market value of
government debt is then less than its real value to consumers and investors. People then try to
buy government debt, and to buy less goods and services, i.e. aggregate demand declines. The
price level declines, until the real value of nominal debt again matches the real present value of
primary surpluses. Since the inflation-lowering effect of higher rates depends on long-term bond
prices, and thus centrally on expected future short term rates, this mechanism is also a model of
forward guidance.
   Similarly, in the presence of long-term debt, buying back some long term debt, with no change
in surpluses, means less debt coming due at future dates, backed by unchanged surpluses. This
reduces the future price level. The extra money from today’s bond purchase drives up today’s
price level, an inflationary stimulus. The higher current and lower future price level imply a lower
long-term interest rate. This is a version of quantitative easing.
   Eventually, however, the Fisher effect wins out, and persistently higher nominal interest rates
mean higher inflation. Sims (2011) calls this pattern of responses to a persistent interest rate rise
“stepping on a rake.” He offers it as an explanation of the 1970s: Attempts to lower inflation by
raising interest rates, without fiscal reform, temporarily lowered inflation, but then inflation came
back even more strongly.
   This fiscal theory of monetary policy requires no frictions at all – no money demand, special
liquid asset, sticky prices, financial frictions, liquidity constraints, irrational expectations, and so
forth. Yes, one may add frictions and elaborations to obtain realistic dynamics. In particular,
pricing frictions deliver output effects of monetary policy. But we can now start with a simple
supply and demand benchmark, which delivers basic signs and intuitions, and then add frictions to

                                                   2
match dynamics, as we do elsewhere in economics, rather than require frictions to even get going,
i.e. to determine the price level, to describe the central bank’s ability to control interest rates and
inflation, or to produce the basic sign of monetary policy.
   Sims (2011) is a ready-made example. Sims specifies an interest rate target which rises with
inflation and output; fiscal surpluses that respond to output, with larger deficits in recessions; a
standard forward-looking sticky-price Phillips curve; a habit-like preference for smooth consump-
tion; and long-term government debt. His policy parameters are in the “passive-money / active-
fiscal” region of the Leeper (1991) categorization: Interest rates respond less than one for one to
inflation, and fiscal surpluses do not respond to validate revisions in the value of government debt
coming from arbitrary changes in the price level.
   Sims shows that a rise in interest rates produces a transitory decline in inflation (see the top left
panel of figure 2 below). If the interest rate rise is persistent, inflation eventually rises. Sims also
generates smooth impulse response functions with signs and magnitudes typical of the active-money
New-Keynesian literature.

1.1. Context

   One may be surprised that I focus on the temporary inflation decline rather than the eventual
long-term inflation rise in response to persistently higher interest rates. Common intuition suggests
that higher interest rates lower inflation, so the short-run negative response seems easy, and the long
run positive response seems a novelty. Indeed, Sims’ analysis of the 1970s was novel. Conventional
wisdom says that inflation grew out of control in the 1970s because rates were not raised high
enough or for long enough, not because they were raised too much or for too long.
   However, it has since become clear that this theoretical presumption should be reversed. Models
with forward-looking people, including standard new-Keynesian models, produce higher long-run
inflation in response to persistently higher interest rates. They have great trouble to produce even
a temporarily lower inflation. The intuition is simple: In these models, the Fisher relation, that
nominal interest rate equals real rate plus expected inflation, is a stable steady state. Real rates
settle down eventually, so inflation is attracted to the nominal rate.
   In fact, other than by this fiscal-theory mechanism, we do not have a simple, modern (rational
agents, market clearing) economic model that robustly produces even a short-run negative effect
of interest rates on inflation. (The qualifiers simple, modern, economic, and robust are important
to this statement. See Cochrane (2017a) for extensive discussion.) Thus, the ability to produce a


                                                   3
negative inflation response fills a gaping hole for monetary theory in general, and not just for the
fiscal theory.
   (Some confusion on this point comes down to the difference between interest rates and monetary
policy shocks. New-Keynesian models can have a negative response of inflation to monetary policy
shocks, but a positive response to interest rates, since interest rates also respond negatively to the
shock. In policy rule such as it = φπ πt + vti , with φπ > 1, when both i an π rise by the same
amount, v i declines.)
   The standard intuition that higher interest rates lead to lower inflation comes from adaptive
expectations models. In these models, the Fisher equation is an unstable steady state, so a persistent
rise in the nominal rate sends inflation spiraling off negatively. Real rates rises by more than the
nominal rate. Adaptive expectations thinking remains strong in policy circles, so the short run
negative sign seems natural and the long run positive sign seems puzzling in that context. But
current economic theory in forward-looking models goes the opposite way.
   That a negative sign is a gaping hole, and Sims’ success in filling it, is also not obvious from
reading either Sims or the standard active-money / passive-fiscal new-Keynesian literature. Super-
ficially, Sims’ model and impulse-response functions look similar to those of standard medium-scale
New-Keynesian models. For example, Smets and Wouters (2003) generate inflation that declines
and interest rates that rise after a monetary policy shock. After 5 months, inflation turns around
and is higher. Interest rates and inflation also go uniformly in the same direction in response to
an inflation objective shock. (See their figure 11, p. 1159 and figure 12, p. 1160.) Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997) produce a negative sign. Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2016) add
a search and matching model, among other ingredients, to a new-Keynesian model and obtain a
nice movement of inflation opposite to an interest rate rise. (See their figure 1.) These models, like
Sims’, also produce output declines (“c” in figure 2).
   Medium-scale new-Keynesian models thus seem already to provide the desired negative sign,
and the subsequent stepping on a rake rise, though the latter is frequently regarded as a bug not
a feature. It seems that Sims just says that there is a fiscal-theoretic alternative; that one can
produce roughly similar impulse-response functions from an active-fiscal / passive-money regime
in an otherwise fairly standard new-Keynesian model. Uniting both papers, the fiscal theory of
the price level is ready to compete directly with standard active-money new-Keynesian models as
a framework for understanding the macroeconomy.
   That is already a large contribution, that was Sims’ other point in writing the model, and it is


                                                  4
important if one accepts the theoretical difficulties of the standard new-Keynesian approach (e.g.
Cochrane (2011a)) and one wishes for an alternative. But it does not show gaping holes in the
standard approach, nor a particular empirical advantage of the fiscal framework.
   However, the negative effect of interest rates on inflation in these standard new-Keynesian
models is fragile. It is sensitive to model complexities, such as the search and matching model
in Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2016). It relies on transitory interest rate movements.
Interest rate changes all die out within 6 months in the above papers. In standard new-Keynesian
models, long-lasting interest rate rises lead to immediately higher inflation. Thus their negative
sign predictions fail the above qualifiers “simple” and “robust.”
   The inflation decline from the fiscal stepping on a rake mechanism, by contrast, is stronger for
permanent interest rate rises, as they have larger effects on long-term bond prices. It is robust to
the monetary policy shock process, and to all of the other model elaborations. We can see the basic
effect in a completely frictionless model, as explored in the first section of this paper.
   The contribution of this paper, then, is the architectural adage that “less is more.” You don’t
see this robustness, or the basic economic story of the inflation decline, in Sims’ full model. (Sims
also does not explore the main topic of the first half of this paper, how the government targets
nominal interest rates, or how the fiscal theory describes monetary policy in general.) Stripping
away the other ingredients – procyclical fiscal policy, policy rule reactions to output and inflation,
the preference for smooth consumption, even price stickiness – the basic negative sign remains.
Long-term debt and an unexpected shock are essential – the negative sign disappears without
these. But we didn’t know that either.
   I also show that the model has a smooth frictionless limit, unlike many new-Keynesian models
(see Cochrane (2017b)). The hump-shaped responses, with no price-level jumps, in Sims’ model
smoothly approach the price-level jumps of the frictionless model. Thus, the frictionless model with
price-level jumps does provide useful guidance to how a model without jumps behaves.
   Sims’ paper is therefore really the second step in a natural research program. It shows that
one can add common new-Keynesian elaborations to simple frictionless models, preserve the neg-
ative effect of interest rates on inflation, and achieve the same sort of reasonable impulse response
functions as the rest of the new-Keynesian literature.
   Sims also does not state the model, he does not derive the equilibrium conditions, and he does
not explain how to compute impulse-response functions. I fill that gap, and confirm Sims’ results.
Sims’ paper is methodologically as well as historically important, so showing how to solve it is


                                                   5
useful.

1.2. Limits and Literature

   The stepping on a rake mechanism does not revive all classic monetary doctrines, beliefs, and
mechanisms surrounding a negative effect of interest rates on inflation. In particular, it only gives
a temporary inflation decline. It does not produce the view that steady high rates will slowly grind
down inflation, a common view of the 1980s. Rational expectations new-Keynesian models share
this feature.
   Inflation declines when the rate rise is announced, not when it happens. A fully anticipated rate
rise has no effect. The inflation decline is stronger when prices are less sticky, counter to traditional
intuition. The aggregate demand reduction leading to lower inflation comes from a wealth effect of
long-term bonds, not from either intertemporal substitution or static IS shifts induced by a higher
contemporaneous interest rate. It can occur with no change in the contemporaneous rate. Thus, it
has nothing to do with the classic story that high nominal rates mean high real rates, which reduce
aggregate demand and via a Phillips curve reduce inflation. For these reasons, the stepping on a
rake mechanism also does not justify conventional policy conclusions based on adaptive expectations
ISLM thinking.
   Finally, the response to “monetary” policy – a change in interest rates – depends crucially on
the associated fiscal policy – the maturity structure of outstanding debt, and how people expect
the treasury to adjust surpluses in reaction to economic events and monetary policy actions. More
long-term debt implies a larger effect of interest rates on inflation, an important and potentially
testable implication.
   This paper is about theory: Can a simple, rational, economic model describe monetary policy,
and can such a model produce a negative response of inflation to interest rates in the short or long
run? Neither sign may true in the data. The evidence for a negative effect of monetary policy on
inflation is weak, and the evidence on long run signs even weaker. But it’s important to know that
monetary policy can produce this hallowed view in a simple rational model and how. Then, the
sign in the data is a matter of calibration, not a deep test of whole classes of theories. Similarly,
perhaps people are irrational. Perhaps super-rational central banks exploit irrational expectations,
via a mechanism whose sign has no rational economic foundation. Perhaps, thereby, the sign is
negative in the long and short run. I search for rational expectations models not for some rigid
insistence that only they can describe the world, but to find out if they even exist and what they


                                                   6
can do.
   This paper is somewhat integrative. Thinking about monetary policy within the fiscal theory
of the price level occurs scattered about in many sources, including my own, Cochrane (1998, 2005,
2011b, 2014, 2017a), as well as Leeper and Leith (2016), (see especially figure 6, with the stepping
on a rake pattern) Leeper and Walker (2013), Leeper and Zhou (2013), Leeper (2016), Jacobson,
Leeper and Preston (2017), other Sims papers, and those of other authors. The main novelty here is
to integrate interest rate targets with long-term debt, to integrate interest rate targets and quantity
operations, and to see how long-term debt creates a negative sign. And, it is perhaps a novelty
relative to many readers’ perceptions, to point out that the fiscal theory does not consign central
banks to irrelevance, that inflation is not just a fiscal phenomenon, and that the fiscal theory does
provide a cogent model of monetary policy.
   In particular, stepping on a rake works by the same mechanism as the analysis of long-term debt
in Cochrane (2001). Section 5 of that paper shows how long-term debt sales can lower inflation
today, raise interest rates, and raise future inflation, quantitative tightening or easing. Stepping
on a rake is the mirror image, in which higher interest rates lower inflation today, raise future
inflation, and result in greater debt sales. Expressing the same policy in terms of interest rate
targets makes contact with the empirical literature and the standard monetary policy literature.
The connection to quantities, however, shows that the same mechanism lies behind interest rate
targets, open market operations, forward guidance, and quantitative easing, unifying monetary
policy in a single framework.


2. Monetary policy in a frictionless fiscal theory

   This section sets out how monetary policy operates in a simple frictionless fiscal theory envi-
ronment. I focus on long-term debt and the stepping on a rake dynamics, which are more novel.

2.1. A frictionless rake

   A rise in interest rates first causes inflation to fall, and then to rise, in a frictionless fiscal theory
model with long-term debt.
   Use a constant real discount factor

                                              β = 1/(1 + r)




                                                     7
where r denotes the real rate of interest. Then the nominal interest rate it and inflation πt follow
the Fisher relationship,
                                                                              
                                       1       1                         Pt
                                            =     Et                                                           (1)
                                     1 + it   1+r                       Pt+1
                                              it ≈ r + Et πt+1                                                 (2)

where Pt denotes the price level. A rise in the nominal interest rate implies an immediate rise in
expected inflation. But the price level can still jump down when the interest rate rise is announced.
(Throughout, I do not verbally distinguish between a rise in expected inflation and a decline in
E(Pt /Pt+1 ). )
                                                                                       (t+j)
     At the beginning of period t, the government has outstanding Bt−1 discount bonds of maturity
j, each of which pays $1 at time t + j. Then, the government debt valuation equation, which states
that the real value of nominal government debt equals the real present value of primary surpluses,
generalizes from the familiar version with one-period debt
                                              (t)  ∞
                                         Bt−1      X
                                              = Et   β j st+j ,                                                (3)
                                          Pt
                                                            j=0

to                              P∞      (t+j) (t+j)                     ∞
                                   j=0 Qt    Bt−1                       X
                                                                = Et          β j st+j .                       (4)
                                          Pt
                                                                        j=0
                                                                  (t+j)
Here, st+j denotes the real primary surplus, and Qt                        denotes the time t nominal price of a j
                                                                     (t)
period discount bond. The maturing bond has price Qt = 1. For j > 0, the bond price is, in this
risk neutral constant real rate world,
                                                                          
                                          (t+j)                      Pt
                                         Qt         = β j Et                   .                               (5)
                                                                    Pt+j
     Now, take innovations (Et − Et−1 ) of (4). Define “monetary policy” as a change in current and
expected future interest rates, and hence bond prices, that involves no change in fiscal surpluses,
so (Et − Et−1 ) st+j = 0. (I generalize this definition considerably below.) We have
                                 P∞      (t+j) (t+j)                 ∞
                                   j=0 Qt     Bt−1                   X
                    (Et − Et−1 )                      = (Et − Et−1 )    β j st+j = 0.                          (6)
                                         Pt
                                                                                     j=0

        (t+j)
Debt Bt−1 is predetermined. The real present value of surpluses does not change by assumption.
                                                    (t+j)
If an interest rate rise lowers bond prices Qt              , then the price level Pt must also fall. The price
level Pt must jump by the same proportional amount as the change in nominal market value of
government debt.

                                                            8
   If the price level does not change, then the real value of government debt to investors is greater
than its real market value. People try to buy more government debt, and thus less goods and
services. This lack of “aggregate demand” pushes the price level down. The deflationary force is
the same as that which occurs if the real present value of primary surpluses {st+j } increases. It is
a “wealth effect” of government debt.
   The size of this short-term inflationary or disinflationary effect of monetary policy depends
exactly on how much the nominal market value of the debt changes. It is larger for greater bond-
price changes, and larger when more long-term debt is outstanding. Both restrictions may be useful
econometrically, in understanding episodes, and in practice.
   From the Fisher equation (2), however, higher interest rates mean higher expected future infla-
tion. So, after the one-period price level drop, inflation rises – the stepping on a rake effect.
                                        (t+j)
   In the case of one-period debt, Bt−1 = 0, j > 0, (6) reads
                                           (t)               ∞
                                         Bt−1                X
                          (Et − Et−1 )        = (Et − Et−1 )   β j st+j = 0.                               (7)
                                          Pt
                                                                  j=0

In this case, the price Pt does not change unless surpluses change. Long-term debt is crucial to the
temporary inflation decline.

2.2. Example
                                          (t+j)
   A geometric maturity structure Bt−1             = θj Bt−1 is analytically convenient. A perpetuity is
θ = 1, and one-period debt is θ = 0. Suppose the interest rate it+j = i is expected to last forever,
                                                                          (t+j)
and suppose surpluses are constant s. The bond price is then Qt                   = 1/(1 + i)j . The valuation
equation (4) becomes
                 P∞       (j) j          ∞
                     j=0 Q0 θ B−1
                                         X         θj B−1      1 + i B−1    1+r
                                    =                  j
                                                           =              =     s.                         (8)
                         P0                     (1 + i) P0   1 + i − θ P0    r
                                         j=0

Start at a steady state B−1 = B, P−1 = P , i−1 = r. In this steady state we have
                                          1+r B   1+r
                                                =     s.                                                   (9)
                                         1+r−θP    r
Therefore, we can express (8) as
                                                 (1 + i) (1 + r − θ)
                                     P0 =                            P.                                  (10)
                                                 (1 + r) (1 + i − θ)
The price level path for t ≥ 0 then displays greater inflation,
                                                1+i t
                                                     
                                         Pt =            P0 .                                            (11)
                                                1+r

                                                        9
   These formulas are prettier in continuous time, though keeping track of which variables can
and can’t jump is trickier. Sims’ model is in continuous time, and this is its frictionless limit. The
valuation equation (4) becomes
                                R∞   (t+j) (t+j)                 ∞
                                j=0 Qt    Bt     dj          Z
                                                      = Et           e−rj st+j dj.
                                       Pt                    j=0

                            (t+j)
With maturity structure Bt        = ϑe−ϑj Bt , and a constant interest rate it = i,
                                  Z ∞
                                                    Bt      ϑ Bt     s
                                ϑ      e−ij e−ϑj dj     =           = .                          (12)
                                   j=0              P t   i + ϑ P t  r

Here ϑ = 0 is the perpetuity and ϑ = ∞ is instantaneous debt. Bt is predetermined. Pt can jump.
Starting from the it = r, t < 0 steady state, if i0 jumps to a new permanently higher value i, we
now have
                                                      r+ϑ
                                             P0 =         P                                      (13)
                                                      i+ϑ
in place of (10). After that,
                                             Pt = P0 e(i−r)t

in place of (11).
   In the case of one-period debt, θ = 0 or ϑ = ∞, P0 = P and there is no downward jump. In
the case of a perpetuity, θ = 1 or ϑ = 0, (10) becomes

                                                    1+ir
                                            P0 =          P.                                     (14)
                                                    1+r i

and (13) becomes
                                                   r
                                               P0 = P.                                           (15)
                                                   i
   The price level P0 jumps down as the interest rate rises, and proportionally to the interest rate
rise. This is potentially a large effect; a rise in interest rates from r = 3% to i = 4% occasions a
25% price level drop. However, our governments maintain much shorter maturity structures, and
monetary policy changes in interest rates are not permanent, reducing the size of the effect.
   The “log(Pt )” line of figure 1 plots inflation and the interest rate in the discrete-time version
of this example, (10)-(11), using θ = 0.8, which roughly approximates the maturity structure of
U.S. federal debt. At time 0, the interest rate rises permanently and unexpectedly from 3% to
4%. The log price level log(P0 ) jumps down by 3.3%. Thereafter, the price level grows by 1% per
period, mirroring the rise in nominal rate. Sims’ model in figures 3, 4 and 7 below gives this sort
of dynamics, smeared out by the elaborations of his model.

                                                      10
                      5


                      4
                                        it
                      3


                      2

                                   Short debt or expected
           Percent




                      1


                      0


                     −1


                     −2        Announced at −3                                   log(P )
                                                                                      t

                     −3


                     −4
                          −6          −4           −2            0           2             4         6
                                                             Time


                          Figure 1: Response of log price level to an interest rate rise. θ = 0.8.


   The dashed line marked “short debt or expected” in figure 1 plots inflation in the θ = 0 case of
only one-period debt. In this case, inflation starts one period after the interest rate rise, with no
downward jump.

2.3. Expected interest rates and forward guidance

   In this model, the expected path of interest rates matters more than the current rate in deter-
mining a deflationary force. Looking at the basic innovation equation (6), a credible, persistent
interest rate rise that lowers long term bond prices a lot has a stronger disinflationary effect than a
tentative or transitory rate rise that induces smaller changes to long-term bond prices. In this way,
this model gives an opposite picture from standard new-Keynesian models, that produce larger
inflation declines for transitory AR(1) interest rate movements than for persistent interest-rate
movements.
   The short-term interest rate need not move at all. This model captures “forward guidance.” If
the central bank can credibly commit to higher or lower interest rates in the future, that announce-
ment will change long-term bond prices, and it will have an immediate inflationary or deflationary

                                                            11
impact, even if it has no effect on the current interest rate.
   The inflationary or deflationary force in this model has really nothing to do with the contem-
poraneous interest rate. There is no variation in real interest rates , no reduction in aggregate
demand due to a currently higher real interest rate, no Phillips curve, and so forth. The time-zero
disinflation is entirely a “wealth effect” stemming from the value of government debt.
   However, an announcement today of a future interest rate change only affects the value of debt
whose maturity exceeds the time interval before rates change. Therefore, forward guidance has
a smaller effect on current inflation than the same expectations coupled with a current rate rise.
Forward guidance eventually loses its power altogether once the guidance period exceeds the longest
outstanding bond maturities.
   Equivalently, interest rate rises have disinflationary effects on the date of their announcement,
not the date of the interest rate rise. Their effects are smaller, since a smaller range of bond prices
is affected, and their effects disappear once they are long-enough anticipated.
   For example, suppose that at time 0, the government announces that interest rates will rise
starting at time T onward. Now, inflation starts in period T + 1, and only bond prices of maturity
T + 1 or greater are affected. Splitting the numerator of (4),
                         PT      (j) (j)   P∞         (j) (j)      ∞
                            j=0 Q0 B−1 +      j=T +1 Q0 B−1
                                                                   X
                                                              = E0   β j sj ,                     (16)
                                          P0
                                                                            j=0

only the second term in the numerator on the left hand side is affected. Furthermore, for given
interest rate rise, bond price declines in that second term are smaller: For a permanent rise from r
to i starting at time T , the prices of bonds that mature at j ≤ T are unaffected, and the the prices
of bonds that mature at T + j are

                                   (T +j)           1       1           1
                                  Q0        =                     >             .
                                                (1 + r)T (1 + i)j   (1 + i)T +j
The downward price jump happens at time 0 when the interest rate rise is announced, not at time
T when interest rates actually rise. When the time T of the interest rate rise exceeds the maturity
                            (j)
of debt outstanding – if B−1 = 0 for j > T – the price-level jump disappears. In this sense, a fully
expected interest rate rise has no negative price effect.
   Continuing the geometric maturity example, when the government announces at time 0 that
interest rates will rise from r to i starting at time T, equation (16) reads
                                                                    
                         T       j       ∞         T       (j−T )
                        X      θ        X        θ       θ            B−1 = s
                      
                                   j
                                     +               T        (j−T )
                            (1 + r)           (1 + r) (1 + i)          P0   1−β
                      j=0                   j=T +1


                                                         12
and with a bit of algebra
                                              T                          
                            P0            θ           (1 + i) (1 + r − θ)
                               −1=                                        −1 ,
                            P            1+r          (1 + r) (1 + i − θ)

generalizing (10). In continuous time, we have
                        Z T                Z ∞                    
                              −rj −ϑj             −rT −i(j−T ) −ϑj   B0  s
                        ϑ    e e dj + ϑ         e             e dj      = ,
                           0                 T                       P0  r

leading to                                                          
                                   P0                          r+ϑ
                                      − 1 = e−(r+ϑ)T               −1 ,
                                   P                           i+ϑ
generalizing (13).
   The price level P0 still jumps – forward guidance works. Longer T or shorter maturity structures
— lower θ or larger ϑ – give a smaller price-level jump for a given interest rate rise. As T → ∞,
the downward price level jump goes to zero.
   figure 1 includes the discrete-time version of this case, in which the interest rate rise is announced
at time −3. The price level jumps down at time −3, but that jump is smaller. The price level stays
at the new lower level until the interest rate rises. On the date 0 that the interest rate rises there
is no further jump. Inflation then rises following the higher nominal rate.
   The line “short debt or expected” also presents the case that the interest rate rise is completely
expected, before any long-term debt was sold, the T → ∞ limit. A fully expected rate rise has no
deflationary effect, even with long-term debt.

2.4. Quantities and mechanisms

   To understand just how the government can set interest rates, the forces behind price-level de-
termination, and how the interest-rate setting mechanism is related to quantitative easing, forward
guidance, open market operations, and other debt operations, and how all this might be called
“monetary policy,” it is useful to follow the underlying bond purchases and sales.
   It helps to tell a story about the sequence of events during a period. In the morning of period
              (t)
t, coupons Bt−1 come due. The government prints up fresh cash to redeem the coupons. At the
end of the day, the government soaks up the newly printed cash by levying taxes net of spending
Pt st , and by selling new debt.
   In equilibrium, all the cash is soaked up in this way, as nobody wants to hold non-interest
bearing cash overnight. Thus, we have the flow equilibrium condition

                                       (t)                 (t+1)    (t+1)
                                     Bt−1 = Pt st + Qt             Bt                               (17)

                                                      13
for one-period debt, and
                                               ∞                                     
                                (t)                   (t+j)        (t+j)      (t+j)
                                               X
                              Bt−1 = Pt st +         Qt           Bt       − Bt−1                (18)
                                               j=1

with long-term debt. We can iterate (18) forward, with the consumer’s transversality condition
that the real value of nominal debt does not grow too fast, to obtain the present-value equilibrium
condition (4), and we can use (4) at two adjacent dates to obtain (18).
     This flow condition helps us to understand fiscal price level determination. If the government
prints up more money in the morning to pay off maturing debt than it soaks up in the evening from
tax payments and debt sales, then as the evening approaches, people try to get rid of unneeded
money by buying goods and services. They bid up the price level, until larger net nominal tax
payments Pt st and bond sales soak up the money.
     Printing money in the morning and soaking it up in the afternoon is a useful story, but not
necessary. There is no transactions demand for money and no cash in advance constraint. Trans-
actions in a frictionless economy can be handled with maturing government debt directly, or inside
claims to maturing government debt. The “day” can collapse to a single moment. Government
debt that promises to pay a dollar is valued even if there are no dollars, because it gives one the
right to be relieved of one dollar’s worth of tax liability. The dollar can remain a unit of account
even if it is not a medium of exchange. (The model also extends straightforwardly to zero nominal
interest rates, where cash and bonds are perfect substitutes, and to the case of a money demand
by which people want to hold some cash overnight despite its interest cost. )

2.5. Interest rate targets

     Now, as above I defined “monetary policy” as a change in interest rates with no change in fiscal
surpluses, define here “monetary policy” as debt sales with no change in fiscal surpluses.
     We can now answer, just how monetary policy can target the nominal interest rate, even with no
monetary, financial, or pricing frictions, and no money demand in particular. This is a frictionless
model, not just a frictionless limit in which the last dollar of money demand and money supply
determine the price level.
     It is easiest to see the mechanism with one-period debt, and then see that it survives in the
presence of long-term debt. Consider what happens at the end of the day, if the government
decides to change the amount of debt it sells, without changing current and future surpluses. Using
 (t+1)
Qt       = 1/(1 + it ) = βEt (Pt /Pt+1 ) and the valuation formula (3) at time t + 1, the real revenue


                                                      14
the government obtains from selling such debt – the right hand term in the flow equation (17) – is
                                                                    ∞
                                                             !
                      (t+1)      (t+1) (t+1)           (t+1)
                1 Bt          Qt      Bt             Bt             X
                            =                = βEt             = Et    β j+1 st+1+j .         (19)
              1 + it Pt              Pt               Pt+1
                                                                            j=0

   The real revenue the government obtains by selling debt without changing surpluses is constant,
independent of the amount of debt it sells, and equal to the real present value of future surpluses
backing the debt. In this one-period debt case, all debt is rolled over every period, so the end of day
                                                                    (t+1)
debt sale is a claim to all future surpluses. The bond price Qt             , interest rate it , and expected
                                                                                              (t+1)
inflation Et (Pt /Pt+1 ) all move proportionally as the government sells more debt Bt                 . Selling
additional debt is like a share split, which changes the number of shares without changing expected
future dividends, which moves prices one for one, and which does not raise any revenue.
   Alternatively, the government can announce the interest rate it , and offer to sell any amount
          (t+1)
of debt Bt        at that price, again fixing surpluses. Now (19) describes the quantity of debt that
people will buy at the set price.
   This is the key observation for an interest rate target. One might worry that in a frictionless
economy, an attempt by the government to set its interest rate with a flat debt supply curve would
lead to potentially infinite demands. This is not the case. The demand curve is unit-elastic, not
infinitely elastic. Furthermore, quantities are not large. The constant-revenue demand curve is
unit-elastic. To engineer a 1 percent higher interest rate, the government only needs to sell one
percent more nominal debt.
   The government can target its nominal rate by this mechanism, but not its real rate. An
attempt to do that would, in this model, lead to infinite demands. Moreover, if the government
promised (even implicitly) to raise surpluses in response to debt sales, then the demand would be
indeterminate. Both cases can leave the impression that an interest rate target in a frictionless
economy is infeasible, but these are not the cases we are studying.
   These operations have some of the feel of traditional money supply and demand stories. Selling
             (t+1)
more debt Bt         , in return for time t cash, raises interest rates, just as a traditional open market
operation is said to do, though by a completely different mechanism. Flat or vertical debt supply
curves work like flat or vertical money supply curves. A vertical debt supply curve sets the interest
rate, or a horizontal supply curve – an interest rate target – will determine the quantity of debt.
   Nonetheless, both debt sales and interest rate targets with constant surpluses initially feel
distant from current institutions. Our treasuries, not central banks, issue debt. Treasuries sell
more debt in order to fund current deficits, negative st , with greater revenues. To do so they must

                                                     15
promise implicitly or explicitly to raise future surpluses. Our treasuries issue fixed quantities of
debt at auction, they do not fix the interest rate and let the market determine the size of the issue.
Our treasuries conduct the equivalent of equity offerings, which raise revenue, do not depress prices,
and promise higher total dividends; not the equivalent of share splits, which raise no revenue, lower
prices, and promise no change in dividends.
     However, on closer look, this mechanism can be read as a model of our central banks and
treasuries, taken to the frictionless limit. The central bank sets the short-term interest rate. It
does so by setting the interest rate on reserves, the discount rate, or by setting a corridor for
short-term borrowing. Our central banks allow free conversion of cash to interest-paying reserves,
which are short-term government debt, and they fix the rate on reserves. Thus, the interest on
reserves regime really is quite close to the fixed interest rate, horizontal supply regime described
above. That people still hold cash overnight makes little difference to the model. However, in this
context the central bank could as well be a committee that just announces the short-term rate.
Practically a defining feature of central banks is that they may not engage in policies with direct
fiscal consequences, such as helicopter money. They must always buy or sell one kind of debt in
exchange for another.
     This interest rate, and its expected future values, determine bond prices. The treasury then
                                                                                                 (t+1)
decides how much debt to sell at the new bond prices in order to finance its deficits. Given Qt          ,
Pt , and the surplus or deficit st the treasury must finance, (19) describes how much nominal debt
 (t+1)
Bt       the treasury must sell to finance the deficit. Therefore, the treasury can set a quantity to
sell, and not a price, as it does. If the central bank raises interest rates one percent, the treasury
will see one percent lower bond prices. The treasury will then raise the face value of debt it sells by
one percent, in order to sell enough debt to roll over existing debt and to cover the current surplus
or deficit. The government overall is really selling any quantity of debt at a fixed interest rate,
though neither treasury nor central bank may be aware of that fact.
     This institutional separation between treasury and central bank is important. Since expectations
of future surpluses are somewhat nebulous, and treasury issues do not come with specific tax
streams, it is important to have one institutional structure for selling more debt without raising
revenue, without changing expected surpluses, and in order to affect interest rates and inflation;
and a distinct institutional structure for selling debt that does raise revenue, does change expected
future surpluses, and does not affect interest rates and inflation. By analogy, a share split and
a secondary offering both increase the number of shares outstanding, and so look identical in


                                                  16
analogous asset pricing equations. But they are conducted in very different institutional structures.
One institutional structure – a share split – communicates no change in expected dividends, it
changes the stock price, and it raises no revenue. The other institutional structure – a secondary
offering – communicates a proportionate change in expected dividends, does not affect the stock
price (beyond implicit information revelation), and raises revenue.
   However, for the purposes here, it is not important to match closely current central bank and
treasury operating procedures. This is the abstract, totally frictionless benchmark model. The
point here is to understand that such a simplified model can work; that the government can set
interest rates, expected inflation, and the price level in such a model; that the mechanics of such
a model make economic sense. Models that wish to really mimic the details of current or historic
operating procedures may well need to incorporate monetary, pricing, or financial frictions.
   So, I continue to call “monetary policy” the setting of interest rates or bond prices, or chang-
                                                             (t+j)
ing the amount or maturity structure of debt {Bt                     }, with no change in fiscal surpluses {st }
(generalized below), and I continue to call changes in those surpluses “fiscal policy”, potentially
accompanied by bond sales, both henceforth without quotes.
   (This fiscal policy can create inflation too, which in the presence of price stickiness may increase
output. So, fiscal theory also contains a description of fiscal stimulus. It is also a completely different
mechanism than the usual multiplier, however. By credibly lowering future surpluses, it encourages
people to sell government debt, and thus try to buy goods and services. The decline in expected
future surpluses rather than the current deficit is the key to any stimulative effect.)
   In sum, with one-period debt and in this frictionless model, a clean separation occurs. From
(7),
                           (t)                                             ∞
                         Bt−1                     Pt                         X
                              (Et − Et−1 )                  = (Et − Et−1 )          β j st+j ,             (20)
                         Pt−1                    Pt−1
                                                                              j=0

so unexpected inflation comes only from innovations to fiscal policy. From (19), monetary policy
can entirely control nominal interest rates, Furthermore, by setting interest rates, monetary policy
here directly controls expected inflation. So despite the fact that this is the “fiscal” theory of the
price level, and in a model with no monetary, pricing, or financial frictions, there is plenty for
“monetary” policy to do.

2.6. Long-term interest rates and quantitative easing

   Monetary policy can also control long-term interest rates. Again, it can specify a vertical or
horizontal supply curve: Expected future debt sales determine expected future one-period interest

                                                        17
rates, or, expected future interest rate targets determine expected future debt sales. Then, the
standard term structure of interest rates connects expected future one-period interest rates to
long-term bond prices. In the perfect foresight case,
                                                          j−1
                                           (t+j)
                                                          Y        1
                                         Qt         =                    .
                                                                1 + it+k
                                                          k=0

   Monetary policy can also control long-term bond prices directly, by buying and selling long-term
bonds, in a policy that begins to look like quantitative easing. As a very simple example, suppose
                           (0)
only one-period debt B−1 is outstanding at the beginning of period 0, so P0 is determined by

                                              (0)  ∞
                                          B−1      X
                                              = E0   β j sj .                                                     (21)
                                           P0
                                                               j=0

                                                                                                                  (j)
At the end of period 0, the government sells long-term debt for all periods j in the future, {B0 },
                                                                      (j)        (j)
and then never buys, sells, or rolls over debt again so Bj−1 = B0 . At period j, the government
pays off the maturing debt from time j surpluses, so the time j price level is set by
                                                     (j)
                                                    B0
                                                        = sj .                                                    (22)
                                                     Pj

   Now long-term bond prices are
                                     (j)           
                                    Q0          j 1        E0 (sj )
                                         = E0 β       = βj    (j)
                                                                    .                                             (23)
                                    P0           Pj         B                0

                                                    (j)
Surpluses sj are split among bond holders B0 . The more bonds sold, the lower the price of each
                                                                                 (j)
bond. Equation (23) either describes how greater bond sales B0                         of each maturity lower bond
          (j)                                                                                               (j)
prices   Q0     and raise long-term yields at that maturity, or it describes how many bonds B0                     the
                                                 (j)
government will sell if it sets a fixed price   Q0 .
   Combinations of the two policies – expectations that the government will buy or sell debt in the
future, in a state-contingent way, along with changes in the maturity structure of the debt today –
offer a rich set of possibilities for the management of interest rates and expected inflation. “Rich”
also means hard to analyze, however. This section stops with simple examples, as otherwise we are
soon drowned in algebra. However, state-contingent debt sales and repurchases, such as rolling over
more debt when a recession shocks surpluses, are a crucial way the government smooths surplus
shocks across time and states, and thereby smooths inflation. For empirical application or policy
analysis, we cannot stop with simple examples.


                                                          18
2.7. Stepping on a rake: debt view

   In the last example, the government could control long-term bond prices, but since there was
no long-term debt outstanding at period 0, changing interest rates or bond prices did not affect the
initial price level P0 . Now, let us add outstanding long-term debt, to see the quantity side of the
stepping on a rake mechanism.
   To see the mechanism in the simplest example, consider a two-period version of the model. At
                                                                                       (1)
time 0, there is long-term debt outstanding, coming due at time 1, B−1 > 0. At the end of time 0,
                                                                               (1)     (1)   (1)
the government may sell additional time 1 debt, in amount B0 − B−1 . (B0 is the total amount
                                             (1)       (1)                                                (1)
outstanding at the end of time 0, and B0 − B−1 is the amount sold at time 0. I highlight B0
with boldface to focus on its influence.) The present value equation (4) determines prices at period
0 and 1 by
                                      (0)      (1)    (1)
                                    B−1 + Q0 B−1
                                                 = s0 + βE0 s1                                           (24)
                                         P0
                                                      (1)
                                                     B0
                                                        = s1 .                                           (25)
                                                     P1
                                                             (0)      (1)
Again, we fix surpluses s0 , s1 , pre-existing debt B−1 , B−1 , and look for effects on the price level,
P0 , P1 and bond prices and interest rates
                                                                              
                                      (1)       1                         P0
                                     Q0     =        = βE0                         .                     (26)
                                              1 + i0                      P1

   Equation (25) directly determines P1 . Substituting (26) and (25) into (24), P0 is given by
                                (0)           (1)     (1)
                                                          !
                              B−1           B0 − B−1
                                    = s0 +        (1)
                                                            βE0 (s1 ) .                        (27)
                               P0               B           0

                                     (1)                                                           (1)    (1)
With outstanding long-term debt B−1 > 0, the price level P0 is now affected by debt sales B0 −B−1
at time 1, with no change in surpluses – by monetary policy in the form of quantitative easing or
tightening.
                                                                (1)
   Examining (25) and (27), we see that raising B0 raises P1 and lowers P0 – the stepping on a
rake effect. It thus raises the interest rate i0 . Thus, by controlling the amount of debt to be sold
 (1)
B0 , monetary policy can still control the nominal interest rate and the expected inflation rate.
Conversely, the government can announce an interest rate target i0 , and offer to buy and sell debt
 (1)
B0 freely at that rate. The model then tells us the demand for that debt.
   The stepping on a rake effect happens because new long-term debt sales dilute existing long-
term debt as a claim to future surpluses. We can split (25) between existing and newly-sold debt,

                                                       19
as
                                             (1)     (1)             (1)
                                       (B0 − B−1 ) + B−1
                                                         = s1 .
                                              P1
The surpluses s1 are divided between new sales and existing bonds. The new sales transfer to new
bondholders resources that were expected by existing long-term bond holders. Selling such bonds
generates revenue at time 0, that soaks up money and pushes down the time 0 price level. To
see this fact, look the period 0 flow equation, the specialization of (18), which says that maturing
bonds must be paid by surpluses or by new bond sales,
                                       (0)                 (1)       (1)     (1)
                                     B−1       Q (B0 − B−1 )
                                         = s0 + 0            .                                   (28)
                                      P0           P0
Using (25) and (26) in this flow equation, we can rewrite its second term, which represents the real
revenue raised by bond sales at the end of time 0, so (28) becomes
                                 (0)           (1)     (1)
                                                           !
                               B−1           B0 − B−1
                                     = s0 +        (1)
                                                             βE (s1 ) .
                                P0               B               0
                                                         (1)
When there is long-term debt outstanding B−1 , then selling new debt without changing future
surpluses provides revenue in period 0. Fixing surpluses s0 , this revenue soaks up money and
drives down the price level P0 .

2.8. Stepping on a rake: dynamic examples
     Here, I consider the debt quantity side of the simple stepping on a rake examples plotted in
figure 1. With one-period debt, there is a unique debt policy that generates the interest rate rise.
With long-term debt, multiple debt policies produce the same interest rate and inflation path. I
examine three of them: I show how the government can implement the rate rise with future short-
term debt sales, with future long-term debt sales, and by a version of quantitative easing that
rearranges the maturity structure at time 0 only.
     A general rule describes interest rate targets: With constant surpluses s and with perfect
foresight, the government debt valuation equation (4) implies that for interest rates {it }, debt must
follow                         P∞       (t+1+j) (t+1+j)
                                   j=0 Qt+1     Bt                       Pt+1   1 + it
                                   P∞      (t+j) (t+j)
                                                                     =        =                  (29)
                                                                          Pt    1+r
                                     j=0 Qt     Bt−1
or, the market value of nominal debt must grow at the inflation rate.
     In the case of one-period debt, this rule is simple as usual,
                                             (t+1)
                                        Bt               Pt+1   1 + it
                                          (t)
                                                     =        =        .
                                         Bt−1             Pt    1+r

                                                           20
                                                                                                             (0)
For the interest rate to rise from r to i permanently, at time 0, with initial condition B−1 , debt
must simply start to grow at the inflation rate,

                                                 1 + i t (0)
                                                     
                                       (t+1)
                                     Bt      =          B−1 .
                                                 1+r

An interest rate target will lead to this path of debt; a quantity rule must have this path to generate
the desired path of interest rates.
   With long-term debt, there are many debt policies consistent with a given interest rate path.
As long as the nominal market value of the debt grows at the interest rate, the maturity structure
of the debt is irrelevant to the impulse response function after date 0. (The maturity structure
matters to later shocks, of course.) All that maters to generating the interest rate path is that the
total nominal market value grow at the desired inflation rate.
   As one example, suppose the economy starts at the steady state with perpetuities B p outstand-
ing, and additional one-period debt B̃. (I use a tilde, B̃, because there is also a maturing coupon
                                                                                          (t)     (t)
in the perpetuity, so total one-period debt coming due at date t is Bt−1 = B̃t−1 + B p .) Suppose
surpluses are constant st = s.
   Then, suppose first that monetary policy is implemented by buying and selling this one-period
                           (t+1)
debt only, in amounts B̃t          , as central banks traditionally did, and suppose the government does
not buy and sell any more long-term debt Btp = B p . The government debt valuation equation (4)
now reads
                   (t)     P∞          1      p        (t)
                 B̃t−1 +         j=0 (1+i)j B         B̃t−1 + 1+i
                                                               i B
                                                                   p
                                                                       1+r    B̃ + 1+r
                                                                                    r B
                                                                                        p
                                                  =                  =     s=             .                        (30)
                                 Pt                         Pt          r          P
(The central term with s is the present value of surpluses, held constant here. The equality to the
right expresses the valuation equation at the initial steady state with it = r. The equalities to the
left express the valuation equation at the new interest rate it = i.) To produce an interest rate i,
                                                                            (t+1)
or if the government fixes that rate and freely sells debt B̃t                      at that price, the overall nominal
value of debt must grow at the inflation rate, from (29) and (30),
                                              (t+1)         1+i p
                                            B̃t        +     i B         1+i
                                               (t)
                                                                     =       .
                                             B̃t−1    +    1+i p         1+r
                                                            i B

                           (0)                                                   (t+1)
With initial condition B̃−1 = B̃, the path of one-period debt B̃t                        must follow
                                                                    t            
                              (t+1)      1+i p                 1+i            1+i p
                            B̃t        +    B =                          B̃ +    B .
                                          i                    1+r             i



                                                               21
   Here, monetary policy produces a persistent interest rate rise, by open market operations of
one-period debt. Expected future one-period debt sales lead to higher expected future interest rates
and expected future inflation.
   The price-level jump at time 0 follows from the preexisting debt. At time 0, the condition that
the present value of surpluses is unchanged (30) implies
                                                              1+i p
                                                   B̃ +        i B
                                            P0 =              1+r p
                                                                    P,
                                                   B̃ +        r B
which leads to P0 = P in the one-period case B p = 0, and to the downward jump proportional to
the interest rate rise (14) in the perpetuity case B̃ = 0.
                      (t+1)
   The debt sales {B̃t        } only set interest rates, they do not directly control the P0 jump. Higher
interest rates and a consequent lower market value of debt cause the price level P0 to jump. There
is no downward jump in debt. The current and expected future one-period debt sales devalue the
outstanding perpetuities as claims to future surpluses.
   To generate forward guidance, an announcement at 0 that interest rates will rise starting at
time T, we follow the same idea. The market value of nominal debt must be expected to start
rising at time T.
   Secondly, the government could target interest rates {it } by buying and selling perpetuities Btp ,
so B̃t = 0. The condition that the nominal value of the debt rises at the inflation rate would be
even simpler,                                                       t
                                                               1+i
                                           Btp   =B   p
                                                                          .                         (31)
                                                               1+r
Governments typically do not do this. They typically accomplish monetary policy with short-term
debt, and they typically accomplish fiscal policy, which implies changes in surpluses, with long-term
debt. This separation may help to communicate different expectations of surpluses.
   These examples rely on expected future debt sales or expected future interest rate targets to
drive the yield curve today. Third, as above, the government can set long-term interest rates
directly by transacting in long-term debt at time zero, in something like quantitative easing (QE)
operations. In the presence of outstanding long-term debt, long-term debt sales will raise rates
and lower the initial price level, and vice versa. By taking action immediately, the debt operation
may communicate a change in central bank intentions more effectively than promising a change in
future interest rate targets or future debt purchases and sales.
   To generate a simple example, we can follow the same idea as in equation (23) – just sell debt at
each maturity to give the desired price path, with no future debt sales. Again, suppose that at the

                                                          22
                                                                                              (j)
end of time 0, the government sets the maturity structure of the debt {B0 }, and thereafter neither
                            (j)       (j)
buys or sells any debt, Bj−1 = B0 , simply paying off this debt as it comes due. Surpluses are
                                                                                                           (j)
constant. With no future sales or purchases, the price level at time j is set as in (22), B0 /Pj = s.
Then, to produce the interest rate i at all dates in the future, the maturity structure must be
                                              (j)
                                             B0              Pj    1+i
                                             (j−1)
                                                        =        =     .                                         (32)
                                            B0              Pj−1   1+r

Debt across maturities at time 0 must grow at the inflation rate.

                                             1 + i j (1)
                                                  
                                      (j)
                                    B0 =               B0 .                                                      (33)
                                             1+r
              (1)
   We find B0       from the initial condition (29) stating that the market value of debt from 0 to 1
grows at the rate of inflation to produce i0 = i,
                                                                             j
                            P∞       1     (j)          P∞        1     1+i         (1)
                                                                                   B0          1+r (1)
                    1+i       j=0 (1+i)j B0                 j=0 (1+i)j 1+r                      r B0
                        =    P∞       1     p
                                                    =              1+i p
                                                                                          =     1+i p
                                                                                                       .         (34)
                    1+r        j=0 (1+i)j B                          i B                         i B

   Uniting (33) and (34), to start with a perpetuity B p , and create interest rates that rise from r
to i at time 0, promising no future debt sales, the date 0 maturity structure must be
                                        (j)
                                               r 1 + i j+1
                                                       
                                      B0
                                            =               .
                                       Bp      i 1+r

For small j, this number is less than one, while for large j, the number is greater than one. Thus, to
engineer the interest rate rise and consequent stepping on a rake inflation pattern, the government
buys back short-term debt, and sells long-term debt. Conversely, to produce an upward price-level
jump at time 0 (stimulus), and lower long-term interest rates, the government buys back long-term
debt and issues short-term debt, quantitative easing.
   In sum, we see how the same mechanism and result lies behind interest rate policy, forward
guidance, and quantitative easing. The government can implement monetary policy by targeting
short term or long-term interest rates, or by buying and selling bonds.

2.9. A constraint

   How far can monetary policy go with such debt operations, or interest rate targets, with constant
surpluses?
   Using the bond price from (5), we can write the government debt valuation equation (4)
                                    ∞                     ∞
                           (0) 1        j (j)      1
                                   X                        X
                          B−1    +     β B−1 E0        = E0    β j sj .                   (35)
                              P0                   Pj
                                            j=1                               j=0


                                                            23
With one-period debt, the second term is absent, ad surplus expectations alone drive shocks to
the price level P0 . With long-term debt, surplus expectations at time 0 drive a moving average of
current and future inverse price levels, weighted by debt outstanding at time 0. In the presence
of outstanding long-term debt, the government can, by varying debt at time 0 or thereafter, or
equivalently by varying interest rate targets, achieve any price level path consistent with (35), and
only those levels. (This is equation (31) in Cochrane (2001), which has additional discussion.)
       This equation makes precise an observation seen in the examples, and offers a general version
of Sims’ “stepping on a rake” observation. Monetary policy with constant surpluses can only lower
the price level P0 by raising prices at some other time. It cannot raise or lower the overall price
level at every date t ≥ 0. This part of the separation result (20) remains. Furthermore, for dates j
                                 (j)
with no debt outstanding, B−1 = 0, there is no trade-off. Monetary policy can still freely pick the
expected price level E0 (1/Pj ) for such periods, but doing so has no effect on the initial price level
P0 .
                         (j)
       Likewise, using Q0 = E0 (β j P0 /Pj ) we can write

                                                        j B (j) Q(j)
                                       (0)     P∞                             ∞
                                  B−1           j=1 β      −1 0
                                                                              X
                                      +                                = E0         β j sj .        (36)
                                   P0               P0
                                                                              j=0

This equation acts as a similar constraint linking bond prices and the initial price level. Monetary
                                         (j)
policy can set any bond prices Q0 > 0, either directly by offering debt at fixed prices, via debt
sales and purchases, or by expectations of future interest rates. Equation (36) then expresses the
effect of these bond prices on the time-0 price level.

2.10. Continuous time and sticky prices

       Sims’ analysis seems to be quite different, in that it operates in continuous time and the price
level Pt cannot jump. Continuous time is not an important difference. If interest rates jump up
with no change in surplus, the price level P0 jumps down, and then starts to rise. The absence of
a price-level jump is an important difference.
       In Sims’ model, with no price-level jump, a rise in interest rates sets off a period of deflation,
which cumulatively lowers the price level. As I show below, this apparent difference is not central.
As one removes price stickiness, Sims’ short period of deflation gets stronger, smoothly approaching
the downward jump predicted by the frictionless model. Thus, the price-level jump in this friction-
less model, which may seem artificial, is in fact a useful guide to drawn out disinflations of models
with sticky prices.

                                                            24
   The continuous-time setup with no price-level jumps is an important framework, and works a bit
differently from the discrete-time model presented above. It’s worth seeing here the basic mechanism
before stepping in to the full model. Simplifying to either a perpetuity or to instantaneous debt,
the risk-neutral (discounting at a constant real rate) government debt valuation equation (4) is
                                              Z   ∞
                                 Qt Bt                     Rτ
                                       = Et           e−   v=t (iv −πv )dv   sτ dτ.               (37)
                                  Pt          τ =t

   For short-term debt, Qt = 1 always. In discrete time, or if prices can jump, innovations in {sτ }
induce a jump in Pt . That channel disappears in continuous time with sticky-price models that
preclude price-level jumps. However, the present value relation (37) still selects equilibria. For
given {st } and {it }, there are typically multiple paths that equilibrium inflation {πt } can follow.
Only one of those paths is consistent with (37).
   A discount rate effect on the right hand side operates in place of a price-level jump on the left.
Since Qt = 1, outstanding Bt , and by assumption Pt all cannot jump when there is a jump to
information about future sτ , then real discount rates {iv − πv } must change. If future s decline,
for example, the discount rates {iv − πv } must also decline so that the present value on the right
hand side of (37) is unchanged. Therefore, a sticky-price model with short-term debt, subject to a
fiscal shock, will substitute a period of higher inflation π for the immediate jump upward Pt of a
frictionless model.
   With long-term debt, the nominal bond price Qt in (37) can jump down when monetary policy
raises interest rates. If the price level Pt cannot jump, the path {πt } on the right hand side must
adjust to produce a higher real discount rate and a lower present value of surpluses. At a majority
of dates on the path, πt must rise less than it so that real discount rates rise. Thus, the downward
price-level jump of the frictionless model becomes a period of lower inflation when the price level
cannot jump.

2.11. A last word on surpluses

   For these simple examples, I have defined “monetary policy” as changes in nominal debt or
interest rate targets, holding surpluses fixed. While convenient for working out examples, this
definition is needlessly restrictive, and will need to be generalized for serious applied work.
   Surpluses do not need to be fixed, or exogenous in the fiscal theory. For the fiscal theory to
work, the minimum requirement is that the surplus does not respond to alternative price levels in
a way that automatically validates the government debt valuation equation (4) for any price level.


                                                      25
In simplest terms, the supply and demand curves may not lie on top of each other. That is a
weak requirement. It is a specification about off-equilibrium beliefs, as there is no way to test this
assumption by data from a given equilibrium: The government debt valuation equation (4) holds in
all models, active-fiscal or passive-fiscal. (Cochrane (2017a) sections 6.1-6.3 expand on this point,
with examples.)
   Other endogenous surplus responses can, and likely should, be included. The question is, which
of these fiscal changes do we want to consider as fiscal policy and which do we want to consider as
endogenous responses to monetary policy?
   For example, Sims includes the fact that surpluses rise and fall with GDP, due to procyclical
tax revenues, automatic stabilizers, and the predictable tendency of governments to engage in
countercyclical fiscal policy. One might well consider that endogenous response to be part of the
effects of monetary policy, as Sims does. The central bank cannot directly change expenditures or
tax rates. But if the central bank, by changing interest rates, increases output, and that increased
output raises fiscal surpluses, one would want to include the secondary effects of those surpluses on
the price level as part of the “effects of monetary policy,” at least for a quantitative analysis. One
might also include the fiscal effects of imperfect indexation and seigniorage.
   One may want to exclude, on the other hand, independent fiscal responses, changes that require
action by fiscal authorities, and changes taken in response directly to shocks that would not be
taken in response to GDP, unemployment, and inflation that result from monetary policy actions.
This is a tricky distinction, both conceptually and in empirical applications. Fiscal policy typically
responds to the same events that occasion monetary policy. The recession of 2008 brought zero
rates and QE, but it also brought on deliberate fiscal stimulus. To evaluate the effects of monetary
policy in isolation, one wants the former but not the latter.
   The delicate question of how fiscal authorities respond to monetary policy is important as well.
In the stepping on a rake mechanism, I assumed no response. But do fiscal authorities not respond
at all to interest rates or inflation? If, for example, fiscal authorities change surpluses so as to keep
constant the present value of government debt, then the stepping on a rake mechanism disappears
entirely. While one may not want to consider such responses as economic “effects of monetary
policy,” a central bank wanting to know the effects of its actions should definitely consider adverse
or cooperative responses from the treasury and congress.
   These are issues beyond the current paper. The point here: The definition of “monetary policy”
going forward need not and should not be that there is no change at all in fiscal surpluses. Applied


                                                   26
work will, as always, have to think hard about fiscal-monetary interactions.


3. Sims’ model

   The completely frictionless model of the last section is transparent, but it is far from realistic. To
make a fiscal theory of monetary policy useful, we must embed it in a more realistic macroeconomic
setting. The most natural setting adds sticky prices and other frictions and elaborations of modern
DGSE models, designed to produce reasonable dynamics, but replacing fiscal theory of the price
level with “active” monetary policy to select equilibria. Sims (2011) has to some extent already
taken this step. But, as explained in the introduction, the connection of Sims’ model to the analysis
of the previous section is not at all obvious. It is not obvious that the frictionless model captures
the essence of the full model, which of Sims’ frictions are important for the stepping on a rake sign,
or how the frictionless limit works. I undertake that connection here.
   I derive and solve Sims’ model in the appendix. The model is

                              dit = [−γ(it − r̄) + φπ πt + φc ċt ] dt + dεmt                       (38)

                              dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt                                          (39)

                              dpt = πt dt                                                           (40)

                              dyt = yt (yt − it ) dt + dδyt                                         (41)

                              dst = ω ċt dt + dεst                                                 (42)
                                                                 bt
                              dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −      dδyt                            (43)
                                                                 yt
                              dλt = −λt (rt − r̄ ) dt + dδλt                                        (44)

                              dct = ċt dt                                                          (45)
                                                              
                                       λ t ct 1 ct −σct
                              dċt =       e − e e      + r̄ċt dt + dδċt                          (46)
                                        ψ     ψ
                               πt = it − rt .                                                       (47)

   Equation (38) is the policy rule and dεmt is the monetary policy shock. The nominal interest
rate is it , r is the real interest rate with steady state and consumer discount rate r̄, π is inflation,
c is consumption equal to output. Equation (39) is the continuous-time Phillips curve. It is the
obvious analogue of the discrete-time curve πt = βEt πt+1 + κct . By (40), this Phillips curve allows
a jump in the inflation rate but not in the (log) price level p. The perpetuity yield is y, (1/y is the
price), and equation (41) is the expectations-hypothesis relation between long y and short i rates –

                                                      27
there are no price-level jumps and no risk premiums. Equation (42) describes a primary surplus s
that rises and falls with consumption growth. It contains a shock, so we can calculate the economy’s
response to fiscal shocks. Equation (43) tracks the evolution of the real market value of debt b,
which consists of nominal perpetuities. The surplus does not respond to inflation-induced changes
in the value of government debt, and the debt in (43) grows at the real rate of interest. Thus,
for all but one equilibrium, debt will explode and violate the consumer’s transversality condition.
This is the “active fiscal” specification. Debt and yield share a shock dδyt . A shock to long bond
yields also shocks the market value of the debt. Equations (44)-(46) describe marginal utility λ and
consumption c with a “habit” term that values a smooth consumption path: The utility function
adds a penalty for the derivative of log consumption growth,
                                   Z ∞        "                  2 #
                                                  1−σ     
                                                C      1    1 dC
                           U =E         e−r̄t     t
                                                      − ψ             dt.
                                    t=0         1−σ 2       C dt

Equation (47) is the Fisher equation defining the real rate of interest.
   Some equations only specify expected values. For example, the Phillips curve (47) is conven-
tionally written Et (dπt ) = (ρπt − κct )dt. I include expectational shocks dδt to capture this fact.
They satisfy Et dδt = 0. I use δ to distinguish them from structural shocks dεt . For each such
expectational equation, we need one explosive eigenvalue of the system to uniquely determine the
corresponding expectational shock dδt by the rule that the system must not be expected to explode.
   Like Sims, however, I only study perfect-foresight solutions with a single probability-zero jump
at time zero. This restriction also simplifies many of the model’s equations. In a fully stochastic
model, these equations would need additional terms such as risk premiums.
   I linearize the model, and solve it in the usual way, sending unstable eigenvalues forward and
stable eigenvalues backward.
   The fiscal block (41) - (43) operates independently of the rest of the model – other variables
enter here, but the variables y, s, b determined here do not feed back on the rest of the system.
As in other new-Keynesian models, the model without this block and passive monetary policy has
multiple equilibria. But all but one of those equilibria lead to an explosive path for the real value
of debt b̃t . Therefore, the fiscal block selects equilibria.


4. Impulse-response functions

   Sims uses parameters γ = 0.5; φπ = 0.4; φc = 0.75; σ = 2; r̄ = 0.05; s̄ = 0.1; ρ = 0.1; δ = 0.2;
ω = 1.0; ψ = 2.0. Here, φπ < γ so we are in the fiscal theory of the price level region of passive

                                                     28
                          1                                             0.1
                                                                       0.08




                                                          y (a)
               i (r)


                         0.5                                           0.06
                                                                       0.04
                                                                       0.02
                          0
                               0   5     10        15                         0   5    10        15


                          1                                            0.05
               r (rho)




                                                                         0




                                                         π (w)
                         0.5                                     -0.05
                                                                       -0.1
                          0
                               0   5     10        15                         0   5    10        15

                         0.4
                                                                         0
                         0.2
                                                             s (tau)



                                                                       -0.1
               p




                          0
                                                                       -0.2
                     -0.2
                                                                       -0.3
                               0   5     10        15                         0   5    10        15


                          0                                              0
                                                          ċ (cc)




                     -0.1                                              -0.2
               c




                     -0.2                                              -0.4

                     -0.3                                              -0.6
                               0   5     10        15                         0   5    10        15
                           1                                             2
                           0                                            1.5
                                                              λ (lam)




                          -1
                                                                         1
                  b




                          -2
                          -3                                            0.5
                          -4                                             0
                               0   5     10        15                         0   5    10        15

Figure 2: Responses to a monetary policy shock. Replication of Sims (2011) figure 3. Sims’ variable labels are in
parentheses.




                                                        29
                      1




                    0.8




                    0.6          Nominal rate i
          Percent




                    0.4




                    0.2




                      0

                                               Inflation π
                    -0.2
                        -1   0   1     2       3      4       5      6       7      8       9      10
                                                       Time

     Figure 3: Response of nominal rate and inflation to a monetary policy shock in the Sims (2011) model.


monetary policy and active fiscal policy.
   figure 2 presents the response of all variables to the monetary policy shock dεm0 . This figure
is visually identical to Sims (2011) figure 3. The price level and consumption do not jump at time
zero. All the other variables jump.
   figure 3 shows the response of interest rates and inflation to the monetary policy shock. You
see the jump down in inflation, followed by its slow rise. The price level cannot jump, but inflation
can and does jump.

4.1. Habits, Taylor rules, and fiscal responses

   How many of Sims’ ingredients are necessary to deliver a negative response of inflation to the
interest rate rise? How many ingredients are useful to match dynamics, but not essential to the
basic sign?
   It turns out that the habit ψ, the Taylor rule γ, φc , φπ , and the fiscal policy response ω do not
matter for the negative response of inflation to the interest rate rise. Figure 4 presents the impulse
response function for the case γ = 0, a permanent rise in rates; φc = φπ = 0, an interest rate peg



                                                      30
that does not respond to inflation or output; ω = 0, surpluses do not respond to output; and ψ = 0,
no habits.
   The remaining model is, in place of (38)-(47),

                                                         1
                                                 dct =     (it − πt )dt + dδct                                        (48)
                                                         σ
                                                dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt                                          (49)

                                                 dit = dεmt                                                           (50)

                                                 dst = dεst = 0                                                       (51)

                                                 dyt = yt (yt − it ) dt + dδyt                                        (52)
                                                                                    bt
                                                 dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −      dδyt .                         (53)
                                                                                    yt

This is the standard continuous-time new-Keynesian model (first two equations) with a non-
responsive interest rate target, so passive-money active-fiscal, and with long-term debt. I refer
to (48)-(53) as the “simple model” below.

                       1

                                            Nominal rate i
                       0




                       -1
                                                                            Inflation π
             Percent




                       -2




                       -3




                       -4




                       -5



                        -1         0       1       2       3       4       5         6          7   8      9     10
                                                                    Time

                            Figure 4: Response to a step-function rise in interest rates, in the simple model.


   The short-run negative response of inflation to the interest rate rise is still there. It is stronger


                                                                    31
– most of Sims’ extra ingredients, which make the model more realistic, reduce the size of the basic
effect. The same 1% nominal interest rate rise as in figure 3 now produces a 5% fall in inflation,
not an 0.15% fall.
   The largest reason for this difference is the permanent interest rate shock. A longer-lasting
                                                                             (t+j)
nominal interest rate rise has a greater effect on nominal bond prices Qt            and so requires a
greater jump in the price level Pt .

4.2. Response to expected monetary policy

   As in the frictionless analysis, to produce a decline in inflation, the interest rate rise must be
unexpected.
   The top panel of figure 5 presents the response of inflation and interest rates of the full Sims
model to a fully expected monetary policy shock dεm0 . In this case, the interest rate response is
Fisherian – inflation rises smoothly through the episode.
   Interest rates respond in advance of the monetary policy shock at t = 0, because inflation and
output move in advance of the shock and the interest rate rule responds to inflation and output.
   The bottom panel of figure 5 plots the response of the simplified model (48)-(53) to a fully
anticipated shock. The inflation rate rises smoothly throughout, just as in the discrete-time versions
of this calculation presented in Cochrane (2017a).

4.3. Short-term debt

   Long-term debt is also necessary for the negative response of inflation to interest rates.
   The top panel of figure 6 presents the response function for the full Sims model to an unexpected
monetary policy shock, with short-term debt in the place of long-term debt. (In a continuous-time
model, short-term debt means fixed value, floating-rate debt. The price is always one, and it pays
it dt interest.) Inflation jumps up and is positive throughout.
   The bottom graph shows the same exercise in the simple model, with only price-stickiness left.
Here we see a perfectly Fisherian response to unexpected monetary policy – inflation rises instantly
to match the rise in interest rates. Yes, this is the standard two-equation new - Keynesian model,
with prices that are sticky and cannot jump. But inflation can jump. Recall equation (37),
                                           Z ∞
                                Qt Bt              Rτ
                                      = Et       e− v=t (iv −πv )dv sτ dτ                         (54)
                                  Pt        τ =t

In the short-term debt case, the bond price Qt = 1 cannot move. So inflation πv moves exactly as
much as the nominal interest rate iv , leaving no change in present value on the right hand side and

                                                 32
                1.2




                 1




                0.8
      Percent




                0.6               Nominal rate i


                0.4                                          Inflation π


                0.2




                 0


                  -10   -8   -6     -4      -2        0     2       4       6       8       10
                                                  Time

                 1




                0.8               Nominal rate i


                0.6
      Percent




                                                             Inflation π
                0.4




                0.2




                 0


                  -10   -8   -6     -4      -2        0     2       4       6       8       10
                                                  Time

Figure 5: Response to expected monetary policy shocks. Top: Sims (2011) model. Bottom: simple model.




                                                 33
thus no need for the price level to jump on the left hand side.
   With short-term debt, the responses to the expected shock are exactly the same as they are
for long-term debt, as already shown in figure 5. Hence, the only effect of long-term debt in this
model is that an unexpected shock can lower the value of long-term debt.

4.4. Varying price stickiness

   How does price stickiness affect the responses? This question is interesting on its own. In addi-
tion, we want to verify that the frictionless limit is sensible. Many Keynesian and new-Keynesian
models blow up as one reduces frictions, even when the frictionless limit points are well-behaved.
(Cochrane (2017b).) Even when the frictionless limit is the same as the frictionless limit point, it is
useful to see if the basic sign and mechanisms hold in the frictionless limit, as analyzed in the first
part of this paper, leaving frictions to fill out dynamics and magnitudes, or whether the frictions
are essential to the basic signs and mechanisms of the model.
   The top panel of figure 7 shows the response of the price level to the step-function interest
rate rise, in the simple model, as we reduce price stickiness. In this model, larger values of κ, the
coefficient on consumption in the Phillips curve (39), correspond to less price stickiness. As price
stickiness is reduced, the model steadily approaches the frictionless result of equation (15), a 20%
downward jump in the price level (r = 5%, i = r + 1%, P0 /P = r/i), followed by steady growth
that is 1% higher, due to the 1% higher nominal rate.
   Thus, both desirable properties hold. The frictionless limit equals the frictionless limit point.
The model does not suffer the frictionless-limit paradoxes. The central point – a temporary negative
inflation response to higher interest rates – holds in the frictionless limit. Price stickiness, like
habits, Taylor responses, and the fiscal response, is useful for producing realistic impulse-response
functions, but price stickiness is not necessary for the basic point.
   Going in the other direction, we see that the reduction in inflation from an interest rate rise is re-
duced as prices become more sticky. As price stickiness becomes absolute, κ = 0, the disinflationary
effect vanishes entirely.
   Like many other results, this one violates common intuition. But since the mechanism for a
negative sign is utterly different from ISLM intuition, we should not expect that intuition to guide
us. Price stickiness is not important for generating the sign, so there is no reason to expect more
price stickiness to generate a greater effect.




                                                  34
                       1




                     0.8              Nominal rate i


                     0.6
           Percent




                     0.4




                     0.2              Inflation π


                       0




                     -0.2
                         -1   0   1        2        3    4      5       6       7      8       9      10
                                                            Time
                                  Inflation π
                      1
                                  Nominal rate i

                     0.8




                     0.6
           Percent




                     0.4




                     0.2




                      0


                        -1    0   1        2        3   4       5       6      7       8       9      10
                                                         Time

Figure 6: Top: Responses of the Sims model (top) and the simple model (bottom) to an unexpected monetary policy
shock, with short-term debt. (The inflation and nominal rate lines lie on top of each other in the bottom panel.)



                                                        35
                                  i
                        0


                                                                                                    κ =0.001

                       -5                                                                      κ =0.020
            Percent




                      -10
                                                                       κ =0.20


                      -15
                                                                κ =1



                                               κ =100
                      -20


                         -1           0          1       2     3       4          5   6        7   8        9   10
                                                                           Time
                        1




                      0.5                 it



                        0
            Percent




                      -0.5

                                                         pt , κ = 0.05, 0.2, 2, 200

                       -1




                      -1.5
                              0                      5        10             15           20           25       30
                                                                           Time


Figure 7: Response of the price level as price stickiness κ varies. Top: simple model. Bottom: full model. κ = 0.2 is
the baseline value shown in other figures.



                                                                       36
   Equation (37),
                                              Z   ∞
                                 Qt Bt                     Rτ
                                       = Et           e−   v=t (iv −πv )dv   sτ dτ,                (55)
                                  Pt          τ =t

helps to understand why stickier prices lead to a smaller effect. As prices become stickier, inflation
πv moves less. Higher nominal interest rates mean higher real interest rates. Higher real interest
rates then discount future surpluses more heavily. Now the present value of surpluses on the right
hand side declines just as the nominal bond price Qt on the left hand side declines. In the limit
that prices are perfectly sticky, inflation does not change at all, the nominal and real rates are the
same, so the real present value of the debt on the right hand side falls exactly by the same amount
as the nominal present value of the debt on the left hand side, and no disinflationary force remains.
   The bottom panel of figure 7 shows the effect of greater or lesser price stickiness in the full Sims
model. The general pattern is the same. Less price stickiness leads to a limit in which the price
level jumps down by about 1.5%, and then inflation mirrors the nominal interest rate. As price
stickiness increases, the pattern is the same, but the magnitude of the disinflation decreases. Again,
this is the opposite of the usual sign, but again price stickiness is not generating the disinflation,
but merely smoothing it out.


5. Conclusions

   The fiscal theory of the price level can provide a cogent description of monetary policy, uniting
the inflationary and disinflationary effects of interest rate policies, open market operations, forward
guidance, and quantitative easing. In the presence of long-term debt, the simplest fiscal theory
model produces a temporary inflation decline as a result of an interest rate rise. Sims (2011) shows
how to extend this structure to include price stickiness and the absence of price-level jumps, and a
form of habit persistence preferences, that generate reasonable impulse response functions broadly
similar to those of standard active-money/passive-fiscal new-Keynesian models.
   Though it seems promising for matching experience, however, the resulting model is quite
different from standard monetary intuition. The decline in inflation is stronger for less price
stickiness. It only occurs for unexpected interest rate rises. It really has nothing to do with the
current interest rate; expectations of future interest rates reflected in the yield curve are the center
of the mechanism. The model does not capture standard intuition that high nominal rates raise
real rates, which reduce aggregate demand and through a Phillips curve lower inflation. The fact
that it works at all in a completely frictionless model is proof of that fact. Inflation comes entirely



                                                      37
from a “wealth effect” – as people try to hold more or fewer government bonds they lower or raise
their demands for goods and services. Permanent interest rate rises eventually raise inflation.
   Furthermore, the fiscal foundations of a fiscal theory of monetary policy remain are important.
The disinflationary effect only happens in the presence of long-term government debt, and is driven
by the decline in market value of that debt. The endogenous reaction of surpluses matters a lot for
the sign and magnitude of the effects of monetary policy. Fiscal policy changes contemporaneous
with a monetary policy shock will contaminate empirical measurement of the effects of that shock.
   All this remains a foundation. Sims’ model is a start, but one needs to develop a fully stochastic
model. One needs to compare impulse-responses and correlations to data, in the style of standard
active-money/passive-fiscal models. The full historical experience of the 1970s and 1980s remains
unexplored. Stepping on a rake is a good story for the 1970s, but not an econometric test. Just
how inflation declined in the 1980s remains a puzzle to rational expectations models, including the
standard active-money models. The suggestion here that the 1980s represent a joint monetary fiscal
stabilization remains to be fleshed out. Optimal policy, which has to trade off distorting taxation
for inflation, remains an interesting fiscal-theory question.




                                                  38
References

Christiano, L.J., Eichenbaum, M.S., Trabandt, M., 2016. Unemployment and business cycles.
  Econometrica 84, 1523–1569. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3982/ECTA11776, doi:10.3982/
  ECTA11776.

Cochrane, J.H., 1998. A frictionless view of U.S. inflation. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 13,
  323–384. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4623752.

Cochrane, J.H., 2001. Long term debt and optimal policy in the fiscal theory of the price level.
  Econometrica 69, 69–116.

Cochrane, J.H., 2005. Money as stock. Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 501–528.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011a. Determinacy and identification with Taylor rules. Journal of Political
  Economy 119, 565–615.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011b. Understanding fiscal and monetary policy in the great recession: Some
  unpleasant fiscal arithmetic. European Economic Review 55, 2–30.

Cochrane, J.H., 2014. Monetary policy with interest on reserves. Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control 49, 74–108.

Cochrane, J.H., 2017a. Michelson-Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The radical implications of stable
  quiet inflation at the zero bound. NBER Macroeconomics Annual Forthcoming. URL: http:
  //faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/MM_occam_fisher.pdf.

Cochrane, J.H., 2017b. The new-keynesian liquidity trap. Journal of Monetary Economics 92,
  47–63. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2017.09.003.

Jacobson, M.M., Leeper, E.M., Preston, B., 2017. Recovery of 1933. Manuscript, Indiana University,
  February.

Leeper, E., Leith, C., 2016. Inflation through the lens of the fiscal theory, in: Taylor, J.B., Uhlig,
  H. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2. Elsevier, p. forthcoming.

Leeper, E.M., 1991. Equilibria under ‘active’ and ‘passive’ monetary and fiscal policies. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 27, 129–147.



                                                 39
Leeper, E.M., 2016. Why central banks should care about fiscal rules. Sveriges Riksbank Economic
  Review 3, 109–125.

Leeper, E.M., Walker, T.B., 2013. Perceptions and misperceptions of fiscal inflation, in: Alesina,
  A., Giavazzi, F. (Eds.), Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago Press,
  Chicago, pp. 255–299.

Leeper, E.M., Zhou, X., 2013. Inflation’s role in optimal monetary-fiscal policy. NBER Working
  Paper No. 19686, November.

Rotemberg, J.J., Woodford, M., 1997. An optimization-based econometric framework for the eval-
  uation of monetary policy. NBER macroeconomics annual 12, 297–346.

Sims, C.A., 2011. Stepping on a rake: The role of fiscal policy in the inflation of the 1970s. European
  Economic Review 55, 48–56. URL: doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2010.11.010.

Smets, F., Wouters, R., 2003. An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of the
  euro area. Journal of the European Economic Association 1, 1123–1175.




                                                  40
  Appendix to “Stepping on a rake: The fiscal theory of monetary policy.”

   This Appendix derives, decodes, and solves the Sims (2011) model. Sims does not present either
a derivation or a solution, so this appendix fills that gap.


1. Model statement

   The model as presented by Sims (2011), starting with his equation (15) on p. 52, is

                                  ˙ = −γ(it − r̄) + φπ ṗt + φc ċt + εmt
                                 (i)                                                                  (56)
                                     t

                                   it = rt + ṗt (∗)                                                  (57)
                                           λ̇t
                                   rt = −      + r̄ (∗)                                               (58)
                                           λt
                                                     ẏt
                                   ḃt = −bt ṗt − bt + yt bt − st                                    (59)
                                                     yt
                                               ẏt
                                   i t = yt −      (∗)                                                (60)
                                               yt
                                  p̈t = ρṗt − κct (∗)                                                (61)

                                   ṡt = ω ċt + εst                                                  (62)

                                  λt = e−σct + ψ [c̈t − r̄ċt ] e−ct (∗).                             (63)

                                                                                 ˙ = di/dt below),
   Here, it is the nominal interest rate (I do not need the cumbersome notation (i)t

r is the real interest rate with steady state and consumer discount rate r̄, p = log(Pt ) is the log
price level, c is consumption which equals output, λ is the marginal utility of consumption, b is the
real market value of government debt, which consists of nominal perpetuities, y is the perpetuity
yield (1/y is the price), and st is the real primary surplus. The last equation differs from Sims’ by
a typo in Sims’ paper, that does not affect the calculations.
   Here I translate from Sims’ notation to a more standard notation. Sims uses r instead of i, ρ
instead of r, τ̄ + τt instead of st , a instead of y. Sims also uses parameters θ instead of φπ , φ instead
of φc , β instead of ρ, δ instead of κ.
   Our goal is to calculate responses of this model to unexpected jumps in the shocks, εmt and εst .


2. The model derived and restated

   We need to state the underlying model and derive these equilibrium conditions. We then need
to linearize the model, transform the model to dx/dt = Axt + εt form, and then we can solve it

                                                       1
as a first order linear differential equation. We need to understand jumps and “forward-looking”
equations marked by (∗). The impulse response functions (Sims’ figure 3 and 4, my figure 2) feature
jumps in all variables except pt and ct . So, we have to understand how variables respond to the
εmt or εst jumps, and what the rules about jumps are.
   My first step is to derive the model, and write the equations as

                             dit = [−γ(it − r̄) + φπ πt + φc ċt ] dt + dεmt                     (64)

                             dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt                                        (65)

                             dyt = yt (yt − it ) dt + dδyt                                       (66)

                             dst = ω ċt dt + dεst                                               (67)
                                                                bt
                             dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −      dδyt                          (68)
                                                                yt
                             dλt = −λt (rt − r̄ ) dt + dδλt                                      (69)

                             dct = ċt dt                                                        (70)
                                                              
                                      λ t ct 1
                             dċt =       e − ect e−σct + r̄ċt dt + dδċt                       (71)
                                       ψ     ψ

with two side conditions,

                                              dpt = πt dt                                        (72)

                                               πt = it − rt .                                    (73)

   Sims’ starred (*) equations (57), (58), (60), (61) and (63) are “forward-looking.” They specify
the expectation of a forward-looking differential that may jump, or in a more general model, may
have a diffusion component. I express the same idea more conventionally with differential notation
dxt and expectational shocks dδxt with Et (dδxt ) = 0. Like Sims, however, I only study perfect-
foresight solutions with a single probability-zero jump at time zero. This restriction also simplifies
many of the model’s equations. In a fully stochastic model, these equations would need additional
terms such as risk premiums.
   To understand these issues, consider the simplest discrete-time new-Keynesian model consisting
only of a Fisher equation it = Et πt+1 and a Taylor rule it = φπ πt + wt with a serially correlated
disturbance wt+1 = θwt + εt+1 . Eliminating it , equilibria follow

                                   Et πt+1 − πt = (φπ − 1)πt + wt .



                                                     2
This equation is “forward-looking” like the starred equations in Sims’ model. Since it only ties
down expected inflation, not actual inflation, it admits multiple equilibria: Any path

                                  πt+1 − πt = (φπ − 1)πt + wt + δt+1

with Et (δt+1 ) = 0 is an equilibrium. This δt+1 is the discrete-time equivalent of the expectational
jumps dδxt above.
   The conventional new-Keynesian model specifies φπ > 1 so the dynamics are explosive. Then
the unique locally bounded equilibrium is
                                           ∞
                                           X                          1
                               πt = −Et          φ−(j+1)
                                                  π      wt+j = −          wt .
                                                                    φπ − θ
                                           j=0

This solution amounts to a unique choice of the expectational shock δt in terms of the structural
monetary policy shock εt ,
                                                        1
                                             δt = −          εt .                               (74)
                                                      φπ − θ
   This general principle applies to Sims’ model: In order to produce a unique equilibrium, for each
“forward-looking” or expectational difference equation, i.e. for each expectational shock δ, we need
one explosive eigenvalue and one variable that can jump, in order to determine one expectational
error δ in terms of structural shocks ε.
   Now we can derive each equation in turn.
   Policy Rule. Equation (64),

                              dit = [−γ(it − r̄) + φπ πt + φc ċt ] dt + dεmt ,

and its equivalent (56), are the monetary policy rule. The nominal interest rate mean-reverts, and
rises with inflation and consumption growth. The rule allows a jump dεmt , which is the monetary
policy shock. By examining the steady state dit = 0, you can see that φπ > γ is the Taylor rule
“active” region in which interest rates respond more than one-for-one to inflation, and φπ < γ is
the “passive money” region.
   All the variables on the right hand side of the monetary policy rule can jump, so in principle
one should specify whether dit is driven by pre-jump or by post-jump values (right or left limits).
But since these variables are all multiplied by dt, and dεmt is a jump, it does not matter which one
specifies. For the same reason, when there is a jump dεmt , it jumps by the same amount dit = dεmt ,
even though the other variables on the right hand side also respond to the jump.


                                                      3
    Phillips. Equation (65),
                                       dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt

defines the forward-looking continuous-time Phillips curve. It is the analogue of the discrete-time
curve
                                           πt = βEt πt+1 + κct

which can be written in the form
                                                              
                                                        1−β               κ
                                   Et πt+1 − πt =                  πt −     ct
                                                         β                α

from which (65) follows immediately. Since (65) is a “forward-looking” equation, describing Et dπt ,
it includes a jump to expectations dδπt .
    This Phillips curve allows a jump in the inflation rate but not in the price level. The Phillips
curve comes from a Calvo fairy who allows a fraction (constant) × dt of firms to change prices at
any date. Since no mass of firms can change prices in an instant, prices cannot jump. This fact is
reflected in (72), dpt = πt dt, which has no jump term.
    Sims’ Phillips curve, equation (61), also specifies a second derivative. The solution method is a
first-order differential equation, so when there are second derivatives, here and in the consumer first
order condition (63), I add an extra state variable to write the system in terms of first derivatives
only, and keep track of the definition of the first derivative in (72) and (70).
    Fisher. Equation (73),
                                               πt = it − rt

and Sims’ version (57), is the Fisher equation defining the real rate of interest. Sims introduces a
structural shock εit , but he does not use it, so I leave it out.
    This version of the Fisher equation stems from the first order conditions for intertemporal
maximization. It adds no risk premium and imposes the absence of price-level jumps stemming
from the Phillips curve, as follows.
    The generic asset pricing equation for a security whose real value process is vt and hence return
is dRt = dvt /vt is                                                      
                                                               dλt
                                     Et dRt = rt dt − Et           dRt
                                                               λt
where λt is the marginal utility of consumption. However, the assumption that jumps are probabil-
ity zero means that the second, risk aversion, terms disappear from asset pricing formulas, leaving
us Et (dRt ) = rt dt.

                                                    4
    In turn, the real return dRt on the nominal riskfree asset, whose nominal value process is
dVt /Vt = it dt and real value is vt = Vt /Pt , is

                                                 dvt           d(1/Pt )
                                       dRt =         = it dt +          .
                                                 vt            (1/Pt )

Therefore, the continuous-time risk-neutral Fisher relation is
                                                        
                                                d(1/Pt )
                                   it dt + Et              = rt dt.
                                                 (1/Pt )

    This Fisher equation is forward-looking, and allows for price-level jumps, so in general it should
have an expectational error. However, the Phillips curve does not allow for price-level jumps.
Therefore we can write d(1/Pt )/(1/Pt ) = −dpt = πt dt, leaving only (73).
    Each of the inflation rate πt , the nominal interest rate it and the real interest rate rt can jump.
This Fisher equation (73) means they must jump together, however, an example of a tie between
jumps in variables.
    Term Structure. Equation (66) and Sims’ version (60) are the term structure relation between
long and short rates. The perpetuity has nominal yield yt , nominal price 1/yt and pays a constant
coupon 1dt. Thus, the condition that the expected nominal perpetuity return should equal the
riskfree nominal rate (there are no price-level jumps and no risk premiums) is

                                           1dt + Et d (1/yt )              dyt
                                 it dt =                      ≈ yt dt − Et     .
                                                 1/yt                      yt

There are jumps in yt , so the second equality is a linearization. The next step will be to linearize
the model anyway. However, if one wishes to extend Sims’ model by solving the nonlinear version,
or by including nonzero shock probability and hence risk premiums, one should keep the nonlinear
version. Rearranging, we have equation (66),

                                           dyt = yt (yt − it ) dt + dδyt .

    Surplus. Equation (67),
                                               dst = ω ċt dt + dεst ,

and Sims’ version (62) describe a primary surplus that rises and falls with consumption growth,
with surpluses in booms and deficits in recessions. The surplus can also jump, so we can plot the
economy’s response to fiscal shocks.
    Debt. Equation (68),
                                                                         bt
                                    dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −        dδyt
                                                                         yt

                                                         5
tracks the evolution of the real market value of debt b. With probability zero jumps, the expected
return on the perpetuity is the same as the expected return on short-term debt, it − πt , hence the
first term. Jumps to the perpetuity yield y induce jumps in the market value of the debt through
the last term.
    By definition, bt ≡ Bt /(yt Pt ) is the real market value of government debt, where Bt is the
number of perpetuities outstanding. Start from the flow condition that the government must sell
new perpetuities at price 1/yt to cover the difference between coupon payments $1×Bt and primary
surpluses st ,
                                                 1         Bt
                                                     dBt =    dt − st dt.                         (75)
                                               yt Pt       Pt
Bt does not jump. Now note
                                                   
                                             Bt               1             d(1/yt )
                              dbt = d                   =          dBt + bt          − bt dpt ,
                                            yt Pt           yt P t           1/yt

Here I use the fact that there are no price-level jumps. Substituting into (75), with πt dt = dpt , and
solving for dbt , we obtain
                                                                               d(1/yt )
                                  dbt = [(yt − πt )bt − st ] dt + bt                    .
                                                                                1/yt
    The market value of debt bt can jump, because the bond price can jump. However, this is an
ex-post equation, restricting how any jump in dbt is induced by the jump in bond prices dyt . It
does not just describe the expected change Et (dbt ), so it does not require an expectational error or
an extra explosive eigenvalue.
    To connect the jump in debt to the jump in bond prices, I use the same linearization of bond
prices,
                                                        d(1/yt )    dyt
                                                                 ≈−     ,
                                                         1/yt       yt
giving Sims’ version (59),
                                                                               bt
                                    dbt = [bt (yt − πt ) − st ] dt −              dyt .
                                                                               yt
I substitute for dyt from (66), which leads to (68).
    Consumption. Equations (69)-(71), and Sims’ version (58) and (63), describe marginal utility
with a “habit” term that values a smooth consumption path. The utility function adds a penalty
for the derivative of log consumption growth,
                                              "                  #
                                                           1 dC 2
                                  Z ∞            1−σ     
                                          −r̄t Ct     1
                            U =E        e            − ψ            dt.
                                    t=0         1−σ 2      C dt



                                                                 6
   To derive marginal utility, set this up as a Hamiltonian with a constraint that wealth grows at
the real interest rate
                                            Ẇt = rt Wt − Ct .

The state variables are xt = [Ct Wt ] and the control variable is ut = dCt /dt. The current value
Hamiltonian is then
                                                         2
                            C 1−σ
                                            
                                   1            1 dCt                                   dCt
                         H = t    − ψ                         + λt (rt Wt − Ct ) + γt       .
                            1−σ 2               Ct dt                                    dt

The first order conditions are

                            ∂H         1 dCt
                                = −ψ 2       + γt = 0                                           (76)
                             ∂u       Ct dt
                                            1 dCt 2
                                                     
                            ∂H     −σ
                                = Ct + ψ 3              − λt = −γ̇t + r̄γt                      (77)
                            ∂C             Ct     dt
                            ∂H
                                = λrt = −λ̇t + r̄λt .                                           (78)
                            ∂W

From (78), we have Sims’ expression (58),

                                                          λ̇t
                                                rt = −        + r̄.                             (79)
                                                          λt

This is a forward-looking expectational equation in which marginal utility λ can jump. I add an
expectational shock to produce (69),

                                    dλt = −λt (rt − r̄ ) dt + dδλt .

   Differentiating (76), and dropping t subscripts,

                                           1 dC 2      1 d2 C
                                                 
                                γ̇ = −2ψ 3          +ψ 2 2 .                                    (80)
                                          C    dt     C dt

Substituting (80) and (76) into (77),
                                        "                2                        #
                                                                1 d2 C
                                                
                                       1            dC                      1 dC       1
                          λ = Ct−σ − ψ                        −        + r̄              .      (81)
                                       C2           dt          C dt 2      C dt       C

Note with c = log(C),

                                               dc   1 dC
                                                  =
                                               dt   C dt
                                            2
                                                     1 dC 2
                                                            
                                            dc
                                                  = 2
                                            dt      C     dt
                                     2
                                            2        2
                                    d c     dc      1d C
                                       2
                                         +        =        .
                                    dt      dt      C dt2


                                                         7
Substituting in to (81),
                                          "        2                    2          #
                                                          d2 c
                                                                 
                                               dc                    dc             dc 1
                           λ = Ct−σ − ψ                  − 2 −                 + r̄
                                               dt         dt         dt             dt C

                                                      d2 c
                                                               
                                                              dc 1
                                    λ=    Ct−σ   − ψ − 2 + r̄      .
                                                      dt      dt C
This gives us equation (63),
                                       λ = e−σc + ψ [c̈ − r̄ċ] e−c .                                 (82)

Sims gives the corresponding equation (his equation (22)) as

                                       λ = e−σc + ψ c̈ − ċ2 e−c
                                                           
                                                                                                      (83)

The presence of ċ2 in place of r̄ċ is a typo, confirmed by Sims. I verify that the typo does not affect
Sims’ calculations.
   The penalty on the second derivative of log consumption means that consumption cannot jump.
Therefore, as with inflation, I introduce a state variable ċt of the first derivative of consumption,
adding (70), dct = ċt dt. I then specify the second-order differential equation (82) containing c̈, ċ,
and c as a paired first-order differential equation consisting of (70) and (71),
                                                              
                                       λ t ct 1 ct −σct
                              dċt =      e − e e       + r̄ċt dt + dδċt .
                                       ψ      ψ

The first derivative of consumption can jump, so (82) implies a a forward-looking expectational
equation in Et [dċt ]. I add the corresponding expectational shock dδċt .


3. Linearization

   The next step is to linearize the model (64)-(73) around the steady state. The steady state
occurs where all time derivatives are zero, so the left hand sides of (64)-(72) are all equal to zero
and all shocks are zero. I use bars, x̄ to denote steady state values. Solving, we find that all rates
of return are equal, ī = r̄ = ȳ. Taxes pay for the coupons on debt, ȳ b̄ = s̄. The Phillips curve (65)
means c̄ = 0, and then the marginal value of wealth is one, λ̄ = 1.
   Linearizing around this steady state, and using tilde notation for differences from the steady
state for variables i, y, r, s, b, λ that are not zero at that state, x̃t ≡ xt − x̄t the linearized version




                                                             8
of (64)-(71) is
                                                                   
                                      dĩt = −γ ĩt + φπ πt + φc ċt dt + dεmt                               (84)

                                      dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt                                           (85)

                                      dỹt = r̄(ỹt − ĩt )dt + dδyt                                         (86)

                                      ds̃t = ω ċt dt + dεst                                                 (87)
                                             h                       i    b̄
                                      db̃t = b̄ ĩt − πt + r̄b̃t − s̃t dt − dδyt                             (88)
                                                                           r̄
                                                         
                                      dλ̃t = − ĩt − πt dt + dδλt                                            (89)

                                      dct = ċt dt                                                           (90)
                                                                
                                               1      σ
                                      dċt =     λ̃t + ct + r̄ċt dt + dδċt .                               (91)
                                               ψ      ψ

Here, I used the linearized (73), r̃t = πt − ĩt to eliminate the real interest rate r̃t . The price level
pt does not enter the model, so we do not need (72). We can just add dp̃t = πt dt to calculate the
price level when needed.
   The linearization of (68) gives
                                                                "             #
                                h                        i       b̄ b̃t  b̄
                          db̃t = r̄b̃t + b̄ ĩt − πt − s̃t dt −      + − 2 ỹt dδyt .                        (92)
                                                                  ȳ  ȳ ȳ

However, the impulse response function takes place when variables are at steady states, so I elimi-
nate the state-dependent shock response in (92) and simplify to (88).


4. Solution

   Expressing the model in matrix notation, and reordering the equations with the structural
shocks first,
                                                                                                    
                   ĩt       −γ       0    φπ    0 0       0        φc    0             dεmt        
                                                                                                    
             
                   s̃t  
                              0        0     0    0 0       0        ω     0 
                                                                                       
                                                                                            dεst        
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    
             
                   πt   
                              0        0     ρ    0 0       0        0    −κ 
                                                                                       
                                                                                            dδπt        
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    
                   ỹt       −r̄      0     0    r̄ 0      0        0     0             dδyt        
            d          =                                                      dt + 
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
             
                   b̃t  
                               b̄     −1 −b̄ 0 r̄           0        0     0 
                                                                                        −(b̄/r̄) dδ
                                                                                                   yt
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    
             
                   λ̃t  
                              −1       0     1    0 0       0        0     0 
                                                                                       
                                                                                            dδλt        
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    
                    ċt       0        0     0    0 0 1/ψ            r̄   σ/ψ             dδċt
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                    
                    ct          0        0     0    0 0       0        1     0                 0

                                                             9
                                          dxt = Axt dt + dεt .

I solve the differential equation, and then use the shocks and jumps to set up a set of initial
conditions x0 . Without the shock term, we have

                                           dx
                                              = Axt = QΛQ−1 xt
                                           dt
                                      dQ−1 xt
                                              = ΛQ−1 xt
                                        dt

or

                                               dzt
                                                   = Λzt
                                               dt

                                         zt = Q−1 xt ; xt = Qzt

where Q is a matrix of eigenvectors, and Λ a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues {νi } of A. To rule out
explosions, we must have zit = 0 for each element i of zt corresponding to an explosive eigenvalue
νi ≥ 0. Since the z are linear combinations of the x, this condition imposes a set of linear restrictions
on xt and x0 in particular,
                                     −1 
                                     Q i,: x0 = Q−1 i,: dε0 = 0.
                                                  


where Q−1 i,: denotes the ith row of Q−1 . This is a set of linear restrictions on the shocks dε0 . In
        

turn, this set of linear restrictions allows us to determine the expectational errors dδ0 as a function
of the underlying shocks dεm0 , dεs0 just as in the simple case of equation (74). This system has
four undefined expectational errors, so we need exactly four non-negative eigenvalues for the model
to be uniquely determined, which is the case.
     Here the active-fiscal passive-money assumption is important. With active fiscal policy, debt
explodes for all but one value of the initial conditions dδ0 . With active monetary policy, interest
rates and inflation explode for all but one value of the initial conditions dδ0 .




                                                   10
   To find the instantaneous response to the shocks, then, we must solve
                                                      
                                           dεmt 
                                                      
                                          
                                              dε st   
                                                       
                                                          
                              −1
                                 
                            Q 1,:         
                                              dδ πt
                                                       
                                                               0
                                                          
                          Q−1 2,: 
                                 
                                               dδyt            0 
                                                             
                                                            =                                    (93)
                                                         
                                                      
                              −1
                                  
                                           −b̄/r̄dδyt 
                                                                 
                          Q 3,:                            0 
                                                             
                            −1 
                            Q 4,:         
                                              dδλt    
                                                               0
                                      4×8                         4×1
                                               dδċt
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      
                                                0
                                                           8×1

for dδπt , dδyt , dδλt , dδct where 1, 2, 3, 4 denote the indices of the explosive (νi > 0) eigenvalues.
Break up the ε and δ parts of the shock vector to write
                                                                          
                      dεmt         0     0    0  0                    dε
                                                                         mt 
                                                                          
                  
                      dε st    
                                 
                                     0     0    0  0 
                                                      
                                                                         dεst 
                                                                   
                                                                        
                                                                               
                                                                               
                  
                      dδ πt
                                
                                 
                                     1     0    0  0 
                                                            dδπt       0 
                                                                        
                                                                             
                      dδyt       0
                                          1    0 0        dδyt     0 
                                                                        
                                =                                   +                          (94)
                                                                              
                                                                            
                   −b̄/r̄dδ   0 −b̄/r̄ 0 0                dδλt
                                                                       
                                                                        0 
                            yt                                            
                                                                        
                  
                      dδλt       0
                                          0    1 0         dδct      0 
                                                                              
                                                                          
                       dδċt      0       0    0 1                    0 
                                                                          
                  
                                                                          
                         0            0     0    0 0                       0

Then, we can solve (93),
                                                           −1                            
                                           0    0     0 0                         dεmt   
                                                                                         
                          
                          
                                            0    0     0 0                         dεst   
                             −1    
                                         
                                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                     
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                          Q−1 1,:
                                                                             
              dδπt        
                              Q 1,:       1    0     0 0                         0      
                                                                                  
                                −1                                                    
                                                                       Q−1 2,:
                                                                             
           dδyt                Q 2,:        0    1     0 0                            0
                                                                  
                                                                                        
                     = −
                                                                                    .
                                                                                              
                                −1                                            
                                                                       Q−1 3,:
                                                                             
                                                 −b̄/r̄ 0 0 
                                                                  
           dδλt             Q 3,:      0                                       0     
                                    
                                         
                                                            
                                                                                 
                                                                                     
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                −1                                     −1 
            dδct          
                               Q 4,:    
                                            0    0     1 0 
                                                                        Q 4,:       0
                                                                                     
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                         
                                             0    0     0 1                         0
                                                                                         
                                                                                            
                                                                                         
                                             0    0     0 0                             0



   Using (94) again, we now have the full jump shock vector dε0 , and therefore the time-zero value
x0 of all variables.

                                                   11
   It’s easiest to solve the differential equation forward using the transformed z variables, z0 =
Q−1 x0 . Finally, the impulse-response function is given by zjt = e−νj t z0i ; xt = Qzt .


5. The model without habits

   To calculate the ψ = 0 limit point, in which consumption can jump, we have to solve it separately
for that case, as 1/ψ terms show up in the regular model solution, and equations disappear.
   In the model without habits, consumption can jump. So we have in place of (64)-(73),

                                        1
                                dct =     (it − πt )dt + dδct                                  (95)
                                        σ
                                 dit = [−γit + φπ πt ] dt + φc dct + dεmt                      (96)

                                dst = ωdct + dεst .                                            (97)

The remaining equations are unchanged. For completeness, they are

                                  dπt = (ρπt − κct ) dt + dδπt                                 (98)

                                  dyt = yt (yt − it ) dt + dδyt                                (99)
                                                                      bt
                                   dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −      dδyt                 (100)
                                                                      yt
                                    πt = it − rt .                                            (101)

   I solve this model and verify that the ψ = 0 limit of the full model approaches the solution of
this model. One might worry that consumption can jump at ψ = 0 and cannot jump for any ψ > 0,
no matter how small ψ. However, the fast hump-shaped responses smoothly approach a jump, as
they do when we remove price stickiness.
   In the paper, I present results of a model (48)-(53) that further simplifies with γ = 0, φπ = 0,
φc = 0, ω = 0, retaining only price stickiness κ < ∞ and long-term debt.
   For the ψ = 0 case, i.e. standard power utility, instead of (69) - (71), we have

                                     dλt = −λt (rt − r̄ ) dt + dδλt                           (102)

                                        λt = e−σct .                                          (103)

We linearize to

                                           dλ̃t = −r̃t dt + dδλt                              (104)

                                             λ̃t = −σct                                       (105)


                                                       12
We can eliminate λ̃, so we have

                                               1                1
                                       dct =     r̃t dt + dδct = (ĩt − πt )dt + dδct .
                                               σ                σ

λ̃ does not appear elsewhere.
   Next, we must adapt the other appearances of the state variable ċt in the original model, and
the fact that the level of consumption may now jump. To allow a response of fiscal policy to
consumption, in place of
                                                    dst = ω ċt dt + dεst

we have
                                                            ω
                                  dst = ωdct + dεst =         (it − πt )dt + ωdδct + dεst
                                                            σ
When consumption jumps, so do taxes.
   The monetary policy rule

                                                                     
                                        dĩt = −γ ĩt + φπ πt + φc ċt dt + dεmt

becomes
                                                       
                                   dĩt = −γ ĩt + φπ πt dt + φc dct + dεmt
                                                                               
                                                        1
                         dĩt = −γ ĩt + φπ πt dt + φc      (ĩt − πt )dt + dδct + dεmt
                                                          σ
                                                           
                                   φc                     φc
                         dĩt =        − γ ĩt + φπ −            πt dt + φc dδct + dεmt
                                   σ                       σ
   The system is then
                                                                                                        
                             φc                        φc
               ĩt           σ    −γ     0      φπ −   σ    0 0     0        ĩt              dεmt + φc dδct
                                                                                                        
               s̃t   ω/σ               0       −ω/σ       0 0     0      st         dεst + ωdδct
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                        
               πt     0                0         ρ        0 0    −κ      πt               dδπt
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
          d       =                                                          dt +                       .
                     −r̄
                                                                                                        
           
              ỹt                     0         0        r̄ 0    0 
                                                                      
                                                                            ỹt 
                                                                                 
                                                                                        
                                                                                             dδyt             
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                        
           
              b̃t  
                      b               −1        −b        0 r̄    0 
                                                                      
                                                                            b̃t 
                                                                                 
                                                                                         −b̄/r̄ dδyt
                                                                                        
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
               ct      1/σ               0       −1/σ       0 0     0        ct                dδct




                                                              13
    With three undetermined shocks dδt , we need three explosive eigenvalues. The shocks now solve
                                                              
                                              dεmt + φc dδct
                                                              
                                             dεst + ωdδct   
                                                           
                              −1
                                 
                             Q 1,:          
                                                                 0 
                                                               
                                                    dδ
                                         
                                                       πt       
                          Q−1 2,: 
                                                           = 0 
                                                                
                                                dδyt       
                              −1
                                 
                             Q 3,:                                0
                                        3×6 
                                                              
                                               − b̄/r̄  dδ yt 
                                                               
                                                    dδct

for dδπt , dδbt , dδct given dmt , dst .   The matrix carpentry:
                                                                                                    
                          dεmt + φc dδct          0     0    φc                                   dεmt
                                                                                                    
                        dεst + ωdδct          0      0    ω                             dεst
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
                                                              dδπt                                  
                              dδπt             1      0    0                               0
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                      
                                            =                 dδyt                   +                       (106)
                                                                                                  
                       
                             dδyt             0
                                                      1    0  
                                                                 dδ
                                                                                             0
                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
                                                                 ct                                 
                        −b̄/r̄dδyt            0 −b̄/r̄ 0                                 0          
                                                                                                    
                               dδct               0     0    1                                 0
                                                                        −1                                 
                                                          0    0     φc                                  dεmt
                                                                                                           
                                                          0    0     ω                              dεst
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
                                       Q−1 1,:                                      Q−1 1,:
                                                                                     
              dδ
             πt
                                                                                                           
                                                          1    0     0                                0
                                                                                                     
                                     −1                                                                 
                       = −                                                      Q−1 2,:
                                                                                                            .
             dδyt                   Q 2,:                                                    
                                   −1       
                                                         0    1
                                                                       
                                                                     0                           
                                                                                                     0        
                                                                                                                
                                                                                    Q−1 3,:
                                                                                       
              dδct         
                                      Q 3,:       
                                                   
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                           
                           
                                                   
                                                         0 −b̄/r̄   0 
                                                                       
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                                                          0    0     1                                  0
This calculation produces a response to the chosen dεt shocks. The actual interest rate move
dit = dεmt + φc dδct is different when the policy rule responds to consumption growth; we no longer
have dit = dεmt .


6. Calculating the response to expected rate rises

    When the monetary policy shock dεmt is expected, all the expectational errors dδt are equal to
zero. That makes solving the model a lot easier. I posit a single jump at time 0. The system is

                                                      dxt = Axt dt + dεt

with
                                                  h                              i0
                                          dεt =       dεmt 0 0 0 0 0                  .

                                                              14
The bounded solutions are then:

                                   νi > 0 :
                                           h        i
                                  zit = − Q−1 i,: dε0 eνi t ; t ≤ 0;
                                              


                                  zit = 0; t > 0


                                    νi < 0 :
                                         h         i
                                   zit = Q−1 i,: dε0 eνi t ; t ≥ 0;
                                             


                                   zit = 0; t < 0.

In words, each state variable zit jumps by an amount Q−1 i,: dε0 at time 0. The state variables
                                                           

corresponding to explosive eigenvalues trend down until they hit − Q−1 i,: dε0 at time t = 0, then
                                                                     

jump up to 0 at time t = 0 + ∆. The state variables corresponding to stable eigenvalues are zero
until time t = 0. They jump up to Q−1 i,: dε0 at time t = 0 + ∆, then decay exponentially.
                                     



7. Model with short-term debt

   The maturity structure only matters to the dbt equation. To derive the dbt equation in the case
of short-term debt, start with the definition that the real value of the debt is bt ≡ Bt /Pt . Here Bt
is the quantity of instantaneous, floating-rate debt. I do not divide by yt as the price of such debt
is always one.
   Then,
                                              dBt Bt d(1/Pt )
                                      dbt =       +           .
                                               Pt   Pt 1/Pt
The flow condition now states that interest must be paid from surpluses or new debt issues,

                                        Bt it dt = Pt st dt + dBt

                                                                 d(1/Pt )
                                   bt it dt = st dt + dbt − bt
                                                                  1/Pt
                                                                 d(1/Pt )
                                   dbt = (it bt − st )dt + bt
                                                                  1/Pt
   The instantaneous value of short-term debt can only jump if there is a price-level jump. Sims’
sticky-price model rules out such jumps, so the last term is

                                           d(1/Pt )
                                                    = −πt dt.
                                            1/Pt

                                                    15
With it = rt + πt we then have
                                      dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt

whereas with long-term debt it was (68),

                                                                    bt
                                 dbt = [bt (it − πt ) − st ] dt −      dδyt
                                                                    yt

The only difference between short and long-term debt in this model is that the instantaneous
response of the value of debt to a yield shock is absent for short-term debt.




                                                   16
