                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE EFFICIENCY OF INVESTMENT
                                IN THE PRESENCE OF
                           AGGREGATE DEMAND SPILLOVERS




                                 Andrei Shleifer

                                   Robert Vishny




                              Working Paper No. 2297




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 1987




We are indebted to Peter Diamond, Kevin M. Murphy, David Romer, and Lawrence H.
Summers for helpful comments. Shleifer is grateful to Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago, for its hospitality. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2297
                                                    June 1987




                   The Efficiency of Investment in the Presence
                          of Aggregate Demand Spillovers




                                    ABSTRACT



        In the presence of aggregate demand spillovers, an imper-

  fectly competitive firm's profit is positively related to
  aggregate income, which in turn rises with profits of all firms

  in the economy. This pecuniary externality makes a dollar of a
  firm's profit raise aggregate income by more than a dollar, since
  other firms' profits also rise, and in this way gives rise to a

  'multiplier." Since such "multipliers' are ignored by firms
  making investment decisions, privately optimal investment choices
  under uncertainty will not in general be socially optimal. Under
  reasonable conditions, private investment is too low.




Andrei Shleifer                                   Robert Vishny
Graduate School of Business                       Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                             University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street                             1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                 Chicago, IL 60637
 I. Introduction

       This paper analyzes investment decisions in the presence of

 macroeconomic externalities. Following the work of Cooper and John (1985)

 and Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1985),1 we study a model with aggregate demand

 spillovers, where a firm's profit is positively related
                                                           to aggregate income,
 which in turn rises with profits of all firms in the economy. This

 externality makes a dollar of a firm's profit raise aggregate income by more

 than a dollar, since other firms' profits also rise, and similarly a dollar

 of a firm's loss reduce income by more than
                                                a dollar. Equivalently, there is
 a "multiplier" on a firm's profit (or loss) in the determination of aggregate

 income. Moreover, such multipliers vary across states of nature, depending

 on how many other firms benefit from a firm's profit (or lose from its loss)

 in each state. Because firms ignore this variation of multipliers across

 states in making investment decisions, profit maximizing choices need not be

socially optimal.

      To set up a benchmark for evaluating economies with imperfectly informed

firms, Section 2 presents a full information economy. In the model, each

sector has a potential monopolist with access to a cost reduction technology.

Each monopolist must decide whether to invest and obtain a low marginal cost

or leave the market to a competitive fringe that has
                                                       a higher marginal cost.
The profit-maximizing choice depends on expected demand, since only in a

large enough market can an investment in unit cost reduction break even.

Demand, in turn, depends on profits of other sectors, since profits are

distributed to the consumer and spent by him.    Aggregate demand spillovers




     1Also related are papers by Diamond (1982), Hart (1982), Weitzman
(1982), Heller (1985), Shielfer (1986) and Mankiw (1986).
                                -2-
through the distribution of profits make firms interested in the productive

potentials of firms in other sectors of the economy.

     In Section 2, the realized distribution of cost reduction technologies

across sectors is publicly known. This knowledge enables each potential

monopolist to compute the profits of potential monopolists in other sectors

and in this way to forecast aggregate profits and demand. He can then gauge

the size of his own market and make an accurate investment decision. In the

benchmark case of perfect information, the economy has a unique perfect

foresight equilibrium in which investment decisions are efficient. In other

words, a perfectly informed planner would have each firm make the same

investment decision as it does in the free market equilibrium.

     In contrast, Section 3 presents the same economy, except now firms have

imperfect knowledge about cost reduction opportunities of other sectors.

Firms then have to make forecasts of aggregate demand based on their priors

as well as observation of their own technological opportunities. In this

case, rational expectations equilibria exist, but are not, in general, unique

or efficient. The sources of inefficiency are twofold. The first is the

inability of firms to accurately condition their investment choices on

circumstances of other sectors, since decisions must be made on the basis of

imperfect information. Mi   equally   well-informed social planner would face

the same difficulty.

     The second source of inefficiency stems from the divergence of prof it-

maximizing and constrained welfare-maximizing investment decisions in the

presence of aggregate demand spillovers. A firm's losses (profits) have an

adverse (beneficial) impact on profits of other firms, and the firm ignores

this impact in making investment decisions. Interestingly, this externality
                                   -3-
  has no adverse welfare consequences in the certainty model of Section 2.

  This is because there a firm has a positive spillover effect on other firms

  if and only if it makes a positive profit by investing. In the uncertainty

 case, in contrast, it is not the case that when a firm's profit averages to

 zero across states, its spillover effect also averages to zero.

      To see this, consider a marginal firm that expects to break even on

 average if it invests. When the state of the world turns out to be good,

 many other firms are investing in cost reduction and the marginal firm's

 positive profit raises profits in all these sectors, giving its profits a

 high multiplier in the generation of aggregate income. When the state of the

 world turns out to be bad, only a few firms are investing in cost reduction,

 and the loss by the marginal firm spills over onto the profits of only a few

 firms, making the multiplier on that loss small.     Overall, even though the

 marginal firm expects on average to break even, the impact of its decision to

 invest on expected aggregate income is strictly positive. In this way,

uncertainty about the productive potential of the economy in the presence of

aggregate demand spillovers gives rise to systematic underinvestiient.


2. The Full Information Economy

     The   benchmark economy described in   this section sets the stage   for the
subsequent analysis. It shares with the models to follow the assumptions
about preferences, technology, and markets, but uses a particularly
                                                                          simple
information structure.

     Consider a one period economy with a representative consumer, who has

Cobb-Douglas preferences defined over a unit interval of goods. All goods

have the same expenditure shares. Thus, when his income is y, the consumer

can be thought of as spending y on every commodity. The     consumer is endowed
                                 -4-
with L units of labor, which he supplies inelastically, and he owns all the

profits of this economy. Taking his wage as numeraire, his budget constraint

is given by:


(1) y-.II+L,

where II is aggregate profits.

      Each good is produced in its own sector, and each sector consists of two

types of firms. First, each sector has a competitive fringe of firms which

convert one unit of labor input into one unit of output with a constant
                                       I

returns   to scale technology. In addition, each sector has a unique firm that

has access to a cost reduction technology. This firm is alone in having

access to that technology in its sector, and hence will be referred to as a

monopolist (even though, as we specify below, it does not always operate).

Cost reduction requires the input of F units of labor (required outlay) where

F is drawn from the economy-wide distribution H(F) and allows each unit of

labor to produce a > 1 units of output. In this section, it is publicly

known that H(F) is the realized distribution of required outlays across

sectors. Much of this paper examines the consequences of uncertainty about

the realized distribution H.

      The monopolist in each sector decides whether to become a low cost firm

or to abstain from production altogether. He reduces his costs (Minvestsw)

only if he can earn a profit. The price he charges if he produces equals

unity, since he loses all his sales to the fringe if he charges more, and he

would not want to charge less when facing a unit elastic demand curve. When

income is y, the profit of a monopolist who spends F to reduce costs is:



(2)
                                                  .5-
 The monopolist invests as long as                 y    F/a.         It is obvious from this that, in

 equilibrium, assuming all firms expect the same aggregate income, if a firm

 with required outlay F invests, then all firms with required outlays less

 than F also invest. We assume that a•L
                                                                 win > 0,
                                                             -   F             where F
                         -
                                                                                        win is the lover
 end of the support of H; that is, it always pays the best cost reducer to

 invest.

      A perfect foresight equilibrium in this economy is given by the marginal

 firm with required outlay F* and income y(F*) such that (a) income y(F*)

 obtains when all firms with required outlays no greater than F* invest, and

 (b) the marginal firm breaks even, i.e.,


 (3) ay(F*) - F* —           0.

When all firms with required outlays no greater than F* invest, then

aggregate profits are given by:

                 *                                                         *
        *     F                                                           F
                                  *                       *          *
(4) II(F ) — f
            F
                      [ay(F           )   - F]dH(F) — ay(F   )H(F )      -f   FdH(F).
                win                                                       Fwin

Combining (4) and (1), we obtain the expression for income:

                       *
                      F
               L -   f       FdH(F)
(5) y(F*) —          F1
                                  *
                1 - aH(F          )




Equilibrium   obtains at F* if (3) holds for income given by (5).

     The numerator of expression (5) is the amount of labor used in the

economy for actual production of output, after investment outlays. One over

the denominator is the multiplier that recognizes that an increase in
                                   -6-
effective labor raises income by more than one for one, since expansion of

low cost sectors also raises profits. To see this more explicitly, one can

calculate that:


          *         *          *
'I
'6'   dy(F )
        dF
          *
               ,r(F     )dH(F )
                  l-all(F )
                           *

where ,r(F*) is the profit of the marginal firm. When the marginal firm earns
this profit, it distributes it to shareholders, who in turn spend it on all

goods and thus raise profits of all cost reducing firms in the economy. The

effect of the marginal firm's profit is therefore enhanced by the increases

in profits of all cost reducing firms resulting from increased spending.

Since there are H(F*) of such firms, the multiplier is increasing in the

number of firms that benefit from the spillover of the marginal firm. The

more firms invest, the greater is the cumulative increase in profits and

therefore income resulting from a positive NPV investment by a marginal firm.

      For an alternative interpretation of (6), notice that since the price of

labor is unity, the profit of the marginal firm, ,r(F*), is exactly equal to

the net labor saved from its investment in cost reduction. The numerator of

(6) is therefore the increase in labor available to the economy as a result

of the investment by the F*firm in the cost reduction technology.    In

equilibrium, this freed up labor moves into all sectors.   However, its

marginal product is higher in investing sectors than in non-investing

sectors. The more sectors investing in cost reduction (i.e., the higher is

         the greater is the increase in total output resulting from the inflow

of freed up labor into these sectors. In fact, the denominator of (6) is

just the average of marginal labor costs across sectors, which is clearly a
                                            -7-
 decreasing function of H(F*). This interpretation connects (6) to (5), which

 explicitly states that income is a multiple of productive labor, and that the

 multiplier is increasing in H(F*).


 ProDositign 1: The equilibrium exists and is unique. The number                  of   firing

 investing in cost reduction is efficient at the given prices.


 Proof:


 Notation: Denote by ,r(FJF* — F)            the profit of the firm       with required
 outlay F when only the firms with required outlays no greater than F invest.

 Call the investing firm with the highest required outlay the marginal firm.

 (a) Existence: Note that ,r(F              IF* — F   ) —   aL   -   F    > 0. Either
                                       mm          mm
                 F)
                                                                     mm
,r(FIF* —                   0, in which case every firm investing is an equilibrium,
or (F max
       IF* — Fmax )           < 0, in which case there exists an F such that

,r(FIF* —   F)   —   0   by the intermediate value theorem.

(b) Uniqueness: Investment by a firm making a negative profit reduces

aggregate income. Take an equilibrium with marginal firm F*. Now raise the

number of investing firms in order of the magnitude of their required

outlays, starting with those just above F*. Since F* firms break even at the

initial equilibrium, firms with F> F' lose money. Adding them can only

reduce aggregate income, making investments by each additional firm even more

unprofitable. To find another equilibrium, however, income must be raised so

that a new marginal firm, with required outlay F > F* can break even.

Since adding investing firms with required outlays above F* only reduces

income, this is impossible.

(c) Efficiency: Mi investing firm adds to aggregate income (and therefore,

at constant prices, to welfare) if and only if the firm's profits are
                                -8-
positive. Consider an thvestxnent rule in which some (possibly empty) subset

of firms with F < F* do not invest and some (possibly empty) subset with

F > F* do invest. Since all those with F < F* are making a positive profit

in the F* equilibrium, eliminating any of them only decreases income. Now

consider adding some firms with F > F* in ascending order of their F's.

Since income is no higher after eliminating some subset of firms with F <   F*,
the lowest F > F* firms will make a negative profit from investing. This

further decreases income, making investment by firms with higher F's even

more unprofitable.


     The efficiency result deserves a comment. According to expression (6),

a firm's spillover is positive if and only if its own profits are positive.

Therefore, even though a firm deciding whether or not to reduce its unit cost

ignores the spillover, it decides to do so only when the social planner would

choose likewise. The multiplier only changes the magnitude of the effect of

a firm's investment on income, and not the sign. Under certainty, both

second-best (constrained by monopoly pricing) welfare maximization and profit

maximization dictate that an investment be undertaken if and only if it earns

a positive profit. In the rest of the paper, we show that, under

uncertainty, this need not be the case. Specifically, if a firm's profit

across states averages to zero, its average spillover effect on other firms

is in general positive.


3. The Incomvjete Information Nodel

     Suppose now that there are two states of the world, characterized by

different distributions of required outlays across sectors. In the good

state, the distribution is C(F), in the bad state, it is B(F).   Assume that
                                   -9-
 the densities g(F) and b(F) are strictly positive and continuous on

 [FmiiF] and that the likelihood ratio b(F)/g(F) is strictly increasing in

 F on that interval. That is, the relative likelihood of a higher fixed cost

 is higher in the bad state. This implies, in particular, that C(F) > B(F)

 for all F in (F      ,Fmax ).
                 mm

      The probability that the state is good is denoted by p; it is a common

prior of all market participants. In this section, each potential monopolist

also observes his own required outlay F, but does not know which state is

realized. For this reason, he must form a posterior belief, q(F), that the

state is good:


(7)
                 pg(F)
      q (F)
              pg(F) + (l-p)b(F)


Because the likelihood ratio b(F)/g(F) is assumed to be increasing in F, q(F)

is decreasing in F for any prior p. The higher is the required outlay that a

firm draws, the lover is the probability it attaches to the outcome of a good

state.

      When a firm conjectures that income is        in the good state, and   in
                                               Yg
the bad state, it invests provided


(8) aL4(r)Yg + (lq(F))y] - F      : 0.



Because profits in each state are linear in income, all that a firm cares

about in its investment decision is the average level of income it expects.

      A rational expectations equilibrium is defined as a cutoff required

outlay F* of the marginal firm, and incomes in the good and bad state yg(F*)

and yb(F*) given by (5) using G(F) and B(F) respectively, such that the

marginal firm expects to break even. To a firm with required outlay F,

expected income is:
                                        - 10   -



(9) Ye(F) — q(F)yg(F*) +         (q(F))y(F*).
Since q(F) is decreasing in F, Ye(F) is decreasing in F, and therefore firms

with required outlays below F* always prefer to invest whenever the marginal

firm expects to break even. In equilibrium, all agents agree on F*, and

hence on incomes in the two states, but disagree on their relative

likelihoods. The marginal firm          must   expect to break even using its own

assessment      of the probability that the state is good.


Provosition 2; Under incomplete information, there always exists at least

one equilibrium. As long as not all firms invest in equilibrium, investment

by some group of firms with required outlays above F* raises expected income.

If there are multiple equilibria, the equilibrium with the highest F* is

Pareto preferred to the others.


Proof:

(a) Existence: Consider the function E[,r(FIF* —                     F)]     under the assumption

that E(,r(FjIF* — Fmjn)] > 0 and apply the intermediate value theorem.

(b) Underinvestment: We show that, for any equilibrium cutoff level F*,

there exists an c > 0 such that investment by the firms in the interval
  *       *
          F   + c)   raises expected income. We have:
(F    ,




                dE(y)
                                 p •    }*)                                  b(F*).
                        (   0)                                +
                                       l-aG(F)                         l-aB(F)

Note that pg(F*)wg(F*) +         (lp)b(F*)1rb(F    )   — 0.       However, G(F*) >    B(F*) and
                                                                     dE(y)
since lrg(F*) > 0 and frb(F*) < 0, we conclude that                           (   — 0) > 0
                                       - 11   -


 (c)    Pareto Ranking of Equilibria: Let F and F be the cutoff levels for

 two different equilibria with F < F. Let E(y) be the difference of

 expected incomes in the F and F equilibria; we show that AE(y) is positive.
 We have:


                           *                              *
                          F2                             F2

                                gooddC                (l-p)f bad3
                          F1
                                       *          +       i       *
                            1   -                       1 -
                                    aG(F)                     aB(F1)

where
        good(F) and bd(F) are based on investment by all firms with required

outlays less than F. But we must have that

   *                            *
  F2                           F2
1* good' + (l-p)f bad                  > 0 or else the firms between
                           F1


F and F would not be investing in the F equilibrium. Since profits are

positive in the good state and G(F) > B(F), it follows that AE(y) is

positive.


       The logic of the underinvestment result warrants some elaboration.

Since more firms invest in the good state, the positive profit that the

marginal firm earns in that state spills over onto more investing firms than

does the negative profit in the bad state. Put differently, the multiplier

on the marginal firm's profit is higher in the good state. As a result, even

when the marginal firms expect to earn zero, the expected change in income

from investing is positive.
                                 - 12   -



    Alternatively,   consider the interpretation with change in productive

labor. In the good state, the labor that is freed up and spread around as a

result of the investment by the marginal firm goes to a large extent into the

already investing sectors, where the marginal product of that labor is high.

In this state, a fraction G(F*) of that labor has high productivity. In the

bad state, when productive labor is withdrawn from the economy as a result of

investment by the marginal firm, only B(F*) of the sectors have invested to

get high productivity. In other words, the labor released by the marginal

firm in the good state is more productive than the labor absorbed by it in

the bad state.

     The difference between productivity of labor across states is not

internalized by investing firms, however. Recall that an investing firm's

profit is equal to the expected amount saved on its sector's wage bill from

switching to the low marginal cost technology (at an initial cost of F)

instead of leaving production to the fringe. But the value to the economy of

the labor saved is equal to the wage payments to that labor D].us the profit

that labor produces elsewhere. In our model, the wage is constant and only

the profit component of the value of labor saved varies across states. Firms

ignore variation in this profit component when making their investment

decisions. Since there are more sectors using labor to produce profits in

good times, the profit of the marginal firm understates the true value of

labor saved in good times more than it understates the value of extra labor

used in bad times. On average, investment by a firm with zero expected

profit raises the productive labor available to the economy, and is therefore

preferred by the planner.
                                 - 13   -


      The underinvestaent result is a consequence of imperfect competition
                                                                           and

 aggregate demand spillovers in this economy, since we have made sure that the

 beliefs of the planner and of the marginal firm are the same. Ignorance

 about the state of nature is not, therefore, the only source of investment

 inefficiency in this model, since the equally well-informed planner would

 have more firms investing.

      The underinvestaent property of the model naturally leads to a

 multiplicity of equilibria in many cases. Multiplicity arises in the model

 when there is a group of marginal firms whose members make positive profits

 from investing if and only if (at least some) other members of the group

 invest. This situation occurs for a wide set of parameters, primarily

because of the underinvestment property of the model.

      Suppose we are at an equilibrium in which all firms having required

 outlays below F* invest. A firm with required outlay F* + £   will   make a

 small negative profit if it invests by itself. On the other hand, if an

entire interval of firms with required outlays slightly above F* invests,

they will have a potentially large positive effect on average income,

possibly making the decision to invest profitable for all firms in that

Interval. This would mean that there must be another equilibrium in which

these firms invest. Hence, the property of the model that investment by a

group of marginal firms raises income can be seen to lead to the existence of

multiple equilibria.

     Because this bootstrapping property relies on having different

multipliers across states (and higher multipliers in good states), it is easy

to see why we cannot get multiple equilibria in the one-period certainty

model. But one could get the underInvestment property and the existence of

multiple equilibria even in a world of certainty if Investments generated
                                - 14   -



more than one period of cash flows. In deciding whether or not to invest,

firms would look at a discounted sum of cash flows, while the social planner

would look at the same sum except with each period's cash flow weighted by

the aggregate income multiplier for that period. Profit-maximizing firms

would ignore variation in these multipliers across periods and might

underinvest (overinvest) if their highest profits occurred in the periods

when their spillover effects were largest (smallest).

     One interesting application of the idea of inefficient investment due to

variation of aggregate income multipliers over time is to rapidly developing

economies. Suppose that to industrialize a sector the monopolist must incur

the cost of a modern plant today but reaps the profits in future periods.

His investment therefore absorbs current labor and releases future labor. If

the economy is progressing, then it is probable that today's labor has less

productive alternative uses than does future labor. But if productivity

gains are mostly confined to a subset of imperfectly competitive industries,

those gains may not be reflected in either lower prices or higher wages.

This means that a larger portion of the value of future labor saved from

investing in a modern plant than of current labor used to build it is

accounted for by the profits of other sectors which the monopolist does not

internalize. As a result, the monopolist's profitability calculation would

place a lower relative value on future labor than would a social planner's.

He might therefore choose not to invest even though it is socially optimal

for him to do so. We conjecture that the internally generated level of

investment in a rapidly developing economy characterized by rising aggregate

income multipliers (profit spillovers) will be too low relative to the

constrained optimum (that is, constrained by monopoly pricing in cost

reducing sectors).
                                 - 15
                                  REFERENCES


Blanchard, Olivier J. and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki (1985), "Monopolistic
       Competition, Aggregate Demand Externalities, and Real Effects     of
       Nominal Money," NBER Working Paper 1770.

Cooper, Russell and Andrew John (1985),
                                        "Coordinating Coordination Failures
       in Keynesian Models," Cowles Foundation DP #745, 1985.

Diamond, Peter A. (1982), "Aggregate Demand Management in Search
       Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy, 90, pp. 881-895.

Hart, Oliver D. (1982), "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian
       Features," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 97, pp. 100-138.

Heller, Walter P. (1985), "Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with
       Application to Effective Demand," UCSD Mimeo.

Mankiw, N. Gregory (1986), "Monopolistic Competition and the Keynesian
       Cross," Harvard University Mimeo.

Shleifer, Andrei (1986), "Implementation Cycles," Journal of Political
       Economy, 94, pp. 1163-1190.

Weitzman, Martin L. (1982), "Increasing Returns and the Foundations of
       Unemployment Theory," Economic Journal, 92, pp. 787-804.
