                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


     ASSET MANAGERS: INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE AND SMART BETAS

                                         Joseph Gerakos
                                      Juhani T. Linnainmaa
                                          Adair Morse

                                      Working Paper 22982
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22982


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016

We thank Jules van Binsbergen (discussant), Jeff Coles (discussant), Richard Evans (discussant),
Ken French (discussant), Aneel Keswani (discussant), Jonathan Lewellen, Jesper Rangvid
(discussant), Scott Richardson, Julio Riutort (discussant), Clemens Sialm (discussant), Annette
Vissing-Jorgensen, workshop participants at Arizona State University, University of California
at Berkeley, Emory University, University of Oregon, University of Colorado, University of
Chicago, Temple University, Dartmouth College, University of Washington, Rice University,
London Business School, London School of Economics, Notre Dame, University of California
San Diego, the Wharton School, and conference participants at the FRIC'14: Conference on
Financial Frictions, the 2014 Western Finance Association Conference, the 7th International
Finance Conference at the Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, the 2014 MSUFCU
Conference on Financial Institutions and Investments, the 2015 UBC Winter Finance
Conference, the 2015 FRBNY/NYU Financial Intermediation Conference, the NBER
Conference on New Developments in Long-Term Asset Management, and the 5th Luxembourg
Asset Management Summit for their comments. We thank the Fama-Miller Center at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. Gerakos is affiliated with
Citadel LLC. Linnainmaa is affiliated with Citadel LLC and Research Affiliates. Neither Citadel
LLC nor Research Affiliates provided funding or data for this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22982.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joseph Gerakos, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Adair Morse. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Managers: Institutional Performance and Smart Betas
Joseph Gerakos, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Adair Morse
NBER Working Paper No. 22982
December 2016
JEL No. G11,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a dataset of $17 trillion of assets under management, we document that actively-managed
institutional accounts outperformed strategy benchmarks by 86 (42) basis points gross (net)
during 2000–2012. In return, asset managers collected $162 billion in fees per year for managing
29% of worldwide capital. Estimates from a Sharpe (1992) model imply that their
outperformance comes from factor exposures ("smart beta"). If institutions had instead
implemented mean-variance portfolios of institutional mutual funds, they would not have earned
higher Sharpe ratios. Recent growth of the ETF market implies that asset managers are losing
advantages held during our sample period.

Joseph Gerakos                                 Adair Morse
Tuck School of Business                        University of California, Berkeley
Dartmouth College                              545 Student Services Bldg, #1900
Hanover, NH 03755                              Berkeley, CA 94720
joseph.j.gerakos@tuck.dartmouth.edu            and NBER
                                               morse@haas.berkeley.edu
Juhani T. Linnainmaa
University of Southern California
Marshall School of Business
701 Exposition Blvd, Ste. 231
Los Angeles, CA 90089-1422
and NBER
juhani.linnainmaa@marshall.usc.edu
1         Introduction
We document that over 2000–2012 delegated institutional holdings averaged $36 trillion,
which represented 29% of worldwide investable capital. Institutions predominantly delegated
this capital through active, strategy-specific investment vehicles set up by asset managers.
Little is known about these investment vehicles or their performance because a lack of data
has hindered research. By contrast, there is a large literature about the retail side of delegated
management (i.e., retail mutual funds), which according to CityUK averaged $19 trillion over
the sample period. Di↵erences in disclosure requirements likely drive the contrast in research
footprints. Retail mutual funds face mandatory disclosure under the U.S. 1940 Investment
Company Act, while delegated institutional holdings are exempt.
        Until recently, research on the institutional sector was at the level of institutions them-
selves, and not the capital that they delegate, because data about institutions are more
accessible (Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny 1992a). For example, Lewellen (2011) uses 13-
F filings to study the performance of total institutional holdings (i.e., delegated capital and
capital managed in-house) in U.S. equities and finds that institutions do not outperform
benchmarks. Likewise, there is a substantial literature about the holdings and performance
of specific types of institutions such as pensions and endowments. This literature finds mixed
results about performance.1 Because institutions both delegate capital and manage capital
in-house, one cannot make inferences about the performance of asset managers based on the
performance of institutions in general.
        Several papers specifically study the institutional asset management industry. Goyal and
Wahal (2008) and Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez (2016) examine how institutions delegate
    1
    The large literature studying performance of pension funds includes Ippolito and Turner (1987), Lakon-
ishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992b), Coggin, Fabozzi, and Rahman (1993), Christopherson, Ferson, and
Glassman (1998), Blake, Lehmann, and Timmerman (1999), Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), Ferson and
Khang (2002), and Dyck and Pomorski (2012). Another literature studies endowments including Brown,
Garlappi, and Tiu (2010), Lerner, Schoar, and Wang (2008), and Barber and Wang (2013).




                                                    1
capital.2 Annaert, De Ceuster, and Van Hyfte (2005) and Bange, Khang, and Miller (2008)
examine the asset allocations made by twenty-six asset managers into asset classes over time
and find performance to benchmarks. Closest to out study, Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010)
examine the performance of asset managers investing in U.S. public equities, and also fail to
find performance over benchmarks.
       We contribute to the literature by estimating the performance, size, and fees of this sector
using a broader dataset of asset manager holdings and returns than has been previously avail-
able. We also provide evidence on what asset managers do to achieve performance. In asset
manager language, we explore the importance of smart beta or tactical factor allocations.
The words smart and tactical refer to tilting portfolios toward toward better-performing
factors. This insight allows us to examine the performance of asset managers in terms of
the Sharpe (1992) empirical model. Our estimates tie positive performance directly to smart
beta investing. We document that institutional asset managers outperformed strategy bench-
marks by 42 basis points net of $162 billion in annual fees and that smart beta investing
entirely explained this outperformance.
       We obtained data for the 2000–2012 period from a global consultant that advises pension
funds, endowments, and other institutional investors on the allocation of capital to asset
managers. As discussed by Goyal and Wahal (2008), most institutions use consultants in their
delegation not only because of consultants’ expertise in portfolio choice, but also because
consultants serve as the gatekeepers of asset manager performance and holdings data that
facilitate the shopping for and comparison of asset managers.
       When an institution chooses an asset manager to delegate a strategy-level allocation, the
asset manager either sets up an investment vehicle as a solo account or mixes the account with
   2
    Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez (2016) find that consultants’ investment recommendations do not add
value for institutions investing in U.S. actively managed equity funds. Similarly, Goyal and Wahal (2008)
find that, when pension fund sponsors replace asset managers, their future returns are no di↵erent from the
returns that they would have earned had they stayed with the fired asset managers. Whereas these studies
examine variation in performance conditional on delegation, we examine the benefits of delegation.



                                                    2
a finite number of institutional clients seeking the same strategy exposure.3 Asset managers
then combine these investments into pooled holdings for all clients in each of the strategies
for marketing and compliance reporting purposes. These “pools” are the unit of observation
that consultants and their institutional clients use when evaluating asset managers. We
refer to these pooled holdings as asset manager funds because the databases maintained by
consultants resemble the mutual fund databases and because these funds are a natural unit
to profile and study strategy-specific performance of asset managers.
       Our data cover $18 trillion of annual assets on average over 2000–2012. The data in-
clude quarterly assets and client counts, monthly returns, and fee structures for 22,289 asset
manager funds marketed by 3,272 asset manager firms. The median fund pools six clients
and has $285 million in capital invested in a strategy. Our analysis focuses on four asset
classes: U.S. fixed income (21% of delegated institutional assets), global fixed income (27%),
U.S. public equity (21%) and global public equities (31%). These asset classes represent the
lion’s share of global invested capital. In these asset classes, we have close to the universe of
institutional asset managers that were open to new investors during this period. We show
that the database does not su↵er from survivorship bias and is not biased toward better
performing funds. Moreover, return reporting is GIPS compliant for most asset managers,
further assuring data reliability.
       With these data, we make five contributions to the literature. First, we augment the
literature on the cost of financial intermediation. We estimate that asset managers charged
the average delegated dollar a fee of 44 basis points, consistent with the prior literature that
documents delegation costs of approximately 50–60 basis points for large institutions (Coles,
Suay, and Woodbury 2000; Busse, Goyal, and Wahal 2010; Dyck, Lins, and Pomorski 2013;
Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez 2016). Our new contribution in this realm comes from the
   3
     Institutional mutual funds are an exception in that they have large numbers of clients. They are inter-
esting in their own right (Evans and Fahlenbrach 2012), but represent only $5 trillion of $48 trillion in total
delegated institutional capital for 2012.



                                                      3
depth of our data globally and across asset classes to estimate aggregate fees. We find that
institutions paid $162 billion per year in fees for delegated fixed income and public equities
assets during 2000–2012, which was approximately twice the aggregate fees paid by retail
mutual fund investors over the same period (French 2008; Bogle 2008).
    For perspective on these magnitudes, consider 2012 as a snapshot. If we apply the
estimates of Philippon (2015) and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) to total worldwide
investable capital in 2012, the worldwide cost of securities intermediation was $726 billion.
We can compare this top-down estimate with bottom-up calculations for costs incurred by
di↵erent classes of investors. The U.S.-based estimates of French (2008) and Bogle (2008),
applied globally, imply that the intermediation costs for retail delegation through mutual
funds was approximately $100 billion for 2012. Further, Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean (2009)’s
estimates of retail investor trading costs from Taiwan can be scaled up to the global level
and adjusted for di↵erences in turnover, leading to an estimate of $313 billion in costs for
non-delegated individual trading in 2012. We find that institutions paid $210 billion in fees
in 2012 for delegated intermediation. These estimates leave another $100 billion to cover any
asset classes omitted from these calculations as well as institutional non-delegated trading
fees.4
    Second, we document performance from the perspective of an institutional investor who
delegates capital to an asset manager in order to gain exposure to a specific strategy (i.e.,
fulfill a “mandate”). As discussed by Goyal and Wahal (2008) and Jenkinson, Jones, and
Martinez (2016), institutions typically construct their portfolios through a two-step process.
Institutions first determine their strategy-level policy allocations by optimizing over strategy-
level risk and return. Investment officers then fulfill the strategy policy allocations either
“in house” or by issuing an investment mandate to an external manager. Because portfolio
   4
     This dissection of intermediation costs emphasizes the importance of under-studied aspects of financial
intermediation of institutional capital. We thank Brad Barber and Robin Greenwood for data and guidance
with these back-of-the-envelope calculations.




                                                     4
risk is incorporated at a higher level, institutions appraise fund performance along two
dimensions—net alpha and tracking error—both relative to the strategy benchmark in a
single-factor model. We find that the average asset manager fund earns an annual strategy-
level gross (net) alpha of 86 basis with a t of 3.35 (42 basis points with a t of 1.63).
   This positive performance is consistent with institutions being sophisticated investors
(Del Guercio and Tkac 2002), but contrasts with most studies that examine the perfor-
mance of institutions (Lewellen 2011). Because the unit of observation in institution-level
studies includes both delegated and non-delegated capital, an implication of our results is
that non-delegated institutional capital likely underperforms delegated institutional capital.
Furthermore, there are di↵erences in asset classes covered. Most institution-level studies
focus on the U.S. public equity asset class. In our results, U.S. public equities have the
lowest positive alpha relative to strategy benchmarks. Thus, our results are consistent with
Lewellen (2011) and Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010), who both find positive, but statistically
insignificant gross alpha in U.S. public equity using coarser data.
   Third, our detailed data allow us to infer, in the spirit of Barber, Huang, and Odean
(2016) and Berk and Binsbergen (2016), how asset managers achieve positive net alphas. The
marketing language used by asset managers speaks of smart betas or tactical factors.5 We
use the Sharpe (1992) to construct portfolios out of such tactical factors that best mimic each
asset manager fund. We choose factors that nest the literature’s factor models across di↵erent
asset classes. To reflect practice, we limit factors to be tradable indexes and the weights
to be long-only and to sum to one. When we estimate fund performance compared against
this mimicking portfolio, we find no excess return over the mimicking portfolio. The fact
that asset managers outperform strategy-level benchmarks but earn returns comparable to
the fund-level mimicking portfolios implies that asset managers provide institutional clients
  5
    See, for example, Blitz (2013), Towers Watson (2013), and Jacobs and Levy (2014). Moreover, the
employees of asset managers often publish professional articles about smart beta. See, for example, Staal,
Corsi, Shores, and Woida (2015), which is authored by employees of Blackrock.




                                                    5
with profitable systematic deviations from benchmarks.
      The results from the Sharpe analysis raise the question as to whether delegation was
worth $162 billion per year. Could institutions have performed as well over the sample
period by instead managing their assets in-house, assuming that they had the knowledge
and ability to implement a factor portfolio? Following Berk and Binsbergen (2015), we
consider the investment opportunity set of tradable indices that was available to institutions
during the sample period. We find that if institutions had implemented dynamic, long-
only mean-variance portfolios to obtain their within-asset class exposures, they would have
obtained a similar Sharpe ratio as asset manager funds once we take into account trading
and administrative costs. This finding suggests that asset managers earned their fees at the
margin. Our estimates also imply that the introduction of liquid, low-cost factor ETFs is
likely eroding the comparative advantage of asset manager funds.
      Fourth, we contribute to the literature on active management.6 We estimate tracking
errors of 8.7% in models that use broad asset class benchmarks and 5.9% in models that
use granular strategy-level benchmarks. These tracking errors are comparable to Petäjistö’s
(2013) estimates for active retail mutual funds. Hence, given the size of the asset manager
fund market, our findings imply that the literature on active management overlooks almost
half of actively managed capital.
      Our fifth contribution speaks to the incidence of returns across investor classes. We
document that the average asset manager fund earns an annual market-adjusted gross alpha
of 131 basis points (t = 3.21) over the 2000–2012 period. In dollar terms, 131 basis points of
gross alpha translates to $469 billion per year, with $307 billion accruing to institutions and
$162 billion to asset managers. Because asset managers may take more risk than the rest of
the market, these results do not necessarily imply that the delegated assets of institutions
earn positive risk-adjusted returns. However, a 131 basis point gross alpha together with
  6
   See, for example, Jensen (1968), Malkiel (1995), Gruber (1996), Carhart (1997), Kosowski, Timmerman,
Wermers, and White (2006), French (2008), and Fama and French (2010).



                                                  6
the adding-up constraint discussed by Sharpe (1991) implies a market-adjusted gross alpha
of all other investors of   53 basis points. Assuming retail mutual funds earn gross alphas
close to zero (Jensen 1968; Fama and French 2010), this implies a negative gross alpha
either for non-delegated retail capital, which would be consistent with Cohen, Gompers, and
Vuolteenaho (2002), or for non-delegated institutional capital, which would reconcile our
work with Lewellen (2011).



2     Data and descriptive statistics
We obtained a database from a large global consulting firm (the “Consultant”). Some
consultants build and maintain databases of asset manager funds. These databases look like
mutual fund databases, containing quarterly assets under management and number of clients,
current fee structures and strategy descriptions, and monthly performance of each asset
manager fund (i.e., at the strategy-level). These databases are essential to the consultants’
business model, enabling consultants to attract and service institutional clients who delegate
capital. Asset managers voluntarily report data to consultants because, in essence, the
consultants are the asset managers’ primary clients. The majority of institutional investors
use consultants to construct portfolios (Goyal and Wahal 2008).
    We use the term “asset manager fund” to draw a parallel with mutual funds, although in
this setting, the word “fund” is somewhat of a misnomer. Asset managers hold institutional
capital in individual accounts or in accounts that pool small numbers of institutions. When
asset managers report institutional holdings and performance, they add up all the clients
with the same strategy focus into a single reporting vehicle (i.e., a “fund”). This fund is a
reporting vehicle, not a direct investment vehicle per se, but it conveys the performance and
holdings of the particular asset manager in the strategy in question just as mutual funds
would do in marketing.
    The pooled strategy-level fund is also the unit used by asset managers to comply with

                                              7
GIPS (Global Investment Performance Standard) reporting standards. What is now the
CFA Institute, initiated GIPS in 1987 to ensure minimum acceptable reporting standards
for investment managers. In 2005, it became the global standard. Compliance is voluntary,
but GIPS has been universally adopted by asset managers.
    Because the Consultant’s business model depends on data reliability, it employs a sta↵
of over 100 researchers who perform regular audits of each asset manager and its funds. In
the course of these audits, the Consultant’s researchers consider the strategy placement of
the fund and verify the accuracy of the performance and holdings data. When clients shop
for asset manager funds, they can read these audits, compare the fund to benchmarks, and
read the credentials of the people running the fund. Non-reporting asset managers receive
less attention when the Consultant makes recommendations to its clients, and consultants
and investors infer any lack of reporting as a negative signal of fund quality.


2.1     Aggregate assets under management

The first column of Table 1 reports our estimates of aggregate institutional assets under
management for each year between 2000 and 2012. These estimates are based on the annual
Pensions & Investments surveys, which we describe in the Appendix.7 Total institutional
assets increased from $22 trillion in 2000 to $47 trillion in 2012, representing approximately
700 asset manager firms throughout the period (column 2). The third column reports our es-
timates of worldwide investable assets, which we detail in the Appendix. Over the 2000–2012
sample period, worldwide investable assets rose from $79 trillion to $173 trillion. The next
column shows that institutional assets held by asset managers remained relatively constant
over the sample period at approximately 29% of worldwide investable assets.
    Important for our study is the comparison of the coverage of the Consultant’s database
    7
      Each year, Pensions & Investments conducts several surveys of asset managers about their assets under
management. These surveys are important to asset managers because they provide size rankings to potential
clients. According to Pensions & Investments, nearly all medium and large asset managers participate.



                                                    8
with the Pensions & Investments data. The Consultant’s total assets cover 28% of institu-
tional assets under management in 2000, and rise to over 60% post-2006. In 2012, for ex-
ample, institutional assets under management in the Consultant’s database are $26 trillion,
which represented 56.1% of total institutional assets according to Pensions & Investments.
   Although our data cover $26 trillion in assets under management, this amount is less
than 100% of worldwide delegated institutional assets. We therefore address the potential
for sample bias in our data. It could be that we are simply missing asset managers, who
choose not to report performance to this consultant. The Consultant’s database covers
3,500 to 4,200 asset manager firms per year. When we hand match the names of the asset
manager firms in the Consultant’s database to those in the Pensions & Investments, 82.6% of
the firms in Pensions & Investments are included in the Consultant’s database. We examined
the missing firms and found that nearly half of these firms are private wealth assets or the
assets of smaller insurance company (but not the large insurer-asset managers). Another
16% of the missing firms specialize in private equity, real estate, or other alternatives, which
represent asset classes that we do not consider. The remaining missing firms are retail banks
mostly from Italy and Spain, and boutique asset managers from the U.S., which presumably
cater to specific clients and thus do not advertise. We therefore feel comfortable that we have
close to the population of large asset managers worldwide that serve institutional clients,
except perhaps in southern Europe.
   When we instead consider the possibility of selective reporting by the asset managers
included in the Consultant’s database, we consider three potential sources of bias. It could
be (i) that asset managers always exclude certain clients’ accounts, (ii) that asset managers
selectively report assets under management at points in time when returns are good, or
(iii) that they report assets under management but not the returns when performance is
good. Based on discussions with the Consultant, we infer that issue (i) accounts for most of
the missing fund-level data. In particular, the Consultant disclosed that missing from the
database are specialized proprietary accounts. When choosing asset managers, institutional

                                               9
investors can only see funds that appear in the databases. Thus, although the data are
incomplete, they nonetheless represent an institutional investor’s information set for deciding
among asset manager funds that are open for investment.8
      Nonetheless, we do not know how these missing accounts perform. Our main concern
is that manager choose to report based on fund performance. However, asset managers
cannot selectively report based on performance and be in compliance with GIPS reporting
procedures. This constraint especially binds starting in 2006, when GIPS was revised and
became the global reporting standard for asset managers. Thus, we will split the sample at
2006 to ensure that our inferences hold in the recent period.
      We also can directly test for bias in reporting following Blake, Lehmann, and Tim-
merman (1999). They state on page 436 that if “bias infected the funds included in our
subsample, they should be more successful ex post than those in the overall universe.” To
implement their test, we create two variables to measure the extent that managers report
to the Consultant’s database. The first variable, coverage, is the percentage of total assets
under management for which the manager reports data to the Consultant on strategy-level
data to the Consultant. The second variable, internal coverage, is the percentage of total
reported strategy-level assets for which the manager reports returns to the Consultant. We
regress fund-level monthly returns on these two variables. We include interactions of strategy
and month fixed e↵ects to absorb strategy-level performance and cluster standard errors at
the month-strategy level. If managers refrain from reporting strategies with worse perfor-
mance, we would expect coverage to be negatively related to performance. For example, if
a manager’s coverage is 100%, then this manager should have a lower overall return than a
manager who only reports better performing funds.
      Table 2 presents results for these regressions with the first specification including coverage
and second specification including both coverage and internal coverage. For both sets of
  8
    Ang, Ayala, and Goetzmann (2014) make a similar point with respect to endowments making allocation
decisions regarding alternative asset classes.



                                                 10
regressions, we find the opposite of what one would expect if managers selectively reported
to the Consultant’s database based on performance—managers who provide higher levels of
coverage have slightly higher performance. The estimates presented in Table 2 suggest that
our data do not su↵er from survival or selection biases.
   Two related concerns are survivorship and backfill biases. The Consultant’s record-
keeping, however, mitigates these concerns. Regarding backfill, the Consultant records a
“creation date” for each asset manager fund, reflecting the date the asset manager fund was
first entered into the system. At the initiation of coverage, the manager can provide historical
returns for the fund. Such backfilled returns would be biased upward if better performing
funds were more likely to survive and/or provide historical returns. In our analysis, we
always analyze returns generated after the creation date. In the last column of Table 1, we
show an annual average of 13% of the data are backfilled (and tossed), particularly in the
early years. Survivorship bias may also occur if funds that closed were removed from the
database. However, this is not the case—the Consultant leaves dead funds in the database.


2.2    Aggregate fees

The Consultant’s database includes the fee structure for each asset manager fund. For
example, one U.S. fixed income-long duration fund charges 40 basis points for investments
up to $10 million, 30 basis points for investments up to $25 million, 25 basis points for
investments up to $50 million, and 20 basis points for investments above $50 million. These
parameters are static in the sense that the database records only the latest fee schedule from
the asset manager. However, because these fees are in percent rather than dollars, the use
of the static structure should only be problematic if fees over the last decade materially
changed per unit of assets under management.
   Figure 1 depicts three di↵erent estimates of aggregate fees. First, we calculate a schedule
middle point estimate that assumes that the average dollar in each fund pays the median fee


                                              11
listed on the fund’s fee schedule. This fee estimate could, however, be too high. Institutional
investors could negotiate side deals that shift their placement in the fee schedule up. Thus,
we second calculate a fee schedule lower bound estimate, which uses the lowest fee in the
schedule for all capital invested in the fund. In the example above, we would apply the rate
20 basis points to all capital invested in the fund. The fee schedule lower bound estimate
does not, however, account for the possibility that large investors pay less than 20 basis
points. Such instances are likely limited to select clients. Nonetheless, we implement a more
conservative estimate that we call the implied realized fee. Some funds in the Consultant’s
database report both net and gross returns. These funds therefore provide an estimate of
e↵ective fees. We annualize the monthly gross versus net return di↵erence, take the value-
weighted average, and then re-weight the asset classes so that the weight of each asset class
matches that in the entire database.
   Figure 1 plots annual estimates of aggregate fees received by asset managers for these
three measures, aggregated to the total worldwide investable assets. We aggregate by taking
the weighted average fees in the Consultant’s data and then multiplying by the estimates of
worldwide delegated institutional assets under management from Pensions & Investments.
Based on this aggregation, we estimate that fees received by the top global asset managers
range from $125 to $162 billion per year on average over the period.


2.3    Fund-level assets under management

The Consultant categorizes funds into eight broad asset classes: U.S. public equity, global
public equity, U.S. fixed income, global fixed income, hedge funds, asset blends, cash, and
other/alternatives. We drop other/alternatives, hedge funds, and asset blends because these
funds represent heterogeneous investment strategies that make benchmarking challenging.
We also drop the cash asset class because these short-term allocations play a di↵erent role in
portfolios. Our database starts with 44,643 asset manager funds over the period 2000–2012.


                                              12
   After removing funds with no returns, cash funds, asset blend funds, other/alternatives
funds, hedge funds, funds with backfilled returns, and funds that were inactive during the
sample period, the sample consists of 15,893 funds across 3,318 asset manager firms. This
sample encompasses 936,383 monthly return observations. Panel A of Table 3 reports de-
scriptive statistics on the sample. The average total assets under management (AUM) in the
sample is $9.1 trillion. In terms of age, the funds in the database are relatively established
with the average fund being 12 years old. The largest asset classes are global and U.S. public
equity with, on average, $2.7 trillion and $2.4 trillion in assets under management followed
by U.S. fixed income ($2.2 trillion) and global fixed income ($1.8 trillion).
   Panel B reports descriptive statistics at the asset manager fund level. For each month,
we calculate the distributions and then take the average of the distributions. The average
fund has $1.8 billion in assets under management, and the median fund has $411 million.
The skew is due to large institutional mutual funds in the database. Hence, we focus on
median statistics. The median fund has 6.5 clients and $55.3 million AUM per client. Many
institutional investors have much smaller mandates. The 25th percentile mandate is just
under $13 million.
   We next present fund-level descriptive statistics for the four broad asset classes. The
largest funds are U.S. and global fixed income, which have, on average, $2.6 billion and $2.2
billion in total AUM as of 2012, followed by global public equity ($1.7 billion) and U.S. public
equity ($1.4 billion). Assets under management per client are also larger for fixed income
funds than for equities. For example, the median per client investment in a U.S. fixed income
fund is $74 million, compared to $30.6 million for U.S. public equity. Thus, fixed income
investments are larger in fund size and mandates per client.




                                              13
2.4       Fund-level fees

We next examine fee distributions by asset class and client size. Panel A of Table 4 reports
that the mean value-weighted fee is 44 basis points. This corresponds with the schedule
middle point estimate presented in Figure 1, which aggregates up to $162 billion if applied
to all delegated institutional assets. The value-weighted mean fee is lowest for U.S. fixed
income (28.7 basis points), followed by global fixed income (31.9 basis points), U.S. public
equity (49.2 basis points) and global public equity (48.2). The global asset classes have more
right-skew, accounting for the larger means.
       A natural question arises of who pays these fees. The equal-weighted fee is 56 basis points.
Funds with lower assets under management are more expensive, as one might expect if larger
clients get price breaks. We do not observe individual client investments in each fund. We
can, however, examine the distribution of fees conditional on the fund’s average mandate
size. Panel B of Table 4 presents these conditional distributions. Fees trend downward in
assets per client. For example, when the assets per client are less than $10 million, the
value-weighted mean fee ranges from 60.9 to 66.8 basis points, but is 37 basis points or less
when the assets per client are greater than $1 billion.9
       Our fee estimates are in line with those reported in both the press and academic research.
For example, Zweig (2015) reports that CalPERS paid an average fee of 48 basis points
in 2012. Coles, Suay, and Woodbury (2000) describe the fee price breaks for closed-end
institutional funds. They find that a typical fund charges 50 basis points for the first $150
million, 45 basis points for the next $100 million, 40 basis points for the subsequent $100
million, and 35 basis points allocations above $350 million. Examining active U.S. equity
institutional funds, Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010) find that fees are approximately 80 basis
points for investments of $10 million and approximately 60 basis points for investments of
$100 million.
   9
    The very small mandates (less than $1 million) are likely to be in institutional mutual funds, which may
explain why the average fees are slightly lower on the first row than on the second.


                                                    14
    Beyond scale e↵ects and the negotiating power held by large investors, asset managers
may take into account other factors to determine an institution’s willingness-to-pay, such
as the ability of institutions to manage capital in-house, behavioral biases, or agency issues
associated with delegation.10 We do not capture such factors in our analysis.



3     Results

3.1     Alpha relative to the market

We start by comparing the performance of asset managers to the overall market. Panel A
of Table 5 reports estimates of gross and net alphas from a market model that subtracts
the returns on the broad asset class benchmarks.11 We implement monthly value-weighted
regressions of asset manager fund returns on broad asset class benchmark returns, con-
straining the market beta to be equal to one. Alphas in this specification represent simple
value-weighted, monthly returns over the benchmark index. Tracking errors are defined as
the standard deviation of the residual in a model that allows for a non-zero alpha. For
exposition, we annualize alphas and tracking errors in all of our tables. We find that asset
manager funds exhibit a market-adjusted gross alpha of 131 basis points annually, with a t
of 3.21, and a net alpha of 88 basis points, with a t of 2.14.
    Which asset classes account for the positive performance? The rows of Panel B report the
net alphas and portfolio weights by year and asset class, and the far right column reports the
time series of gross alphas. The bottom row reports how the asset classes each contribute
to add up to the 131 basis points. The alpha contribution comes from global equity (50
  10
     See, for example, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992b), Brown, Harlow, and Starks (1996), Chevalier
and Ellison (1997), Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdú (2009), and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015).
  11
     In our analysis, we use the following broad asset class benchmarks: Russell 3000 (U.S. public equity),
MSCI World ex U.S. Index (global public equity), Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate Index (U.S. fixed income),
and Barclays Capital Multiverse ex US Index (global fixed income). Table A3 provides return statistics for
the benchmarks and the Consultant’s funds mapped to each asset class.



                                                    15
basis points), U.S. equity (40 basis points), U.S. fixed income (22 basis points), and global
fixed income (17 basis points). The decomposition also indicates that positive alpha is
partly driven by timing (i.e., having greater weights invested in asset classes that performed
well during that period). We can quantify the timing contribution. If asset manager funds
invested with the average weights across the asset classes (i.e., did not dynamically adjust
the asset class portfolio weights), gross alpha would have been 102 basis points. Hence, 29
basis points of alpha is due to timing across asset classes.
    Given that asset managers funds earn positive alpha in a sample that encompasses over
13% of the total worldwide investable assets, the adding-up constraint argument of Sharpe
(1991) implies that the rest of the market earns negative gross alphas relative to the market.
If we assume that there is no selection bias in our data relative to the aggregate delegated
institutional capital in the Pensions & Investments surveys, we can extrapolate our esti-
mates to approximately 29% of worldwide investable assets. The market clearing constraint
suggests that if asset manager funds return a positive 131 basis points gross over the index,
everyone else must return a gross 53 basis points below the index.12
    We can convert this gross alpha into dollars. Maintaining the assumption that the Con-
sultant’s database is representative of the Pensions & Investments sample, asset manager
funds collectively earn $469 billion per year from the rest of the market. Of this amount,
$162 billion accrues to asset managers in fees and $307 billion accrues to institutions. In
terms of the dollar value added measure of Berk and Binsbergen (2015), the average asset
manager fund generates $181,811 in value-added per month, which is similar to the estimates
of Berk and Binsbergen (2015) for retail equity mutual funds ($140,000 per month). Our
results together with the finding of Fama and French (2010) that retail mutual funds’ gross
alphas are close to zero suggest that asset managers earn positive alphas at the expense of
  12
     The market clearing constraint is that the average investor holds the market, which implies that
wasset managers ↵                                      ↵everyone else ⌘ 0. We use this condition to obtain the esti-
                ˆ asset managers + (1 wasset managers )ˆ
mate of ↵ ˆ everyone else = 53 basis points.




                                                        16
non-delegated institutional and individual investors.


3.2     Performance

As discussed by Goyal and Wahal (2008) and Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez (2016), in-
stitutions typically construct their portfolios through a two-step process. Institutions first
determine their strategy-level policy allocations by optimizing over strategy-level risk and
return. Investment officers then fulfill strategy policy allocations either “in house” or by
issuing an investment mandate to an external manager. Because overall portfolio risk is typ-
ically incorporated in the first-step of determining strategy allocations, institutions generally
appraise fund performance relative to only the strategy benchmark. Fund performance is
commonly reported in two dimensions—net alpha and tracking error estimated in a strategy-
level factor model.13


3.2.1    Asset class benchmarked performance

To place out strategy-level benchmark results (in the next subsection) in context, we first
evaluate performance relative to broad asset class benchmarks. We regress monthly fund
returns in excess of the one-month Treasury bill on the excess return of each benchmark. We
estimate these regressions separately for funds’ gross and net returns. Our prior was that
institutions investing in asset manager funds likely have longer investment horizons than
retail investors and are thus willing to hold more market exposure (i.e., betas higher than
one in the traditional CAPM sense). Thus, we expected that the 131 basis points gross alpha
from above would decline in a factor model of performance. The data did not support our
prior. Table 6 reports that the overall (row 1) beta is less than one (0.93). Asset manager
funds exhibit gross and net alphas of 189 basis points and 145 basis points. These estimates
  13
     Our focus on a single factor is consistent with the findings of Barber, Huang, and Odean (2016) and
Berk and Binsbergen (2016), who find that mutual fund flows respond to a single-factor model rather than,
for example, to multi-factor models.


                                                   17
do not, however, reflect performance from the viewpoint of an institutional investor because
the benchmark is not at the strategy level.
   Nevertheless, we can compare these broad market results to those of Lewellen (2011)
and Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010). Using aggregate institutional holdings of U.S. public
equities taken from 13-F filings, Lewellen (2011) finds an insignificant gross alpha of 32 basis
points (annualized) in a market model. For U.S. equity asset manager funds, Busse, Goyal,
and Wahal (2010) estimate a gross alpha for U.S. equities of 64 basis points per year. Their
estimate is not statistically significant, which may be driven by di↵erences in sample period
and their use of quarterly rather than monthly data. Lewellen’s lower estimate may be due
to the non-delegated holdings of institutions, that are not included in our sample or in that
of Busse, Goyal, and Wahal (2010).


3.2.2   Strategy benchmarked performance

The Consultant’s database classifies the asset manager funds into 170 granular strategy
classes (e.g., Australian equities is a strategy class under the broad asset class of global
public equity). In addition, the database includes a strategy-level benchmark for each fund.
The Consultant sets the benchmarks based on the suggestion of the asset manager, auditing
each strategy to ensure that the proposed benchmark is appropriate for the fund. We evaluate
performance using the modal benchmark in the strategy class. If the benchmark chosen has
less than 10% coverage of funds in the strategy, we instead use the benchmark covering
the most assets under management in the strategy. We list the 170 strategies and their
benchmarks in Table A5 of the Internet Appendix.
   Panel A of Table 7 reports estimates of asset manager fund performance from the view-
point of an institutional investor; namely, performance in a strategy-level single factor model.
We find a gross alpha of 86 basis points (t = 3.35) and a net alpha of 42 basis points (t =
1.63). In this estimation, the precision of benchmarking improves materially, especially in



                                              18
the global asset classes. The model’s explanatory power increases from 69.9% (Table 6) to
82.3% (Table 7) when we replace broad asset class benchmarks with strategy-level bench-
marks. Tracking error falls to 5.6%, which is almost identical to the Del Guercio and Tkac
(2002) estimate for pension funds and in line with Petäjistö’s (2013) estimate for moderately
active retail mutual funds.14 Our beta estimate remains less than one, at 0.94. Thus, asset
manager funds achieve performance with lower strategy-level risk, rather than by choosing
lower risk benchmarks to make their performance look better. If managers strategically chose
lower risk benchmarks, then the beta would likely be greater than one.


3.2.3      Robustness of strategy-level results to benchmarking and sample selection

Panel B presents results for alternative samples to evaluate the robustness of our results.
The first row limits the sample to funds that enter the platform within a year after they are
started. This restriction is potentially important because it restricts the analysis to funds
with minimal amount of backfilling. Although we remove all backfilled data throughout
this study, it is still possible that established and successful funds systematically di↵er from
new funds. For this restricted sample, however, the alpha only marginally attenuates to an
estimate of 0.80 (t = 3.03).
       The second row of Panel B restricts the sample to post-2006. We use this cuto↵ for
three reasons. First, the consultant’s coverage, as a fraction of Pensions & Investments total
AUM, is higher after this date. Second, this part of the sample captures all of the crisis
period. Third, GIPS reporting standards were in force during this period. The gross alpha
estimate remains at 0.67 (t = 1.92) for this sub-period. The bottom row of Panel B restricts
the sample to asset managers who report performance for funds representing at least 85% of
their total institutional assets under management (i.e., the variable “coverage” from Table 2
  14
    Petäjistö (2013) reports an average tracking error of 7.1% for actively managed retail mutual funds. He
also estimates tracking errors by fund type, finding a tracking error of 15.8% for concentrated mutual funds,
10.4% for factor bets, 8.4% for stock pickers, 5.9% for moderately active funds, and 3.5% for closet indexers.



                                                     19
is greater than 85%, which is the 75th percentile). We continue to find similar results for this
restricted sample even though the average number of funds per month drops precipitously
from 4,668 for the full sample to 437 for this restricted sample.
   For benchmarking robustness, we compare the performance of asset manager funds with
the performance of mutual funds. We use mutual fund data from CRSP’s survivorship-
bias free database. For each asset manager strategy, we use the CRSP classification codes
to identify all mutual funds that follow the same strategy. We then compute the value-
weighted return series of these mutual funds. Table 8 reports the di↵erences between the
value-weighted returns earned by asset manager funds and mutual funds on both gross and
net basis.
   The average asset manager fund’s net return exceeds that of the average mutual fund
by 110 basis points per year over the sample period. This di↵erence is significant with a t
of 2.43. This performance di↵erence emanates from di↵erences in both gross performance
and fees. In the comparison of gross returns, the average dollar invested in asset manager
funds outperforms the dollar invested in mutual funds by 50 basis points; the di↵erence in
fees makes up for the remaining 60 basis points. The last row reports the average size of
the mutual fund comparison group. Across all asset classes, for example, we benchmark
the average dollar invested in asset manager funds against 376 mutual funds in the typical
month. The asset-class breakdown shows that the performance di↵erences, on both gross and
net basis, are particularly large in the fixed income asset classes. The net return di↵erence
is positive but insignificant in U.S. public equity, and negative and insignificant in global
public equity.
   These estimates are consistent with the research on actively managed mutual funds. Fama
and French (2010) show that, collectively, actively managed U.S. equity funds resemble the
market portfolio. A comparison of asset manager funds against the gross return earned by
mutual funds is therefore close to our broad asset class comparison, except that the mutual
fund “benchmark” is a noisier version of the broad asset class. The typical actively managed

                                              20
mutual fund is also expensive; the gross and net alpha estimates in Fama and French (2010,
Table II) suggest that the average dollar invested in these funds pays 95 basis points in fees,
which is far more than the average dollar invested in the asset manager funds.
   To provide insight into how funds outperform benchmarks, Table 9 reports raw returns,
standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios for the funds, the broad asset class benchmarks, and
the strategy-level benchmarks. The statistics are value-weighted to reflect the investments of
the asset manager funds. Focusing on the last row, we show that the strategy-level indices in
equity and fixed income have a higher Sharpe ratio (0.26) over the period than the broad asset
class indices (0.18). Asset manager funds look almost identical to strategy indices in terms of
standard deviation (10.33 versus 10.37), but they achieve a higher return (5.23 versus 4.82).
This pattern holds for each of the public equity and fixed income asset classes reported on
the other rows of Table 9. These results together with those in Tables 7 and 8—which show
that asset manager funds outperform strategy and mutual fund benchmarks—suggest that
asset manager funds outperform their strategy benchmarks by taking risks outside those
captured by the specific strategy.


3.3    Sharpe (1992) analysis

Given our performance results, we turn to the question of how asset managers generate
positive net alphas relative to strategy benchmarks. To answer this question, we implement
the Sharpe (1992) model that decomposes fund returns into loadings on tradable indices.
This framework allows us to test whether tactical or smart beta exposures explain what
asset managers do to achieve positive net alpha and whether, and at what indi↵erence cost,
institutions could have replicated asset manager returns by managing assets in-house.




                                              21
3.3.1   Estimating mimicking portfolios for asset manager funds from tradable
        factors

We implement the Sharpe analysis as follows. We first gather a set of tradable factors
(i.e., those with tradable indices) including the broad asset class benchmark, which varies
by fund. We start with the 12 original factors of Sharpe (1992), but with modifications to
reflect changes in market weights since the original paper (e.g., replacing Japanese market
indices with that of emerging markets). We then augment the list to map to factors studied
in the finance literature across asset classes.    For U.S. equity, we include size and value
factors, which have statistical power in predicting the cross-section of stock returns (Fama
and French 1992) and explain the majority of variation in actively managed U.S. equity
mutual fund returns (Fama and French 2010). For global equity, we include indices of
European equities and emerging markets. For U.S. fixed income, we include indices to span
di↵erences both in riskiness and maturity, including indices of government fixed income of
di↵erent maturities, corporation investment grade bonds, and mortgage-backed securities.
These indexes are close to those that Blake, Elton, and Gruber (1993) use to measure the
performance of U.S. bond mutual funds. The global fixed income factors capture returns
on government and corporate bonds both in Europe and emerging markets. The following
table lists the original factors used by Sharpe (1992) and those used in our analysis.




                                              22
Asset class            Sharpe (1992)                                   Our implementation
U.S. public equity     Sharpe/BARRA Value Stock                        Russell 3000
                       Sharpe/BARRA Growth Stock                       S&P 500/Citigroup Value
                       Sharpe/BARRA Medium Capitalization Stock        S&P 500/Citigroup Growth
                       Sharpe/BARRA Small Capitalization Stock         S&P 400 Midcap
                                                                       S&P 600 Small Cap
Global public equity   FTA Euro-Pacific ex Japan                       MSCI World ex U.S.
                       FTA Japan                                       S&P Europe BMI
                                                                       MSCI Emerging Markets Free Float
U.S. fixed income      Salomon Brothers’ 90-day Treasury Bill          Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate
                       Lehman Brothers’ Intermediate Government Bond   U.S. 3 month T-Bill
                       Lehman Brothers’ Long-term Government Bond      Barclays U.S. Intermediate Government
                       Lehman Brothers’ Corporate Bond                 Barclays Capital U.S. Long Government
                       Lehman Brothers’ Mortgage-Backed Securities     Barclays Capital U.S. Corporate Investment Grade
                                                                       Barclays Capital U.S. Mortgage-Backed Securities
Global fixed income    Salomon Brothers’ Non-U.S. Government Bond      Barclays Capital Multiverse ex U.S.
                                                                       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Government
                                                                       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Corporate
                                                                       JP Morgan EMBI Global Diversified Index



         For each fund, we regress monthly returns against the 15 factors using data up to month
t        1. We constrain the regression slopes to be non-negative and sum to one, following
(Sharpe 1992). We then use the estimated loadings to construct a dynamic mimicking style
portfolio for each fund. Because we constrain the loadings to sum to one for each fund, they
can be interpreted as portfolio weights.15 A benefit of the Sharpe methodology is that these
non-negative weights yield clean inferences about fund exposures (Sharpe 1992). Panel A of
Table 10 presents the factor weight estimates, where we have estimated the weights fund-
by-fund and taken value-weighted averages by broad asset class. For example, the average
weight on the Russell 3000 (the broad asset class benchmark) for U.S. public equity funds
is 9.9%. The remaining rows present the deviations from the benchmark. For example,
the average U.S. public equity fund holds a 28.8% weight in the S&P 500/Citigroup Value
benchmark.
         The second step of the Sharpe analysis assesses whether the factor loadings captured in
    15
    We also estimated the regressions with the constraint that the coefficients sum to less than or equal to
one. For this specification, the average weights sum to 0.99.



                                                           23
the mimicking style portfolio are the source of the positive asset manager fund performance.
We estimate the factor loadings using rolling historical data to ensure that our second step
performance measurement is out-of-sample.16 For each fund-month, we calculate the fund’s
return in excess of the style portfolio. Panel B of Table 10 reports monthly value-weighted
average excess returns over the mimicking style portfolio for each broad asset class and the
associated t-statistics.
       We find that gross returns are statistically indistinguishable from the mimicking portfo-
lios, across all asset classes and for each broad asset class individually. The excess return
estimate for all asset classes is     0.27 with a t of     0.77. Statistically and economically, the
mimicking portfolio entirely accounts for the positive fund performance that we documented
in Tables 6, 7, and 8. This result is consistent with our inference from the comparisons of
funds and asset class benchmarks in Table 9—asset manager funds achieve outperformance
by exchanging lower strategy-risk for higher other risks (tactical factor risk) that outperform
benchmarks.
       Does performance generated through factor exposures represent skill? This question
relates to Berk and Binsbergen (2015), who consider the proper benchmarking of mutual
funds. If internal management by the client cannot reproduce a tactical exposure in an
asset class, then these authors suggest that we should attribute that exposure loading to
a value-added activity that the fund provides its clients. Cochrane (2011) o↵ers a similar
interpretation:
         “I tried telling a hedge fund manager, “You don’t have alpha. Your returns
         can be replicated with a value-growth, momentum, currency and term carry,
         and short-vol strategy.” He said, “Exotic beta is my alpha. I understand those
         systematic factors and know how to trade them. My clients don’t.” He has a
         point. How many investors have even thought through their exposures to carry-
         trade or short-volatility. . . To an investor who has not heard of it and holds the
         market index, a new factor is alpha.”
  16
    In Table A4 of the Appendix, we present similar results when we estimate the Sharpe model using a
jackknife procedure in which we use the full sample except for month t, or in which we exclude observations
that are from six months before through six months after month t.


                                                    24
                                                                               Cochrane (2011)


3.3.2   Do investors pay more for successful tactical betas?

If these factor exposures represent skill, then investors presumably are willing to pay for such
performance. Therefore, we next examine whether fees in the cross section of asset manager
funds correlate positively with the performance of the fund’s style portfolio. Investors may
also pay for “skill” that is not captured by the factor exposures (the gross fund return residual
after subtracting out the return on the style portfolio). Table 11 presents regressions that
estimate the relation between fees and these two return components. Panel A presents panel
estimates, which include month-asset class fixed e↵ects. This panel allows us to estimate
the marginal e↵ect of return components on fees within asset class-month. To ensure that
the return components obtained from the Sharpe analysis are pre-determined regressors, we
measure fees as of the end of the sample period—either in June 2012 or when the strategy
disappears. Given that the fee observation is the same throughout the panel for each fund,
we cluster the standard errors at the fund-level.
   Panel A of Table 11 shows that fees positively and significantly correlate with the returns
on the style portfolio and the residual component. The coefficient on the style portfolio for
the all asset classes specification is 6.01 (t = 5.51). To put this magnitude in context, the
mean of the dependent variable is 60.0 basis points of fees, similar to the equal-weighted
average fees we report in Table 4. A one-standard deviation higher mimicking style portfolio
return (4.07 basis points) associates with a fee that is higher by: 12 months ⇤ 0.0601 ⇤ 4.07
= 2.94 basis points (i.e., a 4.9% higher fee relative to the baseline mean fee). We also find
a positive significant coefficient for the residual return component. However, the marginal
e↵ect of this correlate is much lower. Using the same calculation, a one-standard deviation
higher residual return (1.99 basis points) associates with fee being only 0.32 basis points
higher. Noteworthy, however, is that the significance of the residual return component is



                                               25
being driven by fixed income asset classes. In global fixed income, for instance, a one standard
deviation higher residual return associates with a 1.5% higher fee than the mean for that
asset class.
    As an alternative to the panel specification in Panel A, we estimate cross-sectional re-
gressions with one observation per fund. We first estimate panel regressions of style returns
and residual returns on month-asset class fixed e↵ects. The independent variables in our col-
lapsed specification are the time series averages of these style and residual returns, purged
of the month-asset class e↵ect. We find robust evidence that investors pay for tactical factor
exposures. A one-standard deviation higher return on the style portfolio translates into fees
that are higher by 2.42 basis points. The residual component only matters in global fixed
income. In sum, our estimates suggest that asset manager funds charge fees, and investors
pay fees primarily for performance generated through tactical factor exposures, especially
for equity strategies.


3.3.3   “In-house” implementation of factor index loadings

The results from the Sharpe analysis raise the question of whether institutional investors
could do as well as asset manager funds if they had instead implemented factor loading port-
folios in-house. To address this question, we discard our asset manager data and construct
rolling optimal portfolios using only historical data on tradable factor indices. We first use
the standard algorithm, treating the factor indices as the assets, to generate mean variance
(MV) efficient portfolios separately for each of the four asset classes. We implement this
optimization using data up to month t       1, and then calculate the return on the optimal
portfolio for month t. We aggregate across asset classes by applying asset managers’ month
t   1 asset class weights for month t returns.
    We then implement two modifications to the mean-variance algorithm to generate more
stable and simpler-to-implement optimal portfolios that avoid extreme short or long posi-



                                              26
tions in factors.17 The first simpler portfolio forces the covariance matrix to be diagonal to
eliminate extreme loadings based on covariances and sets any negative estimated risk pre-
miums to zero. The second alternative portfolio is a mean-variance portfolio with short-sale
constraints imposed in the optimization.
       Panel A of Table 12 presents the gross and net performance along with the implied Sharpe
ratio for asset manager funds. Over the 2000–2012 period, asset manager funds earned 5.2%
in gross returns with a standard deviation of 10.4% (Sharpe ratio = 0.3). Panel A then
presents gross performance for the replicating portfolios. The standard MV portfolio exhibits
a lower Sharpe ratio, 0.16, than asset manager funds. However, the two alternative MV
portfolios have higher Sharpe ratios than the actual asset manager portfolios: MV analysis
with a diagonal covariance matrix, 0.37, and MV analysis with short-sale constraint, 0.34.
       In the rightmost column of Panel A of Table 12, we report the cost that would make
an institution indi↵erent in Sharpe ratio terms between implementing the MV portfolio and
delegating to asset managers. That is, the indi↵erence cost solves for cost in:

                         rgross replicating    rf     cost       rnet asset manager      rf
                                                             =                                .      (1)
                                  gross replicating                  net asset manager


Focusing on the diagonal MV portfolio, we find that institutions would be indi↵erent between
delegating and managing assets in-house if the cost of managing assets in-house was 85.5 basis
points. This 85.5 basis points must cover both administrative costs and trading fees. In
terms of administrative costs, Dyck and Pomorski (2012) find that large pension funds incur
approximately 12 basis points in non-trading costs to administer their portfolios.
       To provide an estimate of the trading costs, we gather historical institutional mutual
fund and ETF fee data from CRSP and Bloomberg covering the factors of the replication.
We present the averages of the time series in Panel C of Table 12. Using these series, we
  17
    For a discussion of the measurement error issues associated with the standard mean-variance solution,
see DeMiguel, Garlappi, and Uppal (2009).



                                                        27
simulate the cost of implementing the replication for four di↵erent trading fee estimates:
Quartile 1, Median, and Quartile 3 of the institutional mutual funds, sorted by cost, and
the end-of-the-period ETFs. Panel B of Table 12 reports these results. Investing in the
diagonal MV factor portfolio at the trading cost of the median institutional mutual fund
would have cost 88.5 basis points in fees. Investing at the Quartile 1 fees would have cost
66.1 basis points. The indi↵erence cost for the diagonal MV portfolio rule (85.5 basis points
from Panel A) is similar to the sum of the administrative costs and the Quartile 1 fees (12 +
66.1 = 78.1 basis points). At this cost, an investor would be indi↵erent between managing
assets in-house and delegating assets. At any mutual fund fees, the investor would likely
prefer delegating.
   Importantly, Panel B of Table 12 shows that even the Quartile 1 trading-cost estimate
is high relative to the end-of-period ETF fees. Although many ETFs were not available
over the full sample period (the ETF inception dates are included in Panel C), we consider
a strategy that trades ETFs at their end of period fees. The first row of Panel B reports
that at the end of period ETF fees, the portfolio would have cost only 24 basis points, thus
tilting the preference away from delegating to asset managers toward investing in-house. The
introduction of liquid, low cost ETFs is likely eroding the comparative advantage of asset
managers.
   This analysis is subject to several caveats. First, we assume that the necessary liquidity
is available for the ETFs, index funds, and institutional mutual funds that an institution
would use to replicate. Second, we assume that all institutions face the same trading costs.
Third, we assume that institutions are sophisticated. Institutions must know which factors
could be used to improve performance, and they have to know how to implement the required
loadings in real time. These caveats favor delegation via asset managers. Put di↵erently,
less-sophisticated institutions or instittions who receive other (non-fee based) benefits from
asset managers would likely choose delegation over in-house management.



                                             28
4     Conclusion
We provide new facts about the investment vehicles into which institutions delegate assets.
Over the period 2000-2012, institutional investors delegated an average of $36 trillion (29%
of worldwide investable assets) to asset managers, paying an annual cost of $162 billion
per year, or 44 basis points per dollar invested. In return, asset managers pooled a small
number of institutions that want similar strategy exposures into actively-managed funds that
outperform strategy benchmarks by 86 basis points gross, or 42 basis points net of fees. We
trace this outperformance to systematic deviations from the asset-class benchmarks. The
asset manager industry is therefore not just a passive pass-through entity that institutions
use to implement strategy mandates.
    A better understanding of delegation is relevant on several dimensions. For example,
Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) show that intermediaries, rather than households, price
assets. We provide evidence on the factors that lead institutions to delegate to intermediaries.
Delegation is relevant to the ongoing debate about whether intermediation contributes to
systemic risk (Jopson 2015). We characterize the delegation process and provide evidence
on costs and benefits. There is room for more research on the determinants of asset flows
and the implications of the sector’s size.
    Delegation is also relevant for understanding who pays for financial intermediation through
fees and returns. We find that the average intermediated institutional dollar’s return ex-
ceeded that of the market by 131 basis points between 2000 and 2012. This estimate implies
that the average non-institutional or non-intermediated dollar—that is, investments made
through retail mutual funds or directly by individuals or institutions—underperformed the
market by 53 basis points even before fees. These estimates add to the debates on interme-
diary skill and the relative performance of active versus passive management, as well as for
discussions of regulatory oversight of intermediation.




                                              29
REFERENCES

 Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir (2014). Financial intermediaries and the cross-section
    of asset returns. Journal of Finance 69 (6), 2557–2596.

 Ang, A., A. Ayala, and W. Goetzmann (2014). Investment beliefs of endowments. Working
    paper, Columbia University.

 Annaert, J., M. De Ceuster, and W. Van Hyfte (2005). The value of asset allocation
    advice: Evidence from The Economist’s quarterly portfolio poll. Journal of Banking
    & Finance 29 (3), 661–680.

 Bange, M. M., K. Khang, and T. W. Miller, Jr. (2008). Benchmarking the performance
    of recommended allocations to equities, bonds, and cash by international investment
    houses. Journal of Empirical Finance 15 (3), 363–386.

 Barber, B., X. Huang, and T. Odean (2016). Which risk factors matter to investors?
    Evidence from mutual fund flows. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

 Barber, B., Y.-T. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, and T. Odean (2009). Just how much do individual
    investors lose by trading? Review of Financial Studies 22 (2), 609–632.

 Barber, B. and G. Wang (2013). Do (some) university endowments earn alpha? Financial
    Analysts Journal 69 (5), 26–44.

 Berk, J. and J. Binsbergen (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry. Journal
    of Financial Economics 118 (1), 1–20.

 Berk, J. and J. Binsbergen (2016). Assessing asset pricing models using revealed prefer-
    ence. Journal of Financial Economics 119 (1), 1–23.

 Blake, C., E. Elton, and M. Gruber (1993). The performance of bond mutual funds.
    Journal of Business 66 (3), 371–403.




                                            30
Blake, D., B. Lehmann, and A. Timmerman (1999). Asset allocation dynamics and pension
   fund performance. Journal of Business 72 (4), 429–461.

Blitz, D. (2013). How smart is ‘smart beta’ ? Journal of Indexes Europe March/April.

Bogle, J. (2008). A question so important that it should be hard to think about anything
   else. Journal of Portfolio Management 34 (2), 95–102.

Brown, K., L. Garlappi, and C. Tiu (2010). Asset allocation and portfolio performance:
   Evidence from university endowment funds. Journal of Financial Markets 13 (2), 268–
   294.

Brown, K., W. Harlow, and L. Starks (1996). Of tournaments and temptations: An anal-
   ysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 51 (1),
   85–110.

Busse, J., A. Goyal, and S. Wahal (2010). Performance and persistence in institutional
   investment management. Journal of Finance 65 (2), 765–790.

Carhart, M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52 (1),
   57–82.

Chevalier, J. and G. Ellison (1997). Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.
   Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167–1200.

Christopherson, J., W. Ferson, and D. Glassman (1998). Conditional manager alphas
   on economic information: Another look at the persistence of performance. Review of
   Financial Studies 11 (1), 111–142.

Cochrane, J. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66 (4), 1047–
   1108.

Coggin, T. D., F. J. Fabozzi, and S. Rahman (1993). The investment performance
   of U.S. equity pension fund managers: An empirical investigation. Journal of Fi-
   nance 48 (3), 1039–1055.

                                            31
Cohen, R. B., P. A. Gompers, and T. Vuolteenaho (2002). Who underreacts to cash-
   flow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions. Journal of
   Financial Economics 66 (2–3), 409–462.

Coles, J., J. Suay, and D. Woodbury (2000). Fund advisor compensation in closed-end
   funds. Journal of Finance 55 (3), 1385–1414.

Del Guercio, D. and P. Tkac (2002). The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
   portfolios: Mutual funds vs. pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
   Analysis 37 (4), 523–557.

DeMiguel, V., L. Garlappi, and R. Uppal (2009). Optimal versus naive diversification:
   How inefficient is the 1/N portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies 22 (5),
   1915–1953.

Dyck, A., K. Lins, and L. Pomorski (2013). Does active management pay? New interna-
   tional evidence. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 3 (2), 200–228.

Dyck, A. and L. Pomorski (2012). Is bigger better? Size and performance in pension plan
   management. Working paper, University of Toronto.

Evans, R. and R. Fahlenbrach (2012). Institutional investors and mutual fund governance:
   Evidence from retail-institutional fund twins. Review of Financial Studies 25 (12),
   3530–3571.

Fama, E. and K. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of
   Finance 47 (2), 427–465.

Fama, E. and K. French (2010). Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund
   returns. Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1915–1947.

Ferson, W. and K. Khang (2002). Conditional performance measurement using portfolio
   weights: Evidence from pension funds. Journal of Financial Economics 65 (2), 249–
   282.

                                         32
French, K. (2008). Presidential address: The cost of active investing. Journal of Fi-
   nance 63 (4), 1537–1573.

Fung, W. and D. Hsieh (2004). Hedge fund benchmarks: A risk-based approach. Financial
   Analysts Journal 60 (5), 65–80.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2015). Money doctors. Journal of Finance 70 (1),
   91–114.

Gil-Bazo, J. and P. Ruiz-Verdú (2009). The relation between price and performance in
   the mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 64 (5), 2153–2183.

Goyal, A. and S. Wahal (2008). The selection and termination of investment management
   firms by plan sponsors. Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1805–1847.

Greenwood, R. and D. Scharfstein (2013). The growth of finance. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 27 (2), 3–28.

Gruber, M. (1996). Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds. Jour-
   nal of Finance 51 (3), 783–810.

Ippolito, R. and J. Turner (1987). Turnover, fees and pension plan performance. Financial
   Analysts Journal 43 (6), 16–26.

Jacobs, B. and K. Levy (2014). Smart beta versus smart alpha. Journal of Portfolio
   Management 40 (4), 4–7.

Jenkinson, T., H. Jones, and J. Martinez (2016). Picking winners? Investment consultants’
   recommendations of fund managers. Journal of Finance 71 (5), 2333–2369.

Jensen, M. (1968). The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964. Journal of
   Finance 23 (2), 389–416.

Jopson, B. (2015, July 14). Big US fund managers fight o↵ ‘systemic’ label. Financial
   Times.


                                           33
Kosowski, R., A. Timmerman, R. Wermers, and H. White (2006). Can mutual fund “stars”
   really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis. Journal of Finance 61 (6),
   2551–2595.

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1992a). The impact of institutional trading on
   stock prices. Journal of Financial Economics 32 (1), 23–43.

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1992b). The structure and performance of
   the money management industry. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeco-
   nomics, 339–379.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, and J. Wang (2008). Secrets of the academy: The drivers of univer-
   sity endowment success. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (3), 207–222.

Lewellen, J. (2011). Institutional investors and the limits of arbitrage. Journal of Financial
   Economics 102 (1), 62–80.

Malkiel, B. (1995). Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to 1991. Journal
   of Finance 50 (2), 549–572.

Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance 7 (1), 77–91.

Petäjistö, A. (2013). Active share and mutual fund performance. Financial Analysts Jour-
   nal 69 (4), 73–93.

Philippon, T. (2015). Has the U.S. finance industry become less efficient? On the the-
   ory and measurement of financial intermediation. American Economic Review 105 (4),
   1408–1438.

Sharpe, W. (1991). The arithmetic of active management. Financial Analysts Jour-
   nal 47 (1), 7–9.

Sharpe, W. (1992). Asset allocation: Management style and performance measurement.
   Journal of Portfolio Management 18 (2), 7–19.


                                            34
Staal, A., M. Corsi, S. Shores, and C. Woida (2015). A factor approach to smart beta
   development in fixed income. Journal of Index Investing 6 (1), 98–110.

Towers Watson (2013, July). Understanding smart beta.

Zweig, J. (2015, June 13). The intelligent investor: What you can learn from a pension
   giant. The Wall Street Journal , B1.




                                          35
                                                                                                                     211.9
                           200:0
                                                                                                                     184.7
                                                                                                           148.0
                                                                                                                     163.2
                           150:0
     Fee (in $ billions)




                                                                   124.6
                                        161.8
                           100:0




                            50:0
                                        Schedule middle point
                                        Schedule lower bound
                                        Implied realized fee

                              2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010    2011   2012
                                                                        Year

Figure 1: Aggregate fees paid by institutions to asset managers. This figure presents aggregate
fee estimates based on information available in the Consultant’s database. The estimates represent
value-weighted average fees in the Consultant’s database multiplied by total institutional assets under
management. Line “Schedule middle point” assumes that the average dollar in each fund pays the
median fee listed on that fund’s fee schedule and “Schedule lower bound” uses the lowest fee from
each fee schedule. “Implied realized fee” is estimated using data on funds that report returns both
gross and net of fees. We annualize the monthly return di↵erence, take the value-weighted average,
and then re-weight asset classes so that each asset class’s weight matches that in the full database.
The numbers on y-axis to the right are the aggregate fee estimates for 2012. The numbers within the
figure represent the average annual fees over the sample period for the three sets of estimates.




                                                                        36
                                                        Table 1: Assets under management ($ in billions)

     This table presents descriptive statistics for the Pensions & Investments surveys, our estimates of worldwide investable assets,
     and the Consultant’s database. For descriptions of the Pensions & Investments surveys and our estimates of worldwide investable
     assets, see the Appendix. The Consultant’s data cover the period 2000–2012.

                             Pensions &                                                                 Consultant’s database
                             Investments                  Worldwide investable assets         AUM                         AUM with returns
                           AUM      Number of                              % held by                % of   Number of              Without
     Year           (in billions)     managers             Total      asset managers      Total      P&I    managers       Raw      backfill
     2000                 22,170          718             78,884               28.1%      6,302    28.4%        3,428     5,286       3,102
     2001                 22,628          727             75,512               30.0%      6,574    29.1%        3,441     5,467       3,671




37
     2002                 22,897          723             76,603               29.9%      6,943    30.3%        3,600     6,014       4,155
     2003                 28,616          748             93,933               30.5%      9,612    33.6%        3,780     8,167       6,129
     2004                 32,370          715            108,514               29.8%     11,353    35.1%        3,902    10,065       7,950
     2005                 36,619          723            116,104               31.5%     12,922    35.3%        4,080    11,858       9,392
     2006                 42,142          720            134,293               31.4%     15,963    37.9%        4,227    14,894      12,246
     2007                 46,208          704            157,057               29.4%     27,778    60.1%        4,196    24,843      21,595
     2008                 36,306          671            134,650               27.0%     22,119    60.9%        4,283    18,491      16,116
     2009                 41,712          646            152,190               27.4%     25,340    60.7%        4,312    21,372      19,513
     2010                 43,798          633            164,610               26.6%     26,395    60.3%        4,248    23,174      21,607
     2011                 42,978          610            163,093               26.4%     25,877    60.2%        4,204    23,004      21,978
     2012†                46,832          595            172,566               27.1%     26,265    56.1%        4,025    23,293      22,932
     Average              35,790          687            125,231               28.9%     17,188    45.2%        3,979    15,071      13,107
     †
         Year 2012 Consultant assets as of June 2012.
                                        Table 2: Selection bias tests

This table examines the relation between performance and selective coverage in the Consultant’s
database. Coverage is the percentage of assets under management that the manager reports to the
Consultant’s database. Internal coverage is the percentage of assets under management for which the
manager reports the returns on the underlying strategies. We report estimates from ordinary least
squares panel regressions of percentage returns on the coverage measures. The unit of observation is a
fund-month with N = 1,226,824. Standard errors are clustered by 32,165 month-by-strategy clusters.
A coefficient estimate of 0.001 indicates that a percentage point increase in coverage is associated with
a 0.1 basis point per month increase in returns.

                                                           Dependent variable:
 Independent                                                                         Net return
 variable                                Net return                               minus benchmark

                                            Specification 1: ri,t = a + b ⇥ coveragei,t + "i,t

 Coverage (%)            0.00268                0.00077               0.00074                0.00077
                         (1.35)                 (4.84)                (2.97)                 (4.84)

 Month ⇥ Strategy FEs    No                     Yes                   No                     Yes

 Adjusted R2             0.03%                  0.02%                 0.01%                  0.02%

                              Specification 2: ri,t = a + b1 ⇥ coveragei,t + b2 ⇥ internal coveragei,t + "i,t

 Coverage (%)            0.00277                0.00078               0.00076                0.00078
                         (1.46)                 (4.84)                (3.10)                 (4.84)

 Internal coverage (%)   0.00106                0.00038               0.00016                0.00038
                         (0.59)                 (2.41)                (0.64)                 (2.41)

 Month ⇥ Strategy FEs    No                     Yes                   No                     Yes

 Adjusted R2             0.04%                  0.02%                 0.01%                  0.02%




                                                      38
                       Table 3: Summary of fund characteristics by asset class

This table presents descriptive statistics for the funds in the Consultant’s database. Panel A reports
the number of managers and funds, the average fund age, and the average AUM for all funds. In
Panel B, we calculate each month the distributions of assets, client counts, and AUM per client for
each fund and then report the time series averages of these distributions. Total assets and assets per
client are in $ millions. The Consultant’s data cover the period from January 2000 through June 2012.

Panel A: Number of managers and funds and average AUM
                      Number of      Number of      Average              Total AUM                % of
Asset class            managers           funds    fund age            per year ($M)       total AUM
All                         3,318        15,893        11.7                 9,101,546            100%
U.S. public equity          1,232         4,956         6.1                 2,396,141             26%
Global public equity        1,067         6,255        15.6                 2,724,748             30%
U.S. fixed income             586         2,206         6.0                 2,219,037             24%
Global fixed income           433         2,476        20.8                 1,761,620             19%

Panel B: Distributions of assets, client counts, and AUM per client
                                                                             Percentiles
Asset class                    Mean                SD             25             50                75
All
 Assets                       1,812.4          6,918.7         108.8           410.6          1,371.7
 Clients                        229.6          3,024.0           1.8             6.5             21.8
 AUM per client                 293.3          1,693.8          12.6            55.3            170.2
U.S. public equity
 Assets                       1,358.4          4,158.4          83.4           339.1          1,103.4
 Clients                        122.3            800.0           2.5             7.8             28.0
 AUM per client                 175.9            491.1           6.3            30.6            125.0
Global public equity
 Assets                       1,697.5          4,488.5         107.4           407.9              1.4
 Clients                        421.4          4,464.5           1.5             5.4             28.7
 AUM per client                 340.2          1,669.6          15.4            61.1            164.6
U.S. fixed income
 Assets                       2,598.7          9,988.3         165.7           526.5          1,965.0
 Clients                         49.2            175.6           3.2            10.1             27.8
 AUM per client                 198.8            445.0          20.5            74.4            217.5
Global fixed income
 Assets                       2,219.1          8,964.6         152.9           501.3          1,567.4
 Clients                         38.8            196.9           1.6             5.5             16.7
 AUM per client                 475.2          2,278.1          45.5           131.5            272.6




                                                 39
                               Table 4: Fees by asset class and client size

This table presents descriptive statistics for the fee data in the Consultant’s database. Panel A reports
the distributions of fund fees across all asset classes and by asset class. The fees reported in this table
are the middle point fees reported on each fund’s fee schedule. Panel B sorts funds based on the assets
under management per client and reports the fee distributions for seven categories that range from
less than one million dollars in assets per client to over one billion dollars in assets per client. The
fees are computed using data on a total of 12,811 asset manager funds. The number of funds in the
average month is 4,715.

Panel A: Distribution of fund fees (bps) by asset class
                                  Average                                          Percentiles
Asset class                  VW            EW            SD                25           50             75
All                          44.0         55.8          33.6             31.0         53.4           74.3
U.S. public equity            49.2          63.1           37.7          47.2          63.5          80.0
Global pubic equity           58.2          68.1           45.8          50.6          64.0          80.6
U.S. fixed income             28.7          29.5           20.6          21.1          26.8          35.1
Global fixed income           31.9          36.1           24.6          22.9          29.5          44.1

Panel B: Distribution of fund fees (bps) by client size
                                  Average                                          Percentiles
AUM per client               VW            EW               SD             25           50             75
< $1 million                 60.9          75.0            32.8          56.0         70.0           90.0
$1–$5                        66.8          69.6            35.7          50.0         65.8           85.0
$5–$10                       66.8          66.2            37.8          40.0         65.0           86.2
$10–$50                      55.0          62.0            33.8          35.0         60.0           80.0
$50–$250                     46.6          55.9            30.8          30.5         53.0           75.0
$250–$1000                   37.1          51.4            30.8          27.5         48.1           69.0
> $1000                      32.2          50.8            36.1          25.0         45.0           66.7




                                                    40
                                       Table 5: Fund returns

This table compares fund returns against broad asset-class benchmarks. Panel A reports market-
adjusted returns, which are computed by subtracting from each fund’s gross or net return the broad
asset-class level benchmark return. These four benchmarks are listed in Table A3. Panel B presents
the annual gross alphas and weights against the asset-class level benchmarks. We define for each
fund i and month t a residual eit = rit rit B , where r B is the return on the broad asset class or
                                                          it
strategy. We then estimate a value-weighted panel regression of these residuals against a constant,
clustering the errors by month. The weights in this regression are proportional to each fund’s assets
under management and they are scaled to sum up to one within each month. Tracking error estimates
are obtained from value-weighted regressions of e2it s on a constant. Alphas and tracking errors are
annualized. Information ratio (IR) is the annualized net alpha divided by the tracking error. The
Consultant’s data cover the period from January 2000 through June 2012.




                                                 41
     Panel A: Overall market-adjusted returns
                            Gross returns                                     Net returns                                          Avg. number
     Year          ↵
                   ˆ        t(ˆ
                              ↵)        Tracking error                        ↵
                                                                              ˆ         t(ˆ
                                                                                          ↵)           Information ratio               of funds
     All        1.31        3.21                 8.62%                     0.88         2.14                        0.10                4,668.2

     Panel B: Market-adjusted returns and asset-class weights by year
                        Annualized gross alphas                         Annual portfolio weights                        Total
                   Public equity         Fixed income               Public equity       Fixed income                    gross      Avg. number
     Year         U.S.     Global       U.S.      Global           U.S.     Global    U.S.      Global                  alpha          of funds
     2000         4.34        4.49      1.54         7.20          0.52       0.18    0.28        0.01                   1.12           1,300.3
     2001         2.90        4.57      0.36         6.57          0.46       0.21    0.32        0.02                   0.38           1,825.6
     2002         0.12        9.57      1.43         7.39          0.41       0.23    0.33        0.03                   1.57           2,314.6
     2003         1.53        7.52      3.08         6.50          0.36       0.26    0.32        0.06                   3.09           2,866.7
     2004         1.55        3.49      1.53         2.77          0.36       0.29    0.27        0.08                   1.79           3,537.5
     2005         2.18        8.36      0.93        12.37          0.34       0.32    0.24        0.09                   0.60           3,956.3




42
     2006         1.12        4.11      0.92         4.23          0.32       0.36    0.21        0.11                   0.84           4,508.0
     2007         0.36        2.72      1.00         6.22          0.31       0.38    0.20        0.12                   0.21           5,119.4
     2008         1.01        1.95      7.28         3.86          0.24       0.34    0.21        0.21                   1.40           6,777.5
     2009         0.42        1.94      8.53         3.23          0.21       0.28    0.26        0.24                   3.66           7,045.1
     2010         0.55        5.00      2.50         2.17          0.20       0.28    0.24        0.29                   2.72           7,309.0
     2011         2.02        1.16      0.87         5.69          0.20       0.28    0.24        0.28                   1.71           7,645.2
     2012         2.23        1.18      4.61         4.17          0.20       0.25    0.26        0.28                   2.26           7,732.5
     Average      0.86        1.65      0.72         0.67          0.32       0.28    0.26        0.14                   1.02           4,668.2

                                                         2012
                      Contribution of asset class a =            portfolio weightat ⇥ gross alphaat             portfolio weight
                                                        t=2000                                         t=2000
                                                         X                                            . 2012
                                                                                                        X



     Total         0.40       0.50       0.22           0.17                                                              1.31          4,668.2
                   Table 6: Evaluating fund returns against broad market indexes

This table presents gross and net alphas from single-factor models that use the four broad asset class
benchmarks listed in Table A3. We first estimate fund-by-fund regressions of net and gross returns
against benchmarks and collect eit = ↵   ˆ i + "ˆit . We then estimate value-weighted panel regressions
of these residuals against a constant, clustering the standard errors by month. The weights in this
regression are proportional to each fund’s assets under management and they are scaled to sum up
to one within each month. Betas and R2 s reported are obtained by estimating similar value-weighted
regressions with the fund-specific betas and R2 s as the dependent variables. Tracking error estimates
are obtained from value-weighted regressions of e2it s on a constant. Alphas and tracking errors are
annualized. Information ratio (IR) is the annualized net alpha divided by the tracking error. The
Consultant’s data cover the period from January 2000 through June 2012.

                                    Gross returns                                            Average
                                     Tracking                         Net returns            number
Asset class               ↵
                          ˆ    t(ˆ
                                 ↵)     error     ˆ          R2          ↵
                                                                         ˆ   t(ˆ
                                                                               ↵)       IR   of funds
All                    1.89    3.92     7.92% 0.93       69.9%        1.45   3.01     0.18    4,668.2
U.S. public equity     0.92    1.83       8.02%   1.00   85.6%        0.43    0.85    0.05    1,788.0
Global public equity   1.73    1.34       9.36%   1.05   77.1%        1.15    0.89    0.12    1,549.9
U.S. fixed income      0.95    1.86       4.07%   0.97   64.3%        0.66    1.30    0.16      779.9
Global fixed income    4.30    4.90       6.58%   0.47   35.1%        3.98    4.54    0.60      550.4




                                                  43
                Table 7: Evaluating fund returns against strategy-specific benchmarks

This table presents gross and net alphas from single-factor models that use the 170 strategies listed
in Table A5. Panel A reports the estimates by asset class. Panel B reports estimates based on
alternative samples for robustness. The first row in Panel B limits the sample to funds for which the
manager entered no more than one year of historical data at the initiation of coverage. The second
row presents results for the post-2006 data and the third row limits the sample to asset managers
that report performance for funds that represent at least 85% of their total assets under management.
We first estimate fund-by-fund regressions of net and gross returns against benchmarks and collect
eit = ↵
      ˆ i + "ˆit . We then estimate value-weighted panel regressions of these residuals against a constant,
clustering the standard errors by month. The weights in this regression are proportional to each
fund’s assets under management and they are scaled to sum up to one within each month. Betas
and R2 s reported are obtained by estimating similar value-weighted regressions with the fund-specific
betas and R2 s as the dependent variables. Tracking error estimates are obtained from value-weighted
regressions of e2it s on a constant. Alphas and tracking errors are annualized. Information ratio (IR) is
the annualized net alpha divided by the tracking error. The Consultant’s data cover the period from
January 2000 through June 2012.

Panel A: Single-factor model regressions against strategy benchmarks
                                   Gross returns                                                 Average
                                    Tracking                      Net returns                    number
Asset class               ↵
                          ˆ t(ˆ↵)       error      ˆ      R 2        ↵
                                                                     ˆ    t(↵
                                                                            ˆ)              IR   of funds
All                    0.86 3.35        5.62% 0.94 82.3%          0.42    1.63            0.07    4,668.2
U.S. public equity      0.39    0.97          6.25%   0.98   89.8%       0.10     0.25    0.02    1,788.0
Global public equity    0.58    1.26          6.02%   0.96   90.3%       0.00     0.01    0.00    1,549.9
U.S. fixed income       1.36    6.59          2.93%   0.84   73.5%       1.07     5.19    0.36      779.9
Global fixed income     1.29    3.15          4.92%   0.95   69.2%       0.97     2.37    0.20      550.4

Panel B: Robustness
                                            Gross returns                                        Average
                                             Tracking                      Net returns           number
Sample or specification           ↵
                                  ˆ    t(ˆ
                                         ↵)     error     ˆ         R2        ↵
                                                                              ˆ   t(ˆ
                                                                                    ↵)      IR   of funds
No more than one year          0.80    3.03     5.33% 0.93      83.2%      0.35   1.34    0.07    2,411.4
  of historical data
Only post-2006 data            0.67    1.92      5.36% 0.94     80.7%      0.23    0.67   0.04    6,503.1
Strategy coverage 85%          0.74    1.76      5.74% 0.94     85.4%      0.18    0.44   0.03      436.5




                                                       44
                     Table 8: Mutual fund-benchmarked gross and net returns

This table compares the performance of asset manager funds with the performance of mutual funds.
For each asset manager fund, we use the CRSP classification codes to identify all mutual funds that
follow the same strategy. We then compute the value-weighted return series of these mutual funds
using the CRSP survivorship-bias free database. The table reports the di↵erences between the value
weighted gross and net returns earned by asset manager funds and mutual funds.

                                                               Asset class
                                                         Public equity            Fixed income
                                             All         U.S.      Global        U.S.      Global
Di↵erence in net returns                    1.10         0.75        1.23        1.35        3.56
                                           (2.43)       (1.28)    ( 1.16)       (1.92)      (2.85)
Di↵erence in gross returns                  0.50         0.22        2.07        0.69        3.35
                                           (1.12)       (0.38)     ( 1.96)      (0.98)      (2.68)
Avg. number of asset manager funds       3,001.3      2,073.3      2,309.9      929.3       930.1
Avg. number of mutual funds                376.4        844.0        100.6      187.5       333.0




                                                45
Table 9: Average returns, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios for asset manager funds, broad asset
class benchmarks, and strategy-specific benchmarks

This table reports average returns, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios for asset managers funds,
the broad asset class benchmarks, and the strategy-specific benchmarks. The estimates are reported
by asset class. The return on the strategy-specific benchmark is the value-weighted average of all the
strategies within each asset class, with the weights proportional to asset manager funds’ AUMs. The
last row examines the performance of equity and fixed income asset classes.

                        Asset managers            Asset-class benchmark       Strategy benchmark
                     Average       Sharpe        Average          Sharpe     Average        Sharpe
Asset class           return   SD    ratio         return    SD     ratio     return    SD    ratio
U.S. public equity      4.46 16.69    0.14           3.62 16.68      0.09       4.23 16.55     0.12
Global public equity    4.01 16.87    0.11           2.31 15.57      0.01       3.66 17.30     0.09
U.S. fixed income       7.10 3.90     1.26           6.36 3.61       1.16       6.83 4.22      1.10
Global fixed income     7.03 4.85     1.00           6.41 8.50       0.50       6.02 4.61      0.83

1-month T-bill                                        2.17   0.63

All                       5.23 10.33      0.30        3.91   9.79     0.18       4.82 10.37      0.26




                                                 46
                                       Table 10: Sharpe analysis

This table reports estimates from an analysis that compares fund returns with returns on mimicking
portfolios constructed from 15 tactical factors. We implement this analysis using a modified version
of Sharpe’s (1992) approach. For each fund i-month t, we regress the strategy returns against 15
tactical factors using data up to month t 1. The first tactical factor is the strategy’s broad asset
class benchmark listed in Table A3. The remaining 14 tactical factors, which are listed in Panel A,
are common across strategies. The regression slopes are constrained to be non-negative and to sum
up to one. We use the resulting slope estimates to compute the return on strategy i’s style portfolio
in month t and define a residual eit = rit rit  B , where r B is the return on the style portfolio. We then
                                                           it
estimate a value-weighted panel regression of these residuals against a constant, clustering the errors
by month. The weights in this regression are proportional to each fund’s assets under management
and they are scaled to sum up to one within each month. Panel A reports the average weights by
asset class. Panel B reports gross and net alphas, tracking errors, and information ratios for the funds
by asset class. The tracking error and Sharpe weight estimates are obtained from value-weighted
regressions of e2it s and the first-stage weights on a constant. The Consultant’s data cover the period
from January 2000 through June 2012.




                                                    47
     Panel A: Sharpe weights (w1 + · · · + w15 = 100%)
                                                                                   Asset Class
                                                                       U.S.    Global           U.S.    Global
                                                                     public    public          fixed     fixed
     Factors                                                 All     equity    equity       income     income
     Asset-class benchmark                                  18.7
        Russell 3000                                                    9.9
        MSCI World ex U.S.                                                        20.8
        Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate                                                        25.0
        Barclays Capital Multiverse ex U.S.                                                              27.2
     Equity: US
        S&P 500/Citigroup Value                             10.8       28.8        3.9           0.7       0.8
        S&P 500/Citigroup Growth                             9.2       22.8        7.4           0.5       0.6
        S&P 400 Midcap                                       3.9       10.9        1.9           0.6       0.4
        S&P Small Cap                                        6.1       14.4        3.3           0.9       1.6




48
     Equity: Global
        S&P Europe BMI                                      10.1        2.1       32.2           0.7       1.2
        MSCI Emerging Market Free Float Adjusted Index       6.8        3.6       18.1           1.2       1.6
     FI: US
        U.S. 3 Month T-Bill                                  5.8        1.8        1.8          8.3      18.0
        Barclays Capital US Intermediate Govt                4.4        0.3        0.8         12.1       6.5
        Barclays Capital US Long Govt                        5.2        1.0        2.5          8.3      12.1
        Barclays Capital US Corporate Investment Grade       8.5        0.6        1.8         22.7       9.6
        Barclays Capital US Mortgage Backed Securities       4.8        0.7        1.2         14.4       2.8
     FI: Global
        Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Govt                  1.5        1.0        1.5         0.2       4.6
        Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Corporate             1.3        1.1        1.4         0.4       1.9
        JP Morgan EMBI Global Diversified                     3.0        1.0        1.3         4.0      11.3
     Total                                                  100.0      100.0      100.0       100.0     100.0
     Avg. number of funds                                4, 235.3   1, 634.1   1, 391.7       715.6     493.9
Panel B: Excess returns over the mimicking portfolio
                                   Gross returns                      Net returns          Average
                      Excess t(Excess Tracking               Excess    t(Excess            number
Asset class           return     return)      error     R2   return     return)       IR   of funds
All                      0.27       0.77      5.76% 84.8%      0.71         2.00    0.12    4,235.3
U.S. public equity      0.67      1.50      5.75%   89.9%      1.16        2.60     0.20    1,634.1
Global public equity    1.11      1.50      7.23%   85.6%      1.69        2.29     0.23    1,391.7
U.S. fixed income       0.46      1.24      2.98%   71.4%      0.17        0.45     0.06      715.6
Global fixed income     0.89      1.41      4.96%   60.9%      0.58        0.91     0.12      493.9




                                               49
                  Table 11: Regressions of fees on style-portfolio and residual returns

This table presents regressions that measure the relation between before-fee performance and fees.
The unit of observation is a month-fund pair. We report estimates from regressions of monthly fees
(⇥100) on the return on the style portfolio and the residual return. These return-component estimates
are from Table 10’s Sharpe analysis. Panel A presents panel regressions with monthly returns. These
regressions include month-asset class fixed e↵ects and standard errors are clustered at the fund-level.
Panel B presents cross sectional regressions with one observation per fund. We generate each fund’s
observation by first running panel regressions of style return and the residual return on month-asset
class fixed e↵ects. The residuals from these regressions represent abnormal performance after removing
variation across asset classes and months. For each fund, we then take averages of these adjusted style
and residual returns. The Consultant’s data cover the period from January 2000 through June 2012.

Panel A: Panel regressions by asset class
  Dependent variable:        Fees
          Sample set:        All asset manager fund-month observations
        In asset class:            All              Public equities                       Fixed income
                                                U.S.        Global                   U.S.        Global
Style portfolio return            6.01         10.34          5.02                   1.02          2.71
                                 (5.51)        (4.32)        (3.69)                 (0.64)        (1.30)
Residual return                   1.34          1.34           1.04                  3.09         2.78
                                 (2.67)        (1.13)         (2.45)                (2.52)       (2.34)

Month-asset class FEs             Yes            Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes
N                             619,703        232,894       202,734               104,747        79,328
Adjusted R2                     0.2%           0.3%          0.1%                  0.1%          0.1%

Panel B: Cross-sectional regressions by asset class
  Dependent variable:        Fees
          Sample set:        Asset manager fund
        In asset class:            All              Public equities                      Fixed income
                                                U.S.        Global                  U.S.        Global
Style portfolio return            0.51          1.18          0.35                  0.05          0.29
                                 (2.83)        (3.03)        (1.39)               ( 0.18)        (0.75)
Residual return                  0.02           0.07           0.15                  0.03         0.44
                                (0.35)         (0.61)       ( 1.14)                 (0.48)       (1.64)
Month-asset class FEs         619,703        232,894       202,734               104,747        79,328
N                               9,665          3,409         3,395                 1,513         1,348
Adjusted R2                     0.6%           2.3%           0.3%                 -0.1%         0.7%




                                                   50
                                Table 12: Replicating asset managers

This table reports Sharpe ratios of alternative portfolios constructed from tradeable indexes listed
in Table 7. The first method uses the standard mean-variance optimization algorithm of Markowitz
(1952). The second method first diagonalizes the covariance matrix and constrains the estimated
risk premiums to be nonnegative. The third method imposes short-sale constraints. We estimate
the means and covariances using all available historical data for each index up to month t 1. We
construct the replicating portfolio separately within each asset class, and then use these weights
together with the asset-class weights observed in the asset-manager data to compute the return on
the replicating portfolio in month t. Panel A reports the Sharpe ratios of asset managers and these
replicating portfolios. Column Indi↵erence cost equates the Sharpe ratio of the replicating portfolio
with the asset managers’ Sharpe ratio. Panel B reports the cost of holding the replicating portfolio,
constructed using the diagonal-covariance method, using four alternative assumptions about fees. The
detailed fees are reported in Panel C. Expense ratios and fees are reported in basis points. Entries of
“NA” denote that the data are not available.

Panel A: Sharpe ratios and indi↵erence costs of replicating portfolios
                                                     Average                   Sharpe     Indi↵erence
                                                       return          SD        ratio      cost (bps)
Asset managers
  Gross return                                         5.23%      10.38%        0.295
  Net return                                           4.79%      10.38%        0.252

Replicating portfolio, gross return
  Standard MV portfolio                                 4.42%      14.49%       0.155            202.3
  MV portfolio with diagonal covariance matrix          6.43%      11.55%       0.369             85.5
  MV portfolio with short-sale constraints              6.16%      11.71%       0.341             53.6

Panel B: Cost (bps) of investing the replicating portfolio using the actual fees of the vehicle over the
period
Vehicle                                                                                             Fee
Institutional mutual funds
   Quartile 1                                                                                      66.1
   Median                                                                                          88.5
   Quartile 3                                                                                    112.4

End-of-sample ETFs                                                                                24.0




                                                  51
     Panel C: Fees used in the replicating portfolios
                                                                   ETFs                      Institutional               Fee
                                                        Expense                 Start        mutual funds           used in
     Benchmark                                             ratio   Ticker        date    Q1 Median         Q3    replication
     S&P 500/Citigroup Value                                 15    SPYV      9/29/00      70        91     112            91
     S&P 500/Citigroup Growth                                15    SPYG      9/29/00      80        97     122            97
     S&P 400 Midcap                                          15    IVOO       9/9/10      70        95 115.5              95
     S&P Small Cap                                           15    SLY      11/15/05      85       109     135           109
     S&P Europe BMI                                          12    VGK       3/10/05    54.5        88     129            88




52
     MSCI Emerging Market Free Float Adjusted                67    EEM       4/11/03     102       139     166           139
     U.S. 3 Month T-Bill                                     14    BIL       5/30/07      16        26      45            26
     Barclays Capital US Intermediate Govt                   20    GVI        1/5/07      51        66      83            66
     Barclays Capital US Long Govt                           12    VGLT     11/24/09      20        43      67            43
     Barclays Capital US Corporate Investment Grade          15    LQD       7/26/02      55        70      92            70
     Barclays Capital US Mortgage Backed Securities          32    MBG       1/15/09      49        65      80            65
     Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Gov                     15    GOVY      5/23/11     NA        NA      NA             15
     Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Corporate               20    IBCX      3/17/03     NA        NA      NA             20
     JP Morgan EMBI Global Diversified                       40    EMB      12/19/07      84        97     112            97
Appendix
In this Appendix, we describe the methodology that we use to estimate worldwide investable assets
and total institutional assets held by asset managers.

Worldwide investable assets
We estimate total worldwide investable assets, which represent the sum of six broad investable asset
classes: real estate, outstanding government bonds, outstanding bonds issued by banks and financial
corporations, outstanding bonds issued by non-financial corporations, private equity, and public equity.
    For real estate, we estimate the worldwide value of commercial real estate. To do so, we follow
the methodology used by Prudential Real Estate Investors (PREI) in the report “A Bird’s Eye View
of Global Real Estate Markets: 2010 Update.” Their methodology uses GDP per capita to capture
country-level economic development and estimates the size of a country’s commercial real estate market
based on GDP. They select a time-varying threshold and assume that the value of commercial real
estate above this threshold is 45% of total GDP. The threshold starts in 2000 at $20,000 in per capita
GDP and then adjusts annually by the U.S. inflation rate. For countries with per capita GDP below
the threshold in a given year, PREI calculates the value of the country’s commercial real estate market
as:

           Value of commercial real estate = 45% ⇥ GDP ⇥ (GDP per capita / Threshold)1/3 .

    To estimate the worldwide size of the government, financial, and corporate bond sectors, we use
the Bank for International Settlements’ debt securities statistics provided in Table 18 of the Bank’s
Quarterly Reviews. These statistics present total debt securities by both residence of issuer and
classification of user (non-financial corporations, general government, and financial corporations).1 We
then aggregate the country-level data by year. For private equity, we use Preqin’s “2014 Private Equity
Performance Monitor Report,” which provides annual estimates of assets under management held by
private equity funds worldwide and these estimates include both cash held by funds (“dry powder”)
and unrealized portfolio values. For our estimates of the size of world’s public equity markets, we use
the World Bank’s estimates of the market capitalization of listed companies.2
    Table A1 presents annual estimates of worldwide investable assets by the six broad asset classes.
Our estimate of worldwide investable assets for 2012 is $173 trillion. For comparison, if we extrapolate
Philippon’s (2015) estimates of U.S. investable assets, we obtain a similar estimate of $175 trillion in
worldwide investable assets for 2012.

Total institutional assets held by asset managers
In our analysis, we supplement the Consultant’s database with data from Pensions & Investments
Magazine, which implements annual surveys of the asset management industry. In this subsection, we
describe the Pensions & Investments surveys and how we use the surveys to construct our estimates of
total institutional assets under management held worldwide by asset managers, which are presented
in the first column of Panel A of Table 1.
    We use two Pensions & Investments surveys. The first survey is the Pensions & Investments
Towers Watson World 500, which is an annual survey of the assets under management (retail and
  1
      The data are available at https://www.bis.org/statistics/hanx18.csv.
  2
      The data are available at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/CM.MKT.LCAP.CD.


                                                       53
institutional) held by the world’s 500 largest money managers. The second survey is the Pensions
& Investments Money Manager Directory, which provides more detailed data for U.S. based money
managers including total assets under management, institutional assets under management, and broad
asset allocations (equity, fixed income, cash, and other) for U.S. tax exempt institutional assets.
    Table A2 provides descriptive statistics for these surveys and describes how we construct our es-
timate of total worldwide institutional assets held by asset managers. Column (1) presents annual
total worldwide assets under management (retail and institutional assets) based on the Pensions &
Investments Towers Watson World 500 survey and column (2) presents total assets under manage-
ment (retail and institutional assets) for the U.S. based asset managers covered in the Pensions &
Investments Money Manager Directory survey. The totals presented in these two columns include
both retail and institutional assets. In column (3), we therefore present total institutional assets held
by U.S. based asset managers. As shown in column (4), over the sample period, institutional assets
held by U.S. based asset managers range from 63% to 69% of total assets.
    To estimate the worldwide size of the institutional segment, we extrapolate based on the institu-
tional asset percentages for the U.S. based asset managers. We first create a union of managers who
show up on either the Pensions & Investments Towers Watson 500 survey or the Pensions & Invest-
ments Money Manager Directory survey.3 Column (5) presents total assets under management (retail
and institutional) for the managers in the union of the two surveys. These totals are very close to the
totals based on the Towers Watson 500 survey, implying that the top 500 managers control the vast
majority of assets. We next scale the total assets presented in column (5) by the percent institutional
assets held by U.S. based managers presented in column (4). Column (6) presents these estimates of
worldwide institutional assets under management. We present these estimates in the first column of
Panel A of Table 1.




  3
    Missing in this union are non-U.S. based asset managers who are smaller than the cuto↵ for the Pensions & In-
vestments Towers Watson World 500. Given the close estimates of the top 500 with the intersection with U.S. based
managers, this missing category does not appear large.


                                                       54
                                       Table A1: Estimates of worldwide investable assets ($ in billions)

     This table presents annual estimates of worldwide investable assets by asset class and in aggregate. We use the following sources to
     estimate the worldwide investable assets by asset class: real estate, Prudential Real Estate Investors; government bonds, the Bank for
     International Settlements; corporate bonds, the Bank for International Settlements; private equity, Preqin; public equity, the World
     Bank.

     Year      Real estate     Govt. bonds       Financial bonds       Corporate bonds       Private equity     Public equity       Total
     2000        13,249          13,578              14,613                 4,788                 716              31,940           78,884
     2001        13,085          13,210              15,927                 4,924                 751              27,614           75,512
     2002        13,625          15,361              18,386                 5,216                 767              23,248           76,603




55
     2003        15,373          18,686              21,808                 5,540                 870              31,657           93,933
     2004        17,312          21,750              25,091                 5,727                 963              37,671          108,514
     2005        18,641          21,205              26,913                 5,413                1,238             42,694          116,104
     2006        20,100          22,600              31,426                 5,801                1,704             52,663          134,293
     2007        22,667          24,852              37,077                 6,437                2,276             63,748          157,057
     2008        24,770          28,055              38,298                 6,757                2,279             34,491          134,650
     2009        23,104          32,187              40,199                 7,535                2,480             46,685          152,190
     2010        25,251          36,686              38,434                 8,102                2,776             53,361          164,610
     2011        28,005          39,745              37,866                 8,565                3,036             45,876          163,093
     2012        28,481          41,181              37,799                 9,380                3,273             52,452          172,566
                                   Table A2: Total institutional assets held by asset managers ($ in millions)

     This table presents how we estimate total institutional assets held by asset managers. To do so, we use two Pensions & Investments
     surveys: Towers Watson and the Money Manager Directory. Towers Watson provides the total assets under management (retail and
     institutional) held by the world’s 500 largest asset managers, which are presented in the first column. The Money Manager Directory
     provides total assets under management (retail and institutional) and institutional assets under management for U.S. asset managers,
     which are presented in the second and third columns. We create a union of these two surveys and then use the ratio institutional to total
     assets for U.S. asset managers to extrapolate total worldwide institutional assets held by asset managers, which is presented in the last
     column.

              Towers Watson                           Money Manager Directory                                           Union
               Total AUM                Total AUM      Institutional AUM     Institutional %              Total AUM       Institutional AUM
     2000       34,590,284              20,192,354         12,805,136              63%                    34,959,252          22,169,678




56
     2001       34,683,588              20,896,204         13,481,972              65%                    35,072,352          22,628,247
     2002       35,002,040              20,371,588         13,192,112              65%                    35,357,876          22,896,843
     2003       42,461,288              24,965,260         16,622,492              67%                    42,978,752          28,616,324
     2004       48,183,548              28,726,436         19,072,168              66%                    48,754,880          32,369,531
     2005       52,964,400              31,701,564         21,643,876              68%                    53,635,800          36,619,222
     2006       62,902,888              37,344,564         24,708,774              66%                    63,693,416          42,142,311
     2007       68,731,120              41,645,204         27,621,568              66%                    69,667,872          46,207,863
     2008       52,581,856              31,414,800         21,459,676              68%                    53,147,692          36,305,571
     2009       61,149,820              37,957,556         25,607,218              67%                    61,829,884          41,712,151
     2010       63,811,204              43,089,043         29,233,620              68%                    64,556,904          43,798,420
     2011       62,170,700              42,591,797         29,157,459              68%                    62,780,420          42,978,170
     2012       67,223,072              46,757,542         32,237,746              69%                    67,925,128          46,832,082
                               Table A3: Broad asset classes in the Consultant’s database and their benchmarks

     This table presents the annual average returns and standard deviation of returns for both the asset manager funds in the four broad
     asset classes and the benchmarks used in Table 5 to evaluate funds performance.

                                  Consultant’s database




57
                               Average                                                                Benchmark
     Asset class                return                  SD                Name                                     Return           SD
     U.S. public equity           4.46               16.69                Russell 3000                               3.29         16.66
     Global public equity         4.01               16.87                MSCI World ex U.S.                         2.03         15.55
     U.S. fixed income            7.10                 3.90               Barclays Capital U.S. Aggregate            6.29          3.60
     Global fixed income          7.03                 4.85               Barclays Capital Multiverse ex U.S.        6.36          8.61
                        Table A4: Sharpe analysis: Alternative specifications

This table reports estimates from an analysis that compares fund returns with returns on mimicking
portfolios constructed from 15 tactical factors. In Table 10, we construct the style portfolio by using
data for all months except month t. Panel A in this table constructs the style portfolio using data
that exclude six months both before and after month t. Panel B constructs the style portfolio using
data only up to month t 1. We report gross and net alphas, tracking errors, and information ratios
for the funds by asset class.

Panel A: Exclude month-t return observation (jackknife)
                                 Gross returns                            Net returns          Average
                     Excess t(Excess Tracking                    Excess    t(Excess            number
Asset class          return    return)       error      R2       return     return)       IR   of funds
All                    0.28       0.86      6.25% 83.4%            0.72         2.19    0.12    4,598.9
U.S. public equity        0.66       1.66      6.63%   87.6%       1.15        2.90     0.17    1,765.3
Global public equity      1.28       1.78      7.41%   84.9%       1.86        2.59     0.25    1,524.8
U.S. fixed income         0.55       1.67      2.93%   72.7%       0.26        0.79     0.09      767.7
Global fixed income       1.01       1.73      4.83%   63.0%       0.69        1.18     0.14      541.1

Panel B: Exclude return observations in window [t 6, t + 6]
                                  Gross returns                    Net returns                 Average
                      Excess t(Excess Tracking              Excess t(Excess                    number
Asset class           return    return)      error     R2 return     return)              IR   of funds
All                     0.31       0.97      6.43% 82.4%      0.75       2.35           0.12    4,419.3
U.S. public equity        0.70       1.83      6.89%   86.5%       1.20        3.11     0.17    1,711.9
Global public equity      1.36       1.86      7.51%   84.5%       1.94        2.65     0.26    1,451.5
U.S. fixed income         0.59       1.75      2.94%   72.2%       0.30        0.89     0.10      743.9
Global fixed income       1.12       1.87      4.91%   62.5%       0.81        1.34     0.16      512.0




                                                  58
Internet Appendix
This Appendix includes a table that lists the investment strategies included in the Consultant’s
database along with the number of funds in each strategy, the average return of the funds in the
strategy, the strategy’s benchmark, and the average return on the strategy’s benchmark.




                                              59
                                                  Table A5: Strategies in the Consultant’s database and their benchmarks
     Strategy name                                          Number of funds      Average return     Benchmark                                 Average return

      U.S. public equities

     All Cap Core                                                145                  3.478         Russell 3000                                   3.624
     All Cap Growth                                               90                  1.750         Russell 3000 Growth                            1.326
     All Cap Index Based                                          18                  3.071         Russell 3000                                   3.624
     All Cap Value                                                88                  7.841         Russell 3000 Value                             5.799
     Canada Core                                                 145                  9.141         S&P/TSX 60                                     9.319
     Canada Growth Biased                                         57                  9.209         MSCI Canada Growth                             9.241
     Canada Income Oriented                                       38                  9.226         S&P/TSX Income Trust                          16.536
     Canada International Equity Targeted Volatility               2                 12.153         MSCI AC World Minimum Volatility CAD           9.924
     Canada Passive Equity                                        32                 10.248         S&P/TSX Composite                              8.953
     Canada Small Cap Equity                                      79                 11.045         MSCI Canada Small Cap                          8.668
     Canada Socially Responsible                                  16                  8.390         Jantzi Social                                  8.381
     Canada Total Equity                                          85                  7.267         S&P/TSX Composite                              7.614
     Canada Value Biased                                          74                 10.200         MSCI Canada Value                              8.902
     Large Cap Core                                              738                 2.693          S&P 500                                       3.003
     Large Cap Growth                                            575                 0.674          S&P 500/Citigroup Growth                      1.851
     Large Cap Index Based                                       199                 3.691          S&P 500                                       3.003
     Large Cap Value                                             573                 5.741          S&P 500/Citigroup Value                       4.225
     Other                                                       215                  3.097         Russell 3000                                   3.624
     Mid Cap Core                                                114                 7.753          Russell Midcap                                 8.308
     Mid Cap Growth                                              172                 4.332          Russell Midcap Growth                          4.810
     Mid Cap Index Based                                          34                 9.146          Russell Midcap                                8.308
     Mid Cap Value                                               142                 8.806          Russell Midcap Value                          10.336
     Small Cap Core                                              220                  7.815         S&P 600 Small Cap                              9.919
     Small Cap Growth                                            295                  4.812         S&P SmallCap 600/Citigroup Growth              8.836
     Small Cap Index Based                                        46                  7.647         S&P U.S. SmallCap                              4.847
     Small Cap Micro                                              75                  8.872         Russell Microcap                               7.482
     Small Cap Value                                             292                 10.701         S&P SmallCap 600/Citigroup Value              10.798
     SMID Cap Core                                                82                  8.881         S&P 400 MidCap (50%)                           9.651
                                                                                                    S&P 600 Small Cap (50%)




60
     SMID Cap Growth                                             123                 2.879          S&P MidCap 400/Citigroup Growth (50%)         8.370
                                                                                                    S&P SmallCap 600/Citigroup Growth (50%)
     SMID Cap Value                                              102                 10.491         Russell Midcap Value                          10.336
     Socially Responsible                                        88                  3.006          Jantzi Social                                  5.683

      Global public equity

     Asia ASEAN Equity                                            47                  9.305         MSCI South East Asia                          16.632
     Asia ex Japan Equity                                        151                  9.288         MSCI AC Asia (Free) ex Japan                   8.460
     Asia Greater China Equity                                    67                 14.940         MSCI Golden Dragon                            14.415
     Asia Pacific Basin Equity Passive                            19                 13.812         MSCI AC Asia Pacific (Free)                    7.101
     Asia/Pacific Small Cap Equity                                20                 14.427         MSCI AC Asia Pacific ex Japan Smallcap        10.506
     Asian Emerging Markets Equity                                26                 14.630         MSCI EM ASIA                                  13.117
     Australia Equity                                            323                  6.319         S&P Australia BMI                              7.517
     Australia Equity (Socially Responsible)                      23                  7.673         Jantzi Social                                  8.714
     Australia Passive Equity                                     22                  7.639         S&P Australia BMI                              8.368
     Australia Small Company Equity                               71                 10.992         S&P/ASX Emerging Companies                     9.153
     BRIC Equity                                                  57                 18.493         MSCI BRIC                                     18.952
     China Equity (o↵shore)                                       38                 18.339         MSCI China (USD)                              21.955
     Eastern European Equity                                      47                 13.001         MSCI EM Eastern Europe                        12.704
     EMEA Equity                                                  36                 15.095         MSCI EM Eastern Europe                        11.393
     Emerging Markets Equity                                     305                 10.425         MSCI EM Net                                   13.491
     Emerging Markets Equity Other                                59                 11.189         MSCI EM Net                                   13.491
     Equity Sectors Consumer Goods                                13                  7.250         MSCI World                                     0.239
     Equity Sectors Other                                         17                  8.440         MSCI AC WORLD                                  6.396
     Europe Eurozone Equity                                      171                  2.866         MSCI EMU                                       2.293
     Europe ex UK Equity                                         157                  5.536         MSCI Europe ex UK                              4.376
     Europe ex UK Equity - Passive                                15                  6.506         MSCI Europe ex UK                              6.066
     Europe inc UK Equity                                        382                 3.237          S&P Europe BMI                                 5.115
     Europe inc UK Equity - Passive                               12                  7.484         S&P Europe BMI                                 7.188
     Europe Nordic Equity                                         33                 -0.295         MSCI Nordic                                   -0.363
     Europe Norway Equity                                         45                  1.865         MSCI Norway                                    7.139
     Europe Small Cap Equity                                     101                 5.104          MSCI Europe Small Cap                          7.271
     Europe Sweden Equity                                        31                  5.119          MSCI Sweden                                   5.748
     Flexible Equity                                              54                 0.682          MSCI World                                     3.124
     German Equity                                                20                  3.301         DAX                                            3.392
     Strategy name                                       Number of funds   Average return   Benchmark                                              Average return

     Global Equity - Core                                     631               2.162       MSCI World                                                  3.124
     Global Equity - Growth                                   152               0.799       MSCI World Growth                                           1.511
     Global Equity - Passive                                   76               0.485       MSCI World                                                  4.620
     Global Equity - Value                                    204               5.472       MSCI World Value                                            4.642
     Global Small Cap Equity                                   57               4.298       MSCI World Small Cap Index                                  7.241
     Gold & Precious Metals                                    15              26.160       S&P GSCI Precious Metals Total Return                      18.662
     Health/Biotech                                            23               7.069       S&P Healthcare Equip. Sel                                  11.058
     HK ORSO                                                   58               4.342       Hang Seng TR Index                                         14.895
     Hong Kong Equity                                          34              16.241       FTSE MPF Hong Kong                                         13.880
     Indian Equity                                             54              18.632       MSCI India                                                 19.357
     International Equity Global Equity Sustainability         7               13.433       MSCI EM                                                     1.307
     International Equity Global Equity Sustainability        167              4.177        MSCI World ESG                                             -0.790
     International Equity Global Equity Sustainability         4               3.273        MSCI World ESG                                             13.184
     International Equity Targeted Volatility                  20               4.019       MSCI World Minimum Volatility                               5.128
     International Equity World ex Japan Equity               116               2.163       MSCI World                                                  5.078
     Japan Equity                                             417              -2.203       MSCI Japan                                                 -0.776
     Japan Passive Equity                                      28               1.558       MSCI Japan                                                  4.033
     Japan Small Cap Equity                                    55               3.918       MSCI Kokusai All Cap                                        0.506
     Korea Equity                                              23               7.165       MSCI Korea                                                 10.515
     Latin American Equity                                     40              14.914       MSCI Latin America                                         17.001
     Mixed UK/Non-UK Equity                                    27               7.111       FTSE All Share                                              3.412
     Natural Resources                                         45              13.364       S&P Global Natural Resources SK                            -8.928
     New Zealand Equity                                        46               8.466       NZX 50 (40 prior to 1 Oct 2003)                             7.223
     Other                                                     75               3.733       MSCI World                                                  3.124
     Pacific Basin ex Japan Equity                            149               9.582       MSCI Pacific ex Japan                                      10.736
     Pacific Basin inc Japan Equity                            85               3.406       MSCI Pacific                                                2.106
     Singapore Equity                                          17               9.995       MSCI Singapore                                             10.676
     Swiss Equity                                              67               7.061       MSCI Switzerland                                            6.886
     Technology                                                24               0.602       MSCI AC World: Sector: Information Technology              -1.176
     UK All Cap                                               309               4.248       MSCI UK                                                     3.971
     UK Passive Equity                                         44               5.292       MSCI UK                                                     4.610
     UK Small Cap                                              50               8.059       Hoare Govett Smaller Companies                              7.954
     UK Socially Responsible                                   15               4.235       MSCI World ESG                                             -0.790




61
     World ex US/EAFE Equity - Core                           341               2.759       MSCI EAFE                                                   3.425
     World ex US/EAFE Equity - Growth                         142               1.873       MSCI EAFE Growth                                            1.629
     World ex US/EAFE Equity - Passive                         52               3.384       MSCI EAFE                                                   3.425
     World ex US/EAFE Equity - Value                          146               6.757       MSCI EAFE Value                                             5.183
     World ex US/EAFE Small Cap Equity                         78               7.134       MSCI EAFE Small Cap                                         7.925

      U.S. fixed income

     Bank/Leveraged Loans                                      58              5.876        S&P/LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index Price                 0.257
     Canada Short-Term                                         13               4.514       DEX Short Term                                              4.586
     Canada Core Plus                                          34               6.301       DEX Long Term                                               8.111
     Canada Credit                                             23               7.371       DEX Universe Corporate                                      6.739
     Canada Long-Term                                          32               8.323       DEX Long Term                                               8.474
     Canada Other                                              65               8.411       DEX Long Term                                               8.837
     Canada Passive                                            33               7.362       DEX Universe Bond                                           6.254
     Canada Universe                                          152               6.626       DEX Universe Bond                                           6.584
     Convertible                                               47               3.746       Barclays Capital US High Yield Composite                   7.982
     Core Investment Grade                                    399              6.330        Barclays Capital US Corporate Inv Grade                    7.045
     Core Opportunistic                                       158               6.793       Barclays Capital US Aggregate                               6.362
     Credit                                                    65              6.734        Barclays Capital US Universal                               6.495
     Credit - Long Duration                                    34               7.881       Barclays Capital US Long Credit                             7.322
     Fixed Income Private Debt                                 12              12.101       Preqin Buyout                                              12.907
     Government                                                66              7.050        Barclays Capital US Govt/Credit                             6.466
     High Yield                                               174              7.053        Barclays Capital US High Yield Composite                    7.982
     Index Based                                              98               6.526        Barclays Capital US TIPS                                   8.002
     Intermediate                                             242              6.001        Barclays Capital US Intermediate Aggregate                  5.954
     Liability Driven Investment                               29               7.895       Barclays Capital US Corporate Inv Grade                     7.489
     Long Duration                                            81               9.947        Barclays Capital US Long Credit                            8.910
     Mortgage Backed                                           96              8.377        Barclays Capital US Mortgage Backed Securities             6.199
     Municipal                                                113              5.109        SPDR Nuveen Barclays Capital Municipal Bond Fund ETF       2.106
     Other                                                    111               6.030       Barclays Capital US Aggregate                              6.362
     Socially Responsible                                      9               6.387        Barclays Capital US Universal                              6.343
     TIPS/Inflation Linked Bonds                               65               7.853       Barclays Capital US TIPS                                    7.363
     Strategy name                            Number of funds   Average return   Benchmark                                             Average return

      Global fixed income

     Asia ex Japan Bonds                            24               3.967       Barclays Capital Non-Japan Asia USD Credit                 7.125
     Asia Singapore Bond                            22               3.579       Singapore iBoxx ABF Bond Index                             3.978
     Asian Bonds                                    55               6.821       JP Morgan Asia Credit Index JACI                           7.646
     Australia Credit                               18               6.440       UBS Credit                                                 6.366
     Australia Diversified                          26              7.146        UBS Composite Bond                                         6.339
     Australia Enhanced Index                       14               6.404       UBS Composite Bond                                         6.339
     Australia Fixed Income                         72               6.329       UBS Composite Bond                                         6.325
     Australia Inflation Linked Bonds               21               6.797       UBS Inflation                                              7.131
     Australia Passive                              11               6.319       UBS Composite Bond                                         6.310
     Australia Short Duration - High Income         48              6.236        BofAML Global High Yield                                  11.314
     Denmark Fixed Income                           13               6.291       OMRX Bond                                                  5.485
     Emerging Markets Debt                         144              12.038       JP Morgan EMBI Global Diversified                         10.939
     Emerging Markets Debt - Corporate              24              22.167       BofA Merrill Lynch Emerging Markets Corporate             16.161
     Emerging Markets Debt - Local Currency         70              11.115       JPMorgan Government Bond Index - Emerging Markets         11.576
     Europe Sweden Fixed Income                     10              7.016        OMRX Bond                                                  5.242
     Eurozone Bank Loans                            11              -6.005       S&P European Leveraged Loan Index                          3.716
     Eurozone Govt                                  97               7.610       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Gov                        5.019
     Eurozone Govt & Non-Govt                      133               4.525       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Credit                     4.941
     Eurozone High Yield                            48               4.653       BofAML Euro High Yield Index                               7.368
     Eurozone Inflation-Linked Bonds               22               3.045        Barclays Capital Euro inflation linked bond indices       3.316
     Eurozone Non-Govt                             113               4.577       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Corporate                  5.045
     Eurozone Other                                 24               2.732       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Credit                     4.321




62
     Eurozone Passive                               25               4.651       Barclays Capital Euro Aggregate Credit                     4.270
     Global Broad Market/Aggregate                 165              5.997        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                         6.416
     Global Convertibles                            54              3.715        UBS Global Convertible Index                              7.503
     Global Credit                                  84              6.273        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                         5.650
     Global High Yield                              71              8.234        BofAML Global High Yield                                  9.092
     Global Inflation-Linked Bonds                 45               5.887        Barclays Global Inflation Linked Index                    6.185
     Global Passive                                34               7.442        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                         6.806
     Global Sovereign                              187              7.115        JP Morgan GBI Global                                      6.750
     Hong Kong Dollar Bond                          18               3.547       HSBC Hong Kong Bond                                        4.533
     International Fixed Other                     12               7.822        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                         6.033
     International Multi-asset Fixed Other          8               8.564        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                         5.268
     Japan Fixed Income                            101               0.542       Nikko BPI Composite                                       1.458
     New Zealand Fixed Income                       15              7.140        UBS Composite Bond                                         6.535
     Other                                          37              3.633        Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                          6.416
     Swiss Fixed Income                             44               3.531       Swiss Bond Index Total Return                             2.519
     UK Core Plus                                   69               6.899       BofAML Non Gilts AAA Rated                                 6.006
     UK Europe Other                                 1               9.200       BofAML Non Gilts 10+ Year                                 12.144
     UK Govt & Non-Govt                             62              6.868        BofAML Non Gilts AAA Rated                                 6.094
     UK Index Linked Gilts                          48               7.027       FTSE Gilts ILG All Stocks                                  6.947
     UK Non-Govt                                    81              6.690        BofAML Non Gilts All Stocks                                6.161
     UK Passive Fixed Income                        39               7.471       BofAML Non Gilts                                           5.603
     UK Govt                                        71              6.408        FTSE Gilts All Stocks                                      6.241
     Unconstrained Bond                             46               7.712       Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                          5.510
     World ex Japan                                 83               4.119       Barclays Capital Global Aggregate                          6.492
     World ex US                                    51               7.673       Barclays Capital Global ex US                              6.648
