                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FUEL CONSUMPTION AND GASOLINE PRICES:
THE ROLE OF ASSORTATIVE MATCHING BETWEEN HOUSEHOLDS AND AUTOMOBILES

                                       H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                           Taha Kasim

                                       Working Paper 22983
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22983


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2016, Revised August 2017




 We thank Kenneth Gillingham, Shanjun Li, Joshua Linn, Kyle Mangum, Michael Price, Roger
 von Haefen, and participants in the ASU environmental economics conference, a Cornel
 University (Dyson School) seminar, Camp Resources, and a GSU workshop for helpful
 comments. We also thank Mark Jacobsen for sharing and explaining the data and code used to
 create the instrument based on Bento et al. (2009). We thank the staff at the U.S. Department of
 Transportation (DOT) for assistance in obtaining the confidential NHTS data files. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2016 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and Taha Kasim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
 including © notice, is given to the source.
Fuel Consumption and Gasoline Prices: The Role of Assortative Matching between Households
and Automobiles
H. Spencer Banzhaf and Taha Kasim
NBER Working Paper No. 22983
December 2016, Revised August 2017
JEL No. Q4,Q5

                                         ABSTRACT

Analyses of policies to reduce gasoline consumption have focused on two effects, a
compositional effect on the fuel economy of the automotive fleet and a utilization effect on how
much people drive. However, the literature has missed a third effect: a matching effect, in which
the policy changes how high-utilization households are matched to fuel-efficient vehicles in
equilibrium. We show that higher gas prices should lead to stronger assortative matching.
Empirical estimates using US micro-level data are consistent with this hypothesis. We find a $1
gas tax would reduce US gas consumption by 1.5% through the matching effect alone.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

Taha Kasim
Dept. of Economics, Furman Univ.
3300 Poinsett Hwy.
Greenville, SC 29613
mohammed.taha@furman.edu
                      Fuel Consumption and Gasoline Prices:
      The Role of Assortative Matching between Households and Automobiles*
                                          H. Spencer Banzhaf†
                                              Taha Kasim‡

                                               July 2017



Abstract. Analyses of policies to reduce gasoline consumption have focused on two effects, a
compositional effect on the fuel economy of the automotive fleet and a utilization effect on how
much people drive. However, the literature has missed a third effect: a matching effect, in which
the policy changes how high-utilization households are matched to fuel-efficient vehicles in equi-
librium. We show that higher gas prices should lead to stronger assortative matching. Empirical
estimates using US micro-level data are consistent with this hypothesis. We find a $1 gas tax would
reduce US gas consumption by 1.5% through the matching effect alone.


                                            I. Introduction

Both to reduce dependency on petroleum imports and to reduce air pollution, many countries seek

to reduce gasoline consumption from passenger vehicles. In the United States, passenger vehicles

account for 16% of all greenhouse gas emissions (US EPA 2015 p. 2-28). Additionally, they are a

major source of conventional pollutants such as carbon monoxide, ozone, and fine particulates.

These pollutants can cause such health effects as headache, respiratory disease, heart disease and

premature mortality. They may be particularly potent in such vulnerable populations as the elderly

and young children. Indeed, studies have shown that in-utero and childhood exposure to these



*
  We thank Kenneth Gillingham, Shanjun Li, Joshua Linn, Kyle Mangum, Michael Price, Roger von
Haefen, and seminar and workshop participants at the ASU environmental economics conference, Camp
Resources, Cornel University, Georgia State University, and UC Santa Barbara for helpful comments.
We also thank Mark Jacobsen for sharing and explaining the data and code used to create the instrument
based on Bento et al. (2009). We thank the staff at the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) for as-
sistance in obtaining the confidential NHTS data files.
†
    Professor, Dept. of Economics, Georgia State Univ., hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu.
‡
    Visiting Assistant Professor, Dept. of Economics, Furman Univ., mohammed.taha@furman.edu.

                                                   -1-
gasses have the potential to affect various health outcomes in the short- and the long-run (Currie

et al. 2014).

        Policies to reduce gasoline consumption generally fall into two main categories: price-

based policies and performance-based policies. Price-based policies such as a gasoline tax work

by making driving more expensive. Among OECD countries, the US has the lowest gasoline taxes

save Mexico, at $0.53 per gallon (average state plus federal tax) as of 2013, compared to $4.73 in

the UK and $4.54 in Germany (OECD 2014). Performance-based policies mandate minimum av-

erage fuel economy standards for the fleet. Examples include the US Corporate Average Fuel

Economy (CAFE) standards and similar policies in Europe, Japan, and elsewhere.

        Traditionally, the literature assessing the effectiveness of such policies has decomposed

their effects into two channels: a compositional effect, relating to the average fuel efficiency of the

fleet, and a utilization effect, relating to how much people drive (e.g. Bento et al. 2009; Goldberg

1998; Li, Timmins, and von Haefen 2009; Puller and Greening 1999). By increasing the cost of

driving, gas taxes create an incentive to drive less as well as to obtain a more fuel efficient car.

Thus, they operate through both channels. Performance standards like CAFE mandate more fuel

efficient cars (on average), but do not create incentives to drive less—indeed, by putting people in

more fuel efficient cars they reduce the cost of driving and increase utilization (the so-called "re-

bound effect"). Bento et al. (2009) and Gillingham (2012) measure both the compositional and the

utilization effects using structural models in which household simultaneously choose an automo-

bile and their level of driving in a consistent framework. They find that the utilization effect is

bigger than the compositional effect.

        In this paper, we show that this large literature has overlooked a third effect of such poli-

cies, a sorting or matching effect. In theory, even if the compositional and utilization effects are



                                                  -2-
held to zero—that is, even if the fleet remains exactly the same and each individual drives exactly

the same number of miles annually—an increase in gasoline prices could still reduce gasoline

consumption if it leads to stronger assortative matching between high-utilization households and

the fuel efficiency of the cars they drive. Intuitively, if a household does little driving, the fuel

efficiency of its car has little impact on overall consumption (at the extreme, a car parked in the

garage burns no gas regardless of its fuel efficiency), whereas if a household drives great distances

the fuel efficiency of its car matters a good deal. Conversely, if a car is very fuel efficient, its

utilization has little impact on overall consumption (at the extreme, the utilization of a bicycle

would not matter), whereas if a car is fuel inefficient its utilization matters a good deal.

        While the literature has long understood that, ceteris paribus, high-utilization households

are more likely to choose low-energy alternatives (thus motivating the simultaneous modeling of

a household's choice of a product's energy efficiency together with its utilization), to our

knowledge the effect of a change in gas prices or other policies on how households are matched to

products in equilibrium has been widely neglected in the literature.1 Yet it is not trivial. To gauge

the potential importance of the matching effect, if household demand for VMT and vehicle fuel

efficiency were perfectly matched in 2009, gasoline consumption would have been 15% lower,

even with no change in the composition of the fleet and no change in individuals' utilization.

        In addition to pointing out the importance of this effect, in this paper we show that, a priori,

there are good reasons to believe that higher gasoline prices increase the degree of matching. The

intuition is as follows. Increases in gasoline prices increase demand for fuel-efficient cars relative



1
 The importance of such simultaneity has been noted since at least Dubin and McFadden (1984). In the
context of automobiles, Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013) speculate that in a cross section, fuel effi-
cient vehicles should be assortatively matched to households who drive long distances. We are more ag-
nostic about such relationships in any one cross section, but show that this relationship can be affected by
prices and other policy parameters.

                                                     -3-
to inefficient ones, because the monetary savings of owning an efficient vehicle increase. But there

is exogenous heterogeneity among households in their utilization. When gasoline prices rise, the

savings of owning an efficient vehicle increase more for higher-utilization households than for

low-utilization households. Consequently, high-utilization households are now comparatively

more likely to outbid low-utilization households for fuel-efficient cars (ceteris paribus). Thus,

when gas prices increase, high-utilization households tend to be allocated more fuel-efficient cars

than before, while low-utilization households are allocated less efficient cars. Accordingly, in equi-

librium, after an increase in the gasoline prices, there should be a stronger assortative matching

from households, based on the amount of driving they are likely to do, to the fuel economy of the

cars they own.

       Finally, we test this hypothesis empirically. Using data from the US National Highway

Transportation Survey, we adopt a difference-in-differences framework, comparing the way (ex-

ogenously) high-utilization households change the fuel economy of their car when gas prices in-

crease relative to the way low-utilization households do. Given our difference-in-difference frame-

work, we interpret our results as short-run responses. We find a statistically significant short-run

matching effect from gas prices that is robust to a variety of identification strategies, including

ordinary least squares (OLS) and different ways of instrumenting for utilization. Specifically, we

find that when gasoline prices increase by $1, a household responds on average by driving a vehicle

that gives 0.01 to 0.05 more miles per gallon for every 1,000 miles it drives in the short run. Using

variation only in gasoline taxes, we find an effect of 0.03 to 0.06 miles per gallon for every 1,000

miles. While these matching effects may seem small, in the aggregate they correspond to a savings

of about 1.5% of fuel consumption, or 1.9 billion gallons, annually for a $1 increase in taxes.

These savings in turn correspond to 84 million tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and



                                                 -4-
environmental damages of about $3.3 billion. These effects are likely to be bigger in the long run.

       Insofar as it focuses on households' choices for fuel efficiency at the extensive margin and

how such choices are affected by gasoline prices, our paper relates to the large literature on auto-

mobile demand and the compositional effect, including Allcot and Wozny (2014); Austin and Di-

nan (2005); Bento et al. (2009); Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013); Feng, Fullerton, and Gan

(2013); Gillingham (2012); Goldberg (1998); Jacobsen (2013); Klier and Linn (2010); Li, Linn,

and Muehlegger (2014); Li, Timmins, and von Haefen (2009); Puller and Greening (1999); and

Sallee, West, and Fan (2016). Overall, this literature has found that an increase in gasoline prices

increases the demand for more fuel efficient cars, which in equilibrium modestly nudges the com-

position of the automobile fleet toward fuel efficiency. In particular, new cars entering the fleet

become more fuel efficient while older inefficient cars are scrapped more rapidly. Interestingly,

Allcot and Wozny (2014); Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013); and Sallee, West, and Fan

(2016) find that, in between, the shift in demand manifests in price rather than quantity effects,

with the prices of fuel-efficient used cars rising relative to inefficient cars when gas prices rise.

Our work can be viewed as exploring the heterogeneity in these demand effects at the extensive

margin, showing that they are larger for (exogenously) higher-utilization households than lower-

utilization households. In equilibrium, this gives rise to more assortative matching, which in turn

becomes a third channel through which gas prices affect gasoline consumption.

       The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II explains the matching effect using

a theoretical model; Section III introduces the basic empirical approach and describes the data;

Section IV presents the results and briefly discusses the implications; and Section V concludes.




                                                 -5-
                                   II. Theoretical Framework

                                       A. Conceptual Basics

Consider an economy with a set       of cars indexed by c and a set ℐ of individuals indexed by i.

These sets have the same measure, which we normalize to one, and in equilibrium there is a bijec-

tive mapping of cars to individuals. Individual i's fuel use is equal to its utilization, measured in

vehicle miles travelled (VMT), times the inverse of the fuel efficiency of its car, or gallons per

mile (GPM):

                                            =             ×       ( ),                           (1)

where c(i) represents the car assigned to individual i.

       From this simple tautology, it would seem that changes in fuel use can be decomposed into

two effects, a change in VMT (utilization) and a change in fuel economy (GPM). While this is true

at the individual level, to extend it to the over-all economy is to commit the fallacy of composition.

Overall fuel usage is the sum over all individuals of these products:


                                           =                  ×      ()   () ,                   (2)
                                                ℐ

where f( ) is the density. This sum of products can be rewritten as

                                       =            ×         + COV(       ,     ).              (3)

Thus, changes in total fuel consumption can be decomposed into three effects: the utilization effect

measured in changes in average VMT, the compositional effect measured in changes in the average

GPM of the fleet, and the matching effect which represents changes in the covariance between a

households VMT and the GPM of the car assigned to it in equilibrium. Though seemingly obvious

when written this way, to our knowledge the existence of this third effect—and in particular how

it might be affected by policies—has been overlooked in the literature.

       Our hypothesis is that when gasoline prices increase, high-GPM cars (i.e. fuel-inefficient

                                                    -6-
ones) will tend more strongly to be assigned to low-VMT households. Thus, the covariance be-

tween VMT and GPM will decrease and total fuel usage will fall, even holding constant average

VMT and average GPM (indeed, even holding constant every individual's VMT and every vehicle

in the fleet).

        The argument for this hypothesis comprises two basic steps. First, when gasoline prices

increase, the demand for high-GPM cars falls relative to the demand for low-GPM cars, and—

more to our point—this shift is greater for high-VMT households. Second, in equilibrium, this

shift in demands leads to a more systematic assignment of high-GPM cars to low-VMT house-

holds. Because it is a simpler point to make, we begin with the second point first.

                                      B. The Matching Effect

        A partial equilibrium model is sufficient to explain how this shift in relative demands leads

to the matching effect. For simplicity, let there be two types of households that differ only in terms

of what Gillingham (2012) calls their "utilization type," or their demand for VMT for reasons

exogenous to the choice of car: thus, there are high-utilization households ( ) and low-utilization

households ( ). Let there be two car types: fuel-inefficient ( ) and fuel-efficient ( ). In Figure 1,

Panel A shows the demand for high-GPM cars relative to low-GPM cars. Heterogeneity in the

relative demand for such cars is reflected by          and   , which indicate the relative marginal

willingness to pay (WTP) of each respective household type. This WTP could be positive or neg-

ative, depending on which car type is preferred. Additionally, we take no stand on whether the

high-VMT types or the low-VMT types have a higher relative WTP for such cars: high-VMT types

may want them more than low-VMT types for their comfort when driving, or want them less than

low-VMT types because of their operating cost. As an illustration, Figure 1 shows an example of

a baseline scenario where       =     . The market demand is       and the relative price is    . The


                                                 -7-
supply elasticity plays no role in the argument; in this example, the market supply curve is perfectly

inelastic, as might be consistent with the market for used cars too young to be scrapped.

        Panel A depicts a situation where gasoline prices increase, so the relative WTP for high-

GPM vehicles falls. The new market demand is            and the price falls to   in the vehicle market.

This is consistent with the findings of Allcott and Wozny (2014); Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer

(2013); and Sallee, West, and Fan (2016). Our insights hinge on the fact that the relative WTP for

a high-GPM automobile will particularly decrease for the high-utilization types, as higher gasoline

prices translate into greater costs for them. This is shown in this figure where         is now lower

than    . As a consequence, in equilibrium, the low-VMT types now have a greater share of the

high-GPM vehicles than before (         versus ). By the same logic, as shown in Panel B, the high-

VMT types now have a greater proportion of low-GPM vehicles relative to the baseline case.

        Consequently, the correlation between VMT and fuel inefficiency is now lower, so that the

covariance in Equation (3) is now lower with higher gas prices. (Equivalent, the correlation be-

tween VMT and fuel economy is higher.) In the empirical portion of this paper, we test this hy-

pothesis directly by looking at the matching of car types to utilization types under variation in

gasoline prices.

        Before getting to that empirical work, however, we must complete the argument by show-

ing that the demand for fuel inefficient cars does shift back more among high utilization types than

low utilization types when gas prices rise.

                                    C. Relative Shifts in Demand

        We begin by generalizing our two-car, two-household model to continuums of types. In

particular, let    be a simply ordered set of cars such that for any two elements c, c' ∈ , c' > c ↔

GPMc' > GPMc. In differentiating cars only by their GPM, we do not imply that mileage is the only


                                                  -8-
relevant factor. To the contrary, we allow for the possibility that as GPM increases, the car be-

comes more desirable in other ways such as increased horsepower and/or comfort, or perhaps less

desirable, if it is cheaper.

          Additionally, we assume that individuals can be ranked according to their utilization type.

In particular, let ( , ,           ) be individual i's inverse demand curve, or marginal WTP, for VMT

conditional on being in car c. We make the following assumption about the ordering of ℐ:

Assumption A1. For any two elements i, i' ∈ ℐ, if i' > i then ( ′, ,                            )> ( , ,       ) every-
where.

That is, as we go through the index i, the demand curves for VMT, conditional on any car c, shift

up. Note Assumption A1 does not necessarily imply that VMTi' > VMTi. For one thing, i and i' may

face different gas prices. Moreover, they may choose different cars, which also affects their VMT

choice. Assumption A1 only implies that, if they were in the same arbitrary car and faced the same

prices, i' would choose higher VMT than i.

          With these preliminaries, consider now the WTP of some household i for an arbitrary car c,

relative to having no car at all, which is a function of gasoline prices pG:
                                                               ∗(   , ,    )
                           ( , ,     )= ( , )+                                  (, ,       )
                                                                                                                    (4)
                                              ∗(          )
                                      −            , ,                    ( )     .

The individual's WTP for car c comprises three terms. The first term f( ) represents a value unre-

lated to actually driving the car. It represents an option value of having it in the garage, a collector's

value, or some similar utility value. The remaining two terms represent the consumer surplus from

driving the car. Integrating under ( ) up to the optimal level of driving given gasoline prices,

     ∗(         ), gives the total (gross) value of driving car c. From this, we subtract the cost of
          , ,

                                                                           ∗(          )
driving car c when gasoline prices are         , which is                       , ,            ( )   .   In equilibrium,

                                                         -9-
an individual buys the car with the highest consumer surplus, after subtracting out the price of

purchasing the car.

          Our model depends on the triple difference among car types, utilization types, and gasoline

prices—that is, on how WTP differs by car type, how that difference differs by utilization type,

and how that difference-in-difference differs with gasoline prices. For simplicity, assume that all

the functions in Equation (4) are twice differentiable in all their arguments.2 In Appendix A, we

derive the following relationship on the third partial cross derivative of WTP:
                                                                 ∗(             )             ( )
                                                                      , ,
                                                    −
                                                           ∗(               )        (, ,           ∗)
                                                                 , ,
                                              +
              (, ,    )
                          =             ∗(                                      ∗)                  ∗(                    (5)
                                             , ,     )     (, ,                                          , ,   )
                              +                                                      −
                                               ∗(         )           (, ,               ∗)              ( )
                                                    , ,
                                  +                                                           −                    .

Note here that, in taking the partial derivative with respect to c, we are taking the car type c as

exogenous, so there are no effects of pG or utilization type on the optimal choice of c.

          Conditional on this car, the individual does optimally choose VMT. At equilibrium, the

                                                                                                                   (, ,   ∗)
individual sets marginal WTP for an additional mile equal to the cost, so                                                      =

        ( )    . As we take the derivatives of the two sides of this expression with respect to c, we get

two effects. If better performance accompanies the increase in c, then the marginal WTP for an

addition mile increases,          ⁄   > 0, through a utility or comfort effect, as driving becomes more

comfortable and/or more fun (West et al. 2016). But at the same time, the actual price paid for an

additional mile increases through the GPM effect, that is                            ′( )         > 0. Thus, what we call the
                                             ∗⁄
overall car effect on VMT, i.e.                     , cannot be signed a priori. However, it is the opposite


2
    This assumption is not necessary but simplifies the presentation.

                                                          -10-
sign as the "rebound effect," which is generally estimated to be positive (Gillingham et al. 2013,

Linn 2016, Small and van Dender 2007, West et al. 2016). A crucial question when evaluating

Equation (5) turns out to be the difference in the car effect on VMT between different values of i.

Consider the following Assumption:

Assumption A2.          ⁄       ≥ 0 everywhere.

Because the effect on operating costs is the same at a given car for all household types, A2 implies

that the car effect on VMT is non-decreasing in i,           ⁄       ≥ 0. Thus, as i exogenously moves

from c to c' it might decrease its VMT, whereas a higher utilization type i' will decrease VMT less

or perhaps increase it. Assumption A2 is stronger than A1 but is consistent with the idea that de-

mand for driving is increasing in i. For example, Assumption A2 is consistent with inverse demand

curves for VMT that are proportional in c and i.

        Assumption A2 is sufficient for the following proposition:

                       , ,
Proposition:                  < 0 so long as either (i) the car effect on VMT is sufficiently small or

                                    ∗⁄
(ii) it is the same sign as                   .

        A proof of the proposition can proceed by inspecting each line on the right-hand side of
                                                                                            ∗
Equation (5). The first line is negative, since by definition of our ordered sets,              > 0 and

      > 0. This line, the lowest-order term in Equation (5), represents the basic intuition for why

the triple difference is negative. As gas prices increase, operating high-GPM cars becomes more

expensive, but this is especially true for high-utilization types.

        Completing the proposition requires considering the higher-order terms in Equation (5).

The second line also is negative.        ⁄   is positive by Assumption A1.         ⁄       is negative

because, by the law of demand, VMT is decreasing in the effective price of driving, which is


                                                    -11-
       ( )     , and the effect of a given change in gasoline prices on the effective price of driving is

greater for higher-GPM vehicles.

          The third line is non-positive by Assumption A2. In the first term, Assumption A2 states

           ⁄                                                       ∗⁄
that               is non-negative, and it is multiplied by                which is negative by the law
                                              ∗⁄
of demand. In the second term,                        also is non-negative by Assumption A2 and of

course GPM is positive. This third line is the only place we use Assumption A2. Notice that it is
                                                                                  ∗⁄
actually a sufficient—not necessary—condition: It would suffice for                       to be "not too

negative" rather than non-negative.

          This then leaves the last line of Equation (5) as the only term that cannot be signed defini-

tively a priori. The Proposition requires either that this line not be large and positive. The term in

square brackets is the same sign as the car effect on VMT, which is the negative of the rebound

effect.        ⁄   represents the comfort effect (positive if c comes with performance) while

          ( )⁄     represents the GPM effect. The literature on the rebound effect suggests this entire

term is probably small and certainly negative (Gillingham et al. 2013, Linn 2016, Small and van

Dender 2007, West et al. 2016). If so, then the proposition requires in turn that the first term in the
                    ∗⁄
product,                      , not be large and negative. Unfortunately, the term cannot be signed
                         ∗⁄
definitively.                 is positive by Assumption A1, but whether VMT becomes more or less

responsive to changes in gasoline prices with utilization type is another question. However, if

VMT becomes less price elastic with increasing utilization types, as seems plausible, then this term

is positive, which would be consistent with the proposition. For it to be negative and large enough

to undermine the proposition, it would have to be the case that the-low utilization types reduce

their VMT more than the high types when gas prices increase, which, coupled with the general

desire to reduce VMT when switching to a larger car, creates such a larger second-order effect on


                                                    -12-
the lost consumer surplus from driving, that low-utilization types will not begin to outbid the high-

utilization types for the larger car. This seems unlikely.

         Under Assumption A2 (and the caveats in the previous paragraph), the Proposition states

that as gasoline prices increase, the demand for high-GPM cars falls relative to the demand for

low-GPM cars more so for high-utilization types than for low-utilization types. This is the key

result of this sub-section. Given the equilibrium results in the previous sub-section, the implication

is that as gasoline prices increase, the correlation between utilization and GPM decreases (or in-

creases between utilization and MPG).

                                  III. Empirical Strategy and Data

                                         A. Empirical Strategy

Our basic strategy for testing our hypothesis is to run the following difference-in-differences re-

gression. The model compares the fuel economy of cars matched to high-utilization households to

those matched to low-utilization households among year/quarter-MSA cells with comparatively

high and low gasoline prices. Our preferred specification is:

                         =    +              +               +             ×
                                                                                                   (6)
                                     +     ′ +      +    +       ,

where            = 1/             is miles per gallon of vehicle owned by household in metro area

  in quarter ,            is the per gallon price of gasoline in metro     in year ,           is VMT

of vehicle   owned by household ,           are demographic variables of household ,          are MSA

dummies,      is a year dummy and            is an idiosyncratic error term. The matching effect of

higher gasoline prices is represented by      and our hypothesis is that       > 0. In Equation (6),

controls for time-varying unobservables and       controls for time-invariant city-specific unobserv-

ables.


                                                 -13-
       Four points about our empirical strategy deserve further comment. First, because we in-

clude year and MSA dummies, and because (as discussed below) we use contemporaneous gas

prices, we view our estimates as short run effects. Given the transaction costs involved in changing

cars, we would expect the effects to be higher in the long run.

       Second, we assume gasoline prices are exogenous. In doing so, it is important to emphasize

that we are using micro-level data with city and year dummies. Thus, we assume deviations in

tastes for MPG from the city's long-run average (insofar as they differ from national deviations)

are uncorrelated with city-quarter gas prices. In an alternative specification, we use city-month

dummies, thereby absorbing city-month averages in MPG demand, which might be correlated with

changing city-level macroeconomic conditions and gas prices. This alternative specification re-

duces the error in Equation (6) to individual-level deviations from the city-month means. As an-

other alternative, we also instrument for gasoline prices using gasoline taxes.

       Third, in our basic approach using OLS, we also assume that VMT is exogenous to the fuel

efficiency of the car. However, as discussed above, VMT and MPG likely are chosen simultane-

ously. If the MPG effect outweighs the comfort effect, households with more fuel efficient vehicles

drive more, which is consistent with the rebound effect. With the exception of Linn (2016), recent

evidence has suggested that this effect is fairly small (Gillingham et al. (2013), Small and van

Dender (2007), West et al. 2016). If so, this endogeneity problem is probably small enough to

ignore and OLS will be unbiased. Accordingly, we first use OLS to estimate Equation (6). How-

ever, in the following section we also consider a variety of instrumental variables (IV) strategies,

including interactions of household characteristics with gasoline prices and nonlinearities inherent

in the structural model of Bento et al. (2013). We generally find our results are robust to these

approaches.



                                                -14-
       Fourth, in the data (described below) VMT is observed on the car, not the individual. Thus,

         is the VMT of the car, not an individual or household. In households with only one car,

these would be observationally equivalent. In households with multiple cars, this raises the ques-

tion of how cars are assigned to individuals. In our base model, we effectively treat the data as if

multi-car households not only have an exogenous total VMT, but an exogenous split of VMT into

baskets to be assigned to cars. For example, if a household has two cars with 10,000 and 5,000

VMT respectively, we treat the household as first exogenously splitting its total VMT into one

basket of 10,000 miles and one of 5,000. However, we treat the assignment of cars to these VMT

baskets as an endogenous choice. Thus, whether the 10,000 mile basket goes to one car and the

5,000 to the other or vice versa is treated in our approach as a choice which can change under

differing economic conditions. This approach allows for some within-household matching insofar

as a high-VMT individual in a household can be more likely to be assigned the high-MPG car in

the household as gasoline prices increase. However, it is conservative in that it does not allow

VMT to otherwise be shifted to the high-MPG car, as it forces the split to stay constant (10,000

and 5,000 in this example). As an alternative, we also consider each household, rather than each

car, as a unit, using only one car per household or alternatively per-car VMT and average fuel

economy of all cars in the household. This approach is even more conservative as it removes all

within-household matching.

                                              B. Data

Our data can be divided into three categories: (i) a confidential version of the 2001 and the 2009

National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), which surveys a random sample of US households

about the cars they own and their VMT for each car; (ii) quarterly gasoline prices from 2001-2 and

2008-9 at the city level, purchased from the American Chamber of Commerce's ACCRA Cost of



                                                -15-
Living Index (COLI) database; and (iii) data on the fuel economy of automobiles by make and

model, from the U.S. Department of Energy. These data were merged to produce a distinct data-

set which provides information on driving habits, household characteristics, average gasoline

prices paid and the fuel economy of vehicles owned by these households.

        The 2009 NHTS was conducted between March 2008 and May 2009 and the 2001 NHTS

was conducted from March 2001 through June 2002. The raw 2009 NHTS samples consisted of

338,184 observations (cars) for 172,105 households, from both urban and rural areas in the US;

the 2001 NHTS sample consisted of 143,457 observations for 69,800 households. Unfortunately,

in 2001, many of the observations are missing information needed to compute MPG or could not

be matched to gasoline prices. After dropping these missing values and otherwise cleaning the

data, we are left with 263,270 observations for 137,868 households in the 2009 sample and 63,102

observations for 35,464 households in the 2001 sample.3 Both data sets contain information on

household driving patterns, including VMT and the type of car(s) owned by the household (make,

model, vintage).4 Furthermore, the survey includes demographic data about the household (in-

come, number of household members, age distribution, race, work status). The confidential NHTS


3
  In 2001, 27,956 observations (23.0% of observations with VMT data) are missing information on the
model or other information necessary for computing MPG; in 2009, 3,909 observations (1.3%) are miss-
ing such data. Additionally, in 2001 13,857 observations (17.8%) could not be assigned gasoline prices.
In both survey waves, annual miles ranged from 0 to 200,000 miles. However, following Bento et al.
(2009), mileage below 100 and above 60,000 indicate possible coding errors and so were dropped. This
resulted in 3,487 (2.9%) and 7,894 (2.6%) observations dropped from the 2001 and 2009 NHTS data, re-
spectively. Additionally, vehicles that were more than 24 years old were not identified in the 2009 NHTS
sample and so were dropped from the 2001 sample for consistency. Finally, diesel and electric vehicles
were dropped (1.4% and 3.4% of the sample respectively). The results with these assumptions relaxed are
similar to the main results and are available upon request.
4
  NHTS collected VMT data through (i) direct questioning; (ii) estimations based on odometer readings
(only for 2001 NHTS); and (iii) estimations based on travel diaries. NHTS data reports two different
measures of VMT, "reported VMT" and "bestmiles." Reported VMT is based only on the direct survey
questions. Bestmiles is based on regression techniques combining information from all three reporting
techniques. Since, bestmiles requires more information, this variables had more missing values compared
to VMT. Following Bento et al. (2009), we used reported VMT in our central estimates, using bestmiles

                                                  -16-
data to which we had access provides more specific geographic data on each household than the

public version, down to its zip code.

        To each household, we match quarterly gasoline prices in the household's metropolitan

statistical area (MSA) at the time of the NHTS survey. Using contemporary gasoline prices, rather

than longer-term averages, is appropriate if households assume gasoline prices follow a random

walk, so that current prices represent the best long-term forecast. In previous work, Bento et al.

(2009), Berry et al. (1995), Gillingham (2012), and Goldberg (1995) all assume that prices follow

a random walk and that only current prices matter. David and Hamilton (2004) and Geman (2007)

have shown that gasoline prices do actually follow a random walk. Li, Timmins, and von Haefen

(2009) also find the lagged gasoline prices have little impact on purchasing decisions. Finally,

Anderson et al. (2011) and Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013) provide empirical evidence sug-

gesting that on average expected real gasoline prices as reported in surveys are equal to current

prices. Moreover, because our model focuses as much on the decision to hold an existing car or

re-optimize when gas prices change, matching at the time of the survey is more appropriate than

matching at the purchase time.

        Spatially, ACCRA provides gasoline prices for more than 300 MSAs. Using the geograph-

ical indicators of the NHTS data, we matched these prices to each household in the NHTS data-

sets, using the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) USPS ZIP Code Cross-

walk Files.5 Gasoline prices are converted to 2009 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI).




wherever reported VMT is missing. As sensitivity analyses, we also considered using only reported VMT
or only bestmiles. Our results are qualitatively similar when using those data instead.
5
 For households in the NHTS outside these 300 metropolitan areas, we used NHTS-reported gasoline
prices. The NHTS prices are at a more aggregate geographic level, namely Petroleum Administration for
Defense Districts (PADDs). These districts are similar to Census regions in that each state is assigned to a
given region, but the regions are drawn up in such a way as to maximize gasoline distribution. ACCRA

                                                    -17-
       Finally, the fuel economy data was obtained from the Department of Energy's website

www.fueleconomy.gov. This website provides the fuel economy data by vehicle make, model and

year and these variables were used to match the vehicle fuel economy with the NHTS data.6

       Table 1 provides summary statistics of household responses in the NHTS. The first column

reports the descriptive statistics for the entire sample. This is broken down by NHTS survey years

in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Column 4 compares columns 2 and 3 and reports the differences

and standard errors in parentheses. Table 1 shows that the average real gasoline price increased

from $1.63 in 2001 to $3.14 in 2009. Moreover, the heterogeneity in gasoline prices increased,

with the standard deviation increasing from 0.21 to 0.67. One reason for this is major fluctuations

in gasoline prices during the 2008-2009 period. Gasoline prices continued to increase during the

first two quarters of 2008, reaching a peak of $4.60 and then started to decline before escalating

again in the beginning of 2009. Panel A in Figure 2 shows the kernel densities of (real) gasoline

prices for the two survey years. It shows very little overlap in the distributions, with the 2009

distribution being both higher and more diffuse. Panel B of Figure 2 plots within-MSA average

gasoline prices in 2009 against their equivalent in 2001. The figure shows that there is a good deal

of between-MSA variation in changes in gasoline prices, as well as both cross-sectional and tem-

poral variation in levels of gasoline prices. These within-city changes represent the essential var-

iation in gas prices that we exploit in our difference-in-differences framework.

       Along with this increase in gasoline prices, Table 1 shows that average VMT declined




and NHTS gasoline prices are highly correlated. We regressed ACCRA gasoline prices on NHTS gaso-
line prices and used predicted gasoline prices for those NHTS MSAs that could not be matched with
ACCRA data.
6
 We use a combined MPG which is a weighted average based on the standard assumption (used by the
US EPA and others) that the automobile was operated 55% under city driving conditions and 45% under
highway conditions.

                                                -18-
about 10% and average MPG improved by about 1%. Figure 3 plots the distribution of annual

VMT and MPG for both surveys. The figure illustrates the slight leftward shift in the distribution

of VMT over time and little detectable change in that for MPG.

                                            IV. Results

                                   A. Patterns in the Raw Data

We begin our analysis of the matching effect by looking at patterns in the raw data. Because of the

large changes in gas prices between 2001 and 2009, a simple starting point is to compare the pat-

terns in those two cross sections. In Figure 4 Panel A, the expected value of miles per gallon

(MPG) conditional on VMT is plotted for the years 2001 and 2009 using linear regression. Over-

layed on each plot is a similar counter-factual plot of what the relationship would look like if,

given the actual distribution of VMT and the actual composition of the fleet in each year, there

were perfectly assortative matching, so that the lowest-VMT individual had the lowest MPG (high-

est GPM) car, etc. The figures show that the observed assignment is far from perfectly assortative.

A shift from the empirical relationship to perfect matching is one way to gauge the potential for

the matching effect. If household demand for VMT and vehicle fuel efficiency were perfectly

matched in 2009, gasoline consumption would have been 15% lower, even with no change in the

composition of the fleet and no change in individuals' utilization.

       However, our hypothesis does not center on how strong the matching effect should be in

any particular cross section. Rather, our hypothesis is that when gas prices are higher, the matching

effect should be stronger. Since gas prices increased from an average of $1.63 per gallon in 2001

to $3.14 in 2009 (in real terms), we would expect more assortative matching over time. The raw

data reveal this pattern. Figure 4 Panel A shows that, between 2001 and 2009, as gasoline prices

increased, the relationship between these two variables went from slightly decreasing to slightly



                                                -19-
increasing. (The small change is consistent with our findings, reported below, of a statistically

significant change in slope of about 0.02, which still has meaningful effects on gas consumption.)

Panel B displays the CDF of car fuel economy among individuals in the highest quartile of VMT

and lowest quartile of VMT, for 2001 and 2009 respectively. It shows that in 2001, the distribution

of MPG among the lowest VMT quartile actually first-order stochastically dominated the distribu-

tion among the highest quartile. That is, the low utilization types had cars with better gas mileage

than the high utilization types. This is consistent with the downward slope in Panel A for 2001. In

2009, when gas prices were higher, the situation reverses, with the distribution of MPG among the

highest VMT quartile first-order stochastically dominating the distribution among the lowest quar-

tile. This is consistent with the upward slope in Panel A for 2009. The switch from 2001 to 2009

in these patterns is consistent with our hypothesis, with high utilization types being more likely to

have cars with better gas mileage when gas prices are high.

       Finally, we exploit the intertemporal and spatial variation in the data to analyze the changes

in sorting correlations between the two survey waves. First, we calculate the correlations between

VMT and MPG within each MSA–survey-wave period as an aggregate summary of matching.

Second, we measure the changes in these city-specific correlations between the two survey years

and correlate them with city-specific changes in gasoline prices over the waves. A scatter plot and

an estimated weighted regression line that depicts the relationship between these two changes are

presented in Figure 5. The slope of the regression line is 0.07 and is significant at the 5% level. In

other words, MSAs where gasoline price changes were larger also had relatively higher increases

in the correlation between VMT and MPG. This is consistent with our prediction of more assorta-

tive matching.




                                                 -20-
                                               B. OLS

       While such patterns in the raw data between 2001 and 2009 are suggestive, other changes

in the economic environment between those years could be important. Accordingly, we primarily

rely on difference-in-differences models with year and MSA dummies. As noted in the previous

section, our base model uses OLS to estimate these effects. Table 2 shows the results of this model

under different variants of Equation (6). The first column of the table only includes the main effects

of VMT (in thousands of miles) and gasoline prices as well as their interaction. The interaction

between VMT and gasoline prices represents the matching effect, that is, the change in correlation

between MPG and VMT when gasoline prices increase. Standard errors clustered by state are re-

ported in parentheses. The second column adds MSA dummies to control for time-invariant unob-

servables between the survey years, such as the availability of mass transit, urban sprawl (Bento

et al. 2005), and differences in average demands across cities. The third column adds year dummies

to control for national time-varying effects. These could include the change in the fleet composi-

tion between years, other technological changes, changes in lifestyle and preferences, changes in

commuting patterns, and so forth. Columns 4-6 parallel the first three specifications, but with the

addition of household-level controls. These controls include number of household members, num-

ber of adults in the households, number of workers in the household, the fraction of children (age

<18) and women in the household, and household income quartiles. Column 6 represents Equa-

tion (6) as it is written and is our preferred specification. The seventh column replaces the MSA

and year dummies with MSA-month dummies. This specification controls for unobserved time-

varying economic conditions in the city, which might be correlated with gas prices, including

changes in income or changes in geographic sorting patterns (Molloy and Shan 2013). Finally, the




                                                 -21-
eighth column includes interactions between the demographic variables and gasoline prices, cap-

turing additional heterogeneity in the effect of gasoline prices on VMT, beyond that already cap-

tured in the interaction with VMT. For all these regressions, the matching effect is positive and

statistically significant and quite robust across specifications.

        The results imply that as gasoline prices increase, households that drive more are driving a

more fuel efficient vehicle relative to households that drive less. Specifically, the results of Table 2

indicate that, for a $1 increase in gasoline prices, households choose cars with about 0.02 greater

MPG per 1000 miles they drive. Holding constant the mean fleet MPG at 2001 levels, when gas-

oline prices increase from $1.63 to $3.14 the model predicts an individual driving 4,000 miles (at

the 25th percentile of VMT) switches on average from a car getting 25.3 MPG to one getting 25.4,

while an individual driving 14,000 miles (at about the 75th percentile) on average switches from a

car getting 25.2 MPG to one getting 25.7. In other words, when gas prices increase, fuel-efficient

cars are more likely to be allocated to high-VMT types, while inefficient cars are more likely to

be allocated to low-VMT types, consistent with the matching effect. The negative coefficients on

gas prices may at first be surprising (seemingly implying higher gas prices lower MPG), but recall

that gas prices also enter in the interaction term; in fact, the marginal effect of gas prices is positive

in all specifications at the mean of the data.

        As noted previously, one potential concern with this model is the endogeneity of gasoline

prices. Our preferred specification in column 6 includes year and MSA dummies. Thus, any en-

dogeneity of gasoline prices would have to come from city-year shocks in the average demand for

(or supply of) vehicle types that drive city-year variation in gasoline prices, after controlling for

time-invariant city effects and city-invariant year effects. This seems unlikely. However, in col-

umn 7 we include city-month dummies. This removes all variation in gasoline price (in levels), so



                                                   -22-
the mean residual in Equation (6) only relates to the individual's departure from the city-month

average residual. Any city-time variation in average MPG that could affect gasoline prices is ab-

sorbed in the fixed effect. The results remain robust to this specification, indicating little concern

about endogeneity of gasoline prices. Finally, we also consider instrumenting for gasoline prices

in additional results presented below.

                                          C. Instrumenting for VMT

         A potentially more serious issue with the OLS model is that VMT may be endogenous to

MPG. VMT should affect the MPG of the chosen car, but by the same token the MPG of the chosen

car also affects VMT, either decreasing it through the comfort effect or increasing it through the

GPM effect.

         To overcome this simultaneity problem, we use a variety of instrumental variables strate-

gies. Our first strategy is to use the interactions of demographics with gasoline prices as instru-

ments for VMT. In particular, consider the following model:

                      =       +                +                  +                   ×
                                                                                                  (7)
                                  +       ′ +          +      +               ,

            =     +               +                ×          ′       +           ′   +   +   +   (8)

                                  +                +                      ×
            ×             =                                                                       (9)
                              +       ′    +       +          +

where,        is a vector of household characteristics. The interactions of these characteristics with

gasoline prices serve as instruments. These characteristics are the same as those used as controls

in the OLS model.7



7
 Thus, the interaction of household income quartile, number of household members, number of adults,
number of workers, and fraction of children and women in the household with gasoline prices serve as

                                                       -23-
        The identifying assumptions of this strategy deserve some discussion. Note the level effects

of       are not excluded from the outcome equation, Equation (7). Thus, demographics are al-

lowed to affect the choice of car. The identifying assumption is only that gasoline prices do not

affect car choice differently for different demographic types except through VMT. Demographics

do drive heterogeneity in VMT demand (at a given price), which in turn affects heterogeneous

sensitivity of MPG to gasoline prices. All this is consistent with our model of WTP expressed in

Equation (4), where individual demographics can affect the taste for car types at the extensive

margin f( ) as well as the WTP for travel conditional on car type ( , ,             ), but the first order

effect of gasoline prices on car demand only operate through VMT (as seen in the last term of the

expression). Our first IV strategy effectively ignores the second order effects related to how het-

erogeneity in ∂VMT*/∂PriceGas (after conditioning on a level of VMT*) feeds back on the optimal

choice of MPG. This restriction is embedded in a number of other models of car demand as well,

including Feng, Fullerton, and Gan (2013), Gillingham (2012), and Goldberg (1998).

        Table 3 shows the results for Equation (7) of the IV model. Besides the endogenous VMT

terms, the only controls in the first column of Table 3 are gasoline prices, predicted VMT and

demographics. MSA and year dummies are added successively to columns 2 and 3. Finally, MSA-

month dummies are included in column 4, which eliminates variation in gasoline prices in levels.

(The specifications follow the pattern in Table 2 but always include demographics.) The matching

effect is again positive and statistically significant in all specifications. The effect in Table 3 ranges

from 0.018 to 0.028. Overall, the estimated matching effect is similar to the OLS estimates, indi-

cating little concern about the potential endogeneity of VMT and MPG after conditioning on these



instruments for VMT and [VMT × Pricegas]. These variables were selected based on the household deter-
minants of VMT established by the previous literature (Bento et al. 2009, Small and Van Dender 2007, Li
et al. 2014).

                                                   -24-
effects.

           As noted previously, the above exclusion restrictions are motivated by our theoretical

model, in which the heterogeneous effects of gasoline prices on MPG work only through hetero-

geneity in utilization. Nevertheless, it might be desirable to include interactions of demographics

with gasoline prices in the outcome equation in other ways, beyond the utilization channel, for

additional flexibility. For example, perhaps different demographic groups form different expecta-

tions about future gasoline prices or have differences in how salient gasoline prices are to them.

To accommodate this possibility, we consider two very different alternative strategies. One is to

add additional economic structure, with nonlinearities in the model that we can leverage for iden-

tification. The other strategy is simply to loosen the causal interpretation of VMT in the model and

look at heterogeneous effects of prices as they are correlated with VMT.

           Consider first the strategy to impose additional economic structure, and to leverage non-

linearities to identify heterogeneous effects of gasoline prices on MPG choice. If VMT is a non-

linear function of household characteristics, we can include                 ×          in Equation (7). We

use a functional form consistent with the structural model of Bento et al. (2009), in which VMT

and MPG are simultaneously determined and in which such nonlinearities arise through the eco-

nomics of the model. Bento et al. (2009) use the following indirect utility function:


                   1                  −             1
              =−       exp −                   −          exp       +             +      ,        (10)



where         =        ;   = −exp         ;    = exp            ;       =    ;        is vehicle rental price;

    is vehicle utilization price;   is the household income;        is a fixed number of choice occasions

set equal to the number of adults in the household plus one; and                 is the Hicksian composite



                                                   -25-
commodity price.8            ,    ,        are vectors of automobile characteristics (age, make, class dum-

mies) interacted with household demographics and                     are household characteristics.9 Using Roy's

identity, VMT demand for household conditional on car is:


                                                                             −
                                 = exp              +         +                                                    (11)



        One can predict                   ()   by using the above model, but             ()   still would be endogenous

to MPG through the vehicle characteristics , which are simultaneously chosen. However, we in-

stead can predict VMT of household at a fixed set of characteristics. In particular, for each house-

hold i, we predict VMT for each car type (i.e. make-model-year) c. We then take a weighted aver-

age of those VMTs, using the proportion of type c in the sample as weights. Using this                              ̅

as an instrument, we then estimate the following model:

                 =       +                      +        +               ×           +                             (12)

                         +                       ×             +     +       +

             =    +                   ̅   +               +              ×       ̅            +     +
                                                                                                                   (13)
                     +

In Equation (13), VMT is a function of gasoline prices and                           ̅    , the latter being computed

from the model estimated by Bento et al. (2009) averaged over the automobile fleet. This variable

is a highly non-linear function of demographics, including household members, household income



8
  If the number of adults is less than the number of household vehicles, equals the number of household
vehicles.      is computed using the ACCRA cost-of-living index for each year, with adjustments over
time using the CPI.
9
 Bento et al. (2009) categorized households into twelve different strata based on employment status, av-
erage household age and the number and age distribution of children in the household. Vehicles are cate-
gorized by vehicle class. For more information, see Bento et al. (2009).

                                                              -26-
quartile, number of children and women in the household, household age distribution, number of

adults in the households, and vehicle class, vehicle age and driving cost per mile of the average

vehicle. In Equation (12), we then estimate the main equation of interest using this constructed

variable as an instrument for VMT. The matching effect is again given by : the coefficient asso-

ciated with the interaction term between gasoline prices and        ̅   . The model given by Equa-

tions (12) and (13) overcomes the issues associated with the previous two models. An advantage

of this particular model over the model given by Equations (7)-(9) is that now we can include

          ×      in the second-stage. These will capture heterogeneous effects of a change in gas-

oline prices on MPG.

       Table 4 shows the results of the second stage of the IV model given by Equation (12)-(13).

In the first column, only demographic controls are included. In the second and third columns, city

and time dummies are successively added. In the fourth column, city-month dummies replace the

city and year dummies. As with the previous model using linear instruments, the matching effect

is positive and significant in all but the first model (with no controls). The point estimates are

bigger than the previous models, but of the same magnitude. Overall then, these results are con-

sistent with our previous estimates. In the last column, the interactions of demographic controls

with gasoline prices, one of the chief motivations for using these instruments, are added. Unfortu-

nately, the standard errors are much higher using this approach. Although the estimated point effect

also is much larger than in the previous models, with the large standard errors for this model we

cannot reject the earlier point estimates. It may be too great a challenge to separately identify

heterogeneity across utilization types in the effect of gasoline prices on MPG from other such

heterogeneity.




                                                -27-
       As an alternative to this additional structure, we also consider a simple reduced form ap-

proach that measures the correlation between heterogeneity in the effect of gasoline prices on MPG

and heterogeneity in VMT. Consider the following two equations:

             =    +      ′ +                +                ×      ′ +         +       +               (14)

            =    +      ′ +             +                ×        ′ +       +       +       .           (15)

Because the effects of VMT and x cannot be identified separately, Equations (14) and (15) repre-

sent reduced form regressions in which          and      (and     and   ) capture direct effects of de-

mographics and effects through VMT (which is a linear function of demographics). MPG and

VMT are simultaneously determined, so              ≠ 0, but because VMT does not appear in the re-

duced form equation for MPG, the equations can be estimated with OLS. Then, the estimated

heterogeneous effects of price on MPG can be correlated with VMT, to see whether it is the high-

or low-VMT types that are more responsive to gasoline prices. In other words, we give up on

identifying the heterogeneous effects of gasoline prices on MPG across utilization types per se,

but still identify the heterogeneity across demographic groups, and we can see how those demo-

graphic groups are correlated with utilization.

       To accomplish this one could take the following steps:

   1. Estimate Equation (14) by OLS and let              =                      =   + ′         be the esti-

       mated treatment effect of a change in gasoline prices on MPG for a household with char-

       acteristics .

   2. Estimate Equation (15) by OLS and let              =      + ′ + ̂             +               ×    ′ ,

       where            is the average gasoline price in the data. These are predicted household

       VMT at the average gasoline price. Average gasoline prices are used to isolate shifts in the

       demand curves of different utilization types, evaluated at the same price.

                                                  -28-
   3. To estimate the correlation between                        and       , run the following regres-

         sion:

                                      =       +      + ,                                          (16)

where the coefficient of interest is      .

         As we show in Appendix B, this whole process is equivalent to estimating the following

model:

             =      +             +       ′ +              ×           +     +    +       ,     (17)

where            is the predicted VMT from Equation (15), but at average gasoline prices. The match-

ing effect in Equation (17) is given by . However, this strategy merely provides a correlation

between the predicted VMT and the effect of                .

         The results for Equation (17) with corrected standard errors are shown in Table 5. The first

column omits any controls except demographics. The second and third columns add MSA dum-

mies and year dummies respectively. The fourth column includes MSA-month dummies. The es-

timated effects continue to be similar to the OLS and IV models, with a statistically significant

matching effect (again in all but the first model) of roughly 0.017 to 0.021. Thus, even if we cannot

say that the causal effect is through utilization per se, we can say that the types of people who do

drive more are allocated more fuel-efficient cars when gasoline prices are higher, relative to those

who drive less. This reduced form correlation is enough to trigger the matching effect and to pro-

vide additional savings in fuel consumption when gasoline prices rise.

         Figure 6 summarizes the results of these four models, using our preferred specification with

year and city dummies and demographic controls. It shows the changing in the matching relation-

ship predicted from various changes in gasoline prices ($0.25, $0.55, $1, and $3.50).




                                                  -29-
                                       D. Robustness Checks

The above models all use miles per gallon as the dependent variable. Table 6 replicates the main

results with gallons per mile as the dependent variable instead (in thousands). Thus, the coefficient

estimates indicate the change in gasoline consumption (in thousands of gallons) per mile when

there is a small change in the explanatory variables. The matching effect is negative for all the

models, implying that when gasoline prices increase, a household that drives more drives a vehicle

that consumes less gasoline, relative to a household than drives less. The bottom row of the table

converts these estimates to an equivalent effect on MPG at the mean of the data. The results are

generally similar to the corresponding estimates from the main tables, indicating little sensitivity

to this change of specification. The matching effect corresponds to about 0.01 to 0.04 MPG per

dollar gasoline price per 1000 miles VMT.

       We considered a variety of alternative models as well. In particular, we considered alter-

native measures of VMT as well as alternative ways of trimming the variable (see note 7 above).

We also considered nominal gasoline prices instead of inflation-adjusted prices. For our IV mod-

els, we considered GMM estimation as well as two-stage least squares. In all models, we computed

standard White heteroskedastic-robust standard errors as well as clustered standard errors. Our

basic findings are unchanged with all these models, which are available upon request.

                          E. Within- and Between-Household Matching

Thus far, we have estimated the matching effect for all vehicles in the household. As noted previ-

ously, households with N vehicles are treated as if they have N exogenous bundles of trips which

they then allocate to vehicles. Continuing with this assumption, we can focus just on within-house-

hold matching effects, in which we look at how such bundles are allocated to vehicles within the

household under different gasoline prices. Figure 7 shows, on the vertical axis, the difference in



                                                -30-
MPG of the car allocated to the highest VMT bundle in the household relative to the lowest, plotted

against the respective differences in VMT. Panel A does this for two-car households, Panel B for

three-car households. (Notice some differences in VMT are quite large, but the left-hand side of

the figure holds most of the density.) The figure shows that, in 2008-9, when gas prices averaged

$3.14, the difference is positive, meaning that the higher-MPG car was allocated to more VMT.

Moreover, it is increasing in VMT especially on the left side which holds most of the data, indi-

cating that as the split in miles between the two bundles of trips increases, the difference in MPG

grows. In 2001-2, when gas prices averaged $1.63, the difference was negative for two-car families

and decreasing. For three-car households in 2001-2, the difference is close to zero with little trend.

In either case, the difference is higher in 2008-9, when gas prices average $3.14, than 2001-2. This

suggests households match their high-MPG car to more VMT when gas prices are higher.

       To further explore these within-household effects within a difference-in-differences frame-

work, we repeat the OLS regression in Table 2, column 2 on multi-car households, but also include

household fixed effects (which supersede MSA dummies and household demographics). We find

a matching effect of 0.0362, statistically significant at the 1% level. This effect is somewhat bigger

than the effect using all the data, which is not surprising given that it would be easier to re-match

vehicles to trips within a household than between households, as the latter requires a market trans-

action but the former does not. We view these results as suggestive, but caution that they depend

on our simplifying assumption that we can take baskets of trips as exogenously determined prior

to being matched to vehicles.

       We similarly can focus on between-household effects by reducing the data set to one ob-

servation per household. This between-household analysis is interesting in itself, because it focuses




                                                 -31-
on the transactions that take place as households sell old cars and buy new ones and the re-alloca-

tion that emerges. It has the further virtue of eliminating the necessity of our assumption about the

exogenous division of trips within the household. We conduct such a between-household analysis

three ways. Our preferred approach is to take the average MPG of all cars in the household,

weighted by each car's VMT, to represent a household-level average MPG. Likewise, we take the

total VMT of the household divided by the number of adults, to obtain the household's per-capita

VMT. This approach removes within-household variation while giving some weight to all its de-

cisions and makes no assumptions about how total VMT is allocated to cars. The results are dis-

played in Panel A of Table 7 (which for brevity shows only the coefficients from the matching

effect). The columns correspond to our preferred specification (with year and MSA dummies and

demographic characteristics) for the OLS, linear IV, IV with the non-linear instrument, and non-

causal models respectively. The results remain similar to the previous findings, but slightly

smaller, which is consistent with the idea that the transaction costs of re-matching to automobiles

is more difficult between households than within them.

       As an alternative to taking the household-level average, in Panel B we take only the car

with the highest VMT in the household ("top car"). The results are similar to Panel A. This second

approach has the advantage of using one one car but the disadvantage of taking the VMT assigned

by multi-car households to the top car as exogenous. Finally, in Panel C, we take only one-car

households.10 While this approach has the advantage of sidestepping the question of how VMT is

allocated across cars, it has the disadvantage of created a more selected and less representative

sample (as well as dropping over half the data). For example, the average one-car household has



10
 We also include households in which the second car is effectively unused, with less than one thousand
miles.

                                                 -32-
1.9 people and drives 9,287 miles per year, whereas the average household in the data has 2.4

people and drives its top car 12,960 miles per year. Nevertheless, the estimates using this approach

are similar to the other two approaches, except for the non-linear instruments, which were ineffec-

tive in this subsample (with the instruments failing to pass most tests of relevance).

                                           F. Gasoline Taxes

Our analysis to this point has used variation in the overall price of gasoline. However, energy

policies typically influence gasoline prices through gasoline taxes. Moreover, households might

respond differently to gasoline taxes than other components of the price. For example, they might

view them as more permanent than variation in oil prices or refinery costs or more salient. Speak-

ing to this point, Li, Linn, and Muehlegger (2014) recently found that gasoline price elasticities

are larger for changes in the gasoline tax than from other sources of variation in prices.11 They also

found that the MPG of the average car responded more to taxes. This raises the possibility that the

matching effect might also be stronger from changes in gasoline taxes than other price changes.

        To further explore this issue, we gathered data on gasoline prices by state from the Amer-

ican Petroleum Institute's (API's) State Motor Fuels Tax Reports. These data are at the monthly

level for 2008-9 (from which we constructed quarterly averages to match our quarterly gasoline

price data) and the annual level for 2001-2. Weighting by our data, the average gasoline tax in-

creased 6 cents between survey waves. The variability ranged from increases of more than 10 cents

in Texas, Oregon, and Maine to small decreases in Virginia and California.

        Following Li, Linn, and Muehlegger (2014), we then reran our OLS models using both




11
  Coglianese et al. (2016) have argued that taxes are an inappropriate instrument for gas prices when esti-
mating very short-term gasoline demand elasticities, if households tank up in anticipation of tax hikes.
However, this critique would not apply to our setting of year-to-year or changes in automobile fuel econ-
omy choices.

                                                   -33-
variation in gasoline taxes and net-of-tax price variation. This approach allows us to separately

identify the two effects. As an alternative, we continue to employ our basic model with gasoline

prices in the equation of interest, but instrument for gasoline prices with gasoline taxes. This ap-

proach obviously limits the source of variation in the data to the taxes.12

        Panel A of Table 8 shows the results of the first approach, in which we separately estimate

the effects of gasoline taxes and net-of-tax gasoline prices, showing only the respective matching

effects. The estimates suggest the effect of the gasoline tax is three times the effect of prices gen-

erally, with a statistically significant matching effect of about 0.06 (versus about 0.02 in our pre-

vious models). Net-of-tax prices have a slightly smaller effect than the over-all price effect, of

about 0.019. (Note because these are a much larger share of overall prices they need not move as

much from the overall effect.) Panel B shows the results in which we instrument for gasoline prices

using gasoline taxes. The point estimates using this approach range from 0.03 to 0.04, still higher

than our earlier estimates of about 0.02 using raw gasoline prices. The findings from both panels

are consistent with the notion that gas taxes are more salient than other shocks and with previous

results from Li, Linn, and Muehlegger (2014). They also suggest that gasoline taxes can have a

more potent effect than our earlier estimates using only gas prices would suggest.

                                            G. Implications

In the introduction, we noted that an increase in gasoline prices should have three effects: a utili-

zation effect on VMT, a compositional effect on the average fuel economy of the fleet, and a

matching effect. Our model does not estimate the utilization effect, but does capture a combination




12
  We also considered instrumenting for VMT using the above strategies, however, the presence of multi-
ple nonlinear endogenous variables (for the first strategy, VMT interacted with taxes and VMT interacted
with net-of-tax prices; for the second, VMT interacted with gasoline prices with both treated as endoge-
nous) made it impossible to identify all the structural effects without additional instruments.

                                                  -34-
of a city-level composition effect and matching effect. It also provides a way to isolate the match-

ing effect. Using our model, the change in household fuel economy due to a change in gasoline

prices is given by           ⁄         =    +          , where     and    are the estimated parameters on

Price and Price*VMT respectively. The proportion of the change in gasoline consumption through

the matching channel can be measured by Equation (18):


     Proportion of predicted total change                   ∑                           −
                                                                      +    +    ⋅
                                              = 1−                                                    ,   (18)
            from matching effect                            ∑                           −
                                                                      +    +    ⋅

where          measures the gasoline consumption of vehicle and                is the average VMT.

          Using our preferred specification with MSA and year dummies and demographic controls,

we predict that a $1 increase in gasoline taxes would result in a savings of 1.5% of US gasoline

consumption in the short run from the matching affect alone, or 1.9 billion gallons annually.13 This

compares to a short-run (one-year) savings of 7.2% from the composition effect estimated by Li,

Timmins, and von Haefen (2009).14 Although smaller that this estimate of the composition effect,

the matching effect is economically meaningful. These gasoline savings correspond to 84 million

metric tonnes of CO2 annually. Using the US social cost of carbon of $36/tonne and Parry and

Small's (2005) estimate of $0.16/gallon of damages from conventional pollution, these gasoline

savings are equivalent to $3.3 billion in benefits from avoided pollution per year, just through the

matching channel—i.e., with no change in the automotive fleet and no change in total miles driven.




13
  As the models are linear in prices, the effects of smaller changes in taxes can be computed as any pro-
portion of $1. Similarly, if one prefers to use the estimates from prices in Tables 2-4 rather than the effect
of taxes, one could proportionately adjust these effects by about one-fourth to one-half.
14
  To compute this figure, we used their short run elasticity of MPG of 0.022 combined with the percent-
age change in each household's gas price associated with $1 (adjusted for the difference in dollars).

                                                     -35-
Moreover, these short-run effects are likely to be lower bounds on the long-run effects.

                                          V. Conclusion

Combustion of gasoline has detrimental environmental and health impacts. To reduce these effects,

one policy tool is to increase gasoline prices. Two effects of gasoline prices have been identified

in the literature, the utilization effect and the compositional effect. The former implies that an

increase in gasoline prices results in a decrease in the demand for VMT. The latter suggests that it

causes an evolution of fleet towards fuel efficiency. As we have shown in this paper, there is a

potential third effect of gasoline prices that has been overlooked in the previous studies. Due to

heterogeneity in demand for VMT, increase in gasoline prices should particularly affect vehicle

choices of households that drive more. In the presence of higher gasoline prices, the costs borne

by high-VMT households is greater and hence they become more to outbid low-VMT households

for a fuel efficient vehicle. In equilibrium, there will be matching of fuel efficiency among high-

VMT households and fuel inefficiency among low-VMT households. This is the first study that

analyzes such assortative behavior.

       To understand the potential importance of the matching effect, if fuel economy was as-

signed perfectly to households based on their VMT demand, US gasoline consumption would be

15% lower, without changing the fleet or VMT. Our study exploits variation in gasoline prices in

the last decade to estimate how gasoline prices affect vehicle choice. Using our model based on

taxes and our preferred specification, if gasoline taxes were $1 higher, gasoline consumption

would have been about 1.5% lower due to the matching effect alone. These additional benefits of

higher prices further favor price-based policies.




                                                -36-
REFERENCES

Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2016. "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Para-
        dox." Review of Economics and Statistics 96(5):779-95.

Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee. 2013. "What Do Consumers Believe
      About Future Gasoline Prices?" Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
      66: 383-403.

Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, James M. Sallee, and Richard T. Curtin. 2011. "Forecasting
      Gasoline Prices Using Consumer Surveys." American Economic Review 101(3):110–14.

Austin, David, and Terry Dinan. 2005. "Clearing the air: The Costs and Consequences of Higher
       CAFE Standards and Increased Gasoline Taxes." Journal of Environmental Economics
       and management 50(3): 562-82.

Bento, Antonio M., Maureen L. Cropper, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Katja Vinha. 2005.
       "The Effects of Urban Spatial Structure on Travel Demand in the United States." Review
       of Economics and Statistics 87: 466-78.

Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009.
       "Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes." American Eco-
       nomic Review 99(3): 667-99.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
       rium." Econometrica 63(4): 841-890.

Brown, Jennifer, Justine Hastings, Erin T. Mansur, and Sofia B. Villas-Boas. 2008. "Reformulat-
      ing Competition? Gasoline Content Regulation and Wholesale Gasoline Prices." Journal
      of Environmental Economics and Management 55(1): 1-19.

Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. "Are Consumers My-
       opic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases." American Economic Review 103(1):
       220-56.

Coglianese, John, Lucas W. Davis, Lutz Killian, and James H. Stock. 2016. "Anticipation, Tax
       Avoidance, and the Price-Elasticity of Gasoline-Demand." Journal of Applied Economet-
       rics 32: 1-15.

Currie, Janet, Joshua G. Zivin, Jaime Mullins and Matthew Neidell. 2014. "What Do We Know
        About Short and Long Term Effects of Early Life Exposure to Pollution?" Annual Review
        of Resource Economics 6: 217-247.

Davis, Michael C., and James D. Hamilton. 2004. "Why Are Prices Sticky? The Dynamics of
       Wholesale Gasoline Prices." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36: 17-37.

Davis, Lucas, and Lutz Kilian. 2011. "Estimating the Effect of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon Emis-
       sions." Journal of Applied Econometrics 26(7): 1187-1214.

                                             -37-
Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. "An econometric analysis of residential elec-
       tric appliance holdings and consumption." Econometrica 52: 345-362.

Feng, Ye, Don Fullerton, and Li Gan. 2013. "Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven, and Pollution Poli-
       cies." Journal of Regulatory Economics 44(1): 4-29.

Geman, Hélyette. 2007. "Mean Reversion Versus Random Walk in Oil and Natural Gas Prices."
     In M. Fu, R. Jarrow, J. Yen, and R. Elliott, eds. Advances in Mathematical Finance. Birk-
     hauser: Boston, 219-228.

Gillingham, Kenneth. 2012. "Selection on Anticipated Driving and the Consumer Response to
       Changing Gasoline Prices." Mimeo.

Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew J. Kotchen, David S. Rapson and Gernot Wagner. 2013. "Energy
       Policy: The Rebound Effect is Overplayed." Nature 493: 475-476.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1995. "Product Differentiation and Oligopoly in International
      Markets: The Case of the US Automobile Industry." Econometrica 63(4): 891-951.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. 1998. "The Effect of Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Stand-
      ards in the US." Journal of Industrial Economics 46(1): 1-33.

Graham, Daniel J., and Stephen Glaister. 2002. "The Demand for Automobile Fuel: A Survey of
      Elasticities." Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 36(1): 1-26.

Hughes, J.E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling. 2008. "Evidence of a Shift in the
      Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand." The Energy Journal 29(1): 113-134.

Jacobsen, Mark R. 2013. "Evaluating US fuel economy standards in a model with producer and
       household heterogeneity." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(23): 148-87.

Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. 2010. "The Price of Gasoline and the Demand for Fuel Effi-
        ciency: Evidence from Monthly New Vehicle Sales Data." American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy 2(3): 134–53.

Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. 2011. "Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards and the
        Market for New Vehicles." Annual Review of Resource Economics 3: 445-62.

Li, Shanjun, Christopher Timmins, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2009. "How Do Gasoline Prices
       Affect Fleet Fuel Economy?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2): 113-
       37.

Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger. 2014. "Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behav-
       ior." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4): 302-42.

Linn, Joshua. 2016. "The Rebound Effect for Passenger Vehicles." Energy Journal 37(2): 257-
       88.


                                              -38-
Molloy, Raven, and Hui Shan. 2014. "The Effect of Gasoline Prices on Household Location."
      Review of Economics and Statistics 95: 1212-21.

OECD. 2014. Consumption Tax Trends 2014. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/taxation/consump-
     tion-tax-trends-2014_ctt-2014-en

Parry, Ian W.H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. "Does Britain or the United States Have the Right
        Gasoline Tax?" American Economic Review 95(4): 1276-89.

Puller, Steven L., and Lorna A. Greening. 1999. "Household Adjustment to Gasoline Price
        Change: An Analysis Using 9 years of US Survey Data." Energy Economics 21: 37-52.

Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan. 2016. "Do Consumers Recognize the Value of
        Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations." Jour-
        nal of Public Economics 135: 61-73.

Small, Kenneth A., and Kurt Van Dender. 2007. "Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel: The
       Declining Rebound Effect." Energy Journal 28(1): 25-52.

United States Department of Energy (US DOE). 2011. Fuel Taxes by Country.
       http://www.afdc.energy.gov/data/10327. Last accessed 11 July, 2016.

West, Jeremy, Mark Hoekstra, Jonathan Meer, and Steven L. Puller. 2016. "Vehicle Miles (not)
       Traveled: Fuel Economy Requirements, Vehicle Characteristics, and Household Driv-
       ing." Journal of Public Economics 145: 65-81.




                                             -39-
Figure 1: The Matching Effect




Notes: In these diagrams partial-equilibrium models illustrate the matching effect. There are two types of households: high-VMT (Hand low-VMT
(L). There are two types of vehicles: high- and low-GPM. The demand curves           and      show the relative willingness to pay (WTP) of the two
household types for different fuel economies. In both panels above, the baseline case is given by a scenario where      =     and the baseline market
demand curve is given by       for a relative price . After an increase in gas prices, the relative WTP for inefficient vehicles decreases. The new
market demand curve is shown by         for a relative price . However, due to the heterogeneity in demand among agents for VMT, the decrease
(increase) in the relative WTP for the high-VMT types for inefficient (efficient) vehicles is greater than for the low-VMT types.




                                                                        -40-
Figure 2: MSA 2009 Gasoline Prices v. 2001 Gasoline Prices (in 2009 Dollars)

Panel A: Gasoline Prices Kernel Densities
                         3
                         2
  Density
                         1
                         0




                             1       2                  3                   4                5
                                                 Gasoline Prices

                                 2001 Gasoline Prices                 2009 Gasoline Prices




Panel B: 2009 Prices against 2001 Prices
                    4
  2009 Gasoline Prices
                    3
                    2
                    1




                             1            2                           3                      4
                                               2001 Gasoline Prices


Notes: The graph in Panel A shows the kernel densities of gasoline prices for the 2001 (solid line) and the
2009 (dashed line) ACCRA gasoline prices. Panel B plots 2009 average MSA gasoline prices against 2001
average MSA gasoline prices.




                                                                          -41-
Figure 3: Kernel densities of VMT and MPG




Notes: These graphs show the kernel densities of reported vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in thousands and
miles per gallon (MPG) per vehicle for the 2001 and the 2009 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS).




                                                 -42-
Figure 4: Is there a matching effect?

 Panel A. Matching in Raw Data vs. Perfect Matching, 2001 and 2009

                                                          NHTS 2001                                                                                                                NHTS 2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Perfect matching
                            60




                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                             Perfect matching
                            50




                                                                                                                                                     50
   Miles per gallon (MPG)




                                                                                                                            Miles per gallon (MPG)
                            40




                                                                                                                                                     40
                            30




                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Actual values
                                                                                                    Actual values
                            20




                                                                                                                                                     20
                            10




                                                                                                                                                     10
                                  0            20                                40                             60                                         0            20                                40                             60
                                                    Vehicle miles travelled ('000)                                                                                           Vehicle miles travelled ('000)
                                                      Avg. gas price = $1.62                                                                                                   Avg. gas price = $3.14




 Panel B. CDF of MPG, by Top and Bottom VMT Quartile, 2001 and 2009

                                           CDF of MPG by VMT quartile, 2001                                                                                         CDF of MPG by VMT quartile, 2009
    1




                                                                                                                             1
    .8




                                                                                                                             .8
    .6




                                                                                                                             .6
    .4




                                                                                                                             .4
    .2




                                                                                                                             .2
    0




                                                                                                                             0




                             10       20                       30                     40                        50                                    10       20                       30                     40                        50
                                                         Vehicle MPG                                                                                                              Vehicle MPG
                                                     Avg. gas price = $1.62                                                                                                   Avg. gas price = $3.14

                                      Top VMT Quartile                        Bottom VMT Quartile                                                              Top VMT Quartile                        Bottom VMT Quartile




Notes: In Panel A, actual values in both graphs represent a linear regression of fuel economy on vehicle
miles traveled (VMT). For perfect matching, vehicles were re-assigned to households based on their re-
spective VMT, so that their ranks are the same. Panel B shows the distribution of fuel economy among
those in the highest and lowest quartile of VMT. In 2001 low-VMT households have more fuel-efficient
cars than high-VMT households (in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance of the distribution); in
2009, the reverse is true.




                                                                                                                     -43-
 Figure 5: Change in sorting correlations




Notes: The figure shows the relationship between changes in city-specific gasoline prices and changes in
city-specific MPG-VMT correlations between 2001 and 2009 NHTS. The slope and the standard error (in
parentheses) of the predicted regression line are also reported. Positive slope indicates that MSAs that re-
ceived larger changes in gasoline prices also experienced larger changes in the MPG-VMT correlations.

**Significant at the 5% level.




                                                    -44-
Figure 6. MPG-VMT relationship for different tax regimes (Year = 2009)




Notes: Figures in Panels A – D are based on the parameter estimates from the preferred specifications of the OLS linear IV, non-linear IV and the
non-causal model, respectively. The predictions show the relationship between VMT and MPG when gasoline prices increase by $0.25, $0.55, $1,
and $3.50.



                                                                      -45-
Figure 7: Within-Household Matching

           A. Two-Car Households                            B. Three-Car Households




Notes: The figures show the difference in MPG of the car allocated to the highest VMT bundle in the
household relative to the lowest, plotted against the respective differences in VMT.




                                               -46-
Table 1: Summary Statistics: 2001 & 2009 National Household Travel Survey and
Matched Gasoline Prices
Variable                                         Full sample 2001 NHTS 2009 NHTS                Difference
                                                    2.834       1.635      3.138                 1.503***
Gasoline price (2009 dollars)
                                                   (0.855)     (0.214)   (0.670)                  (0.002)
                                                   10.280      11.138      9.980                -1.158***
Vehicle miles traveled (VMT) in '000
                                                   (8.277)     (8.640)   (8.124)                  (0.033)
Combined unadjusted fuel economy                   25.551      25.400     25.599                 0.199***
(MPG)                                              (6.094)     (5.280)   (6.332)                  (0.022)
                                                    2.666       2.816      2.614                -0.201***
Household size
                                                   (1.288)     (1.353)   (1.260)                  (0.005)
                                                    1.275       1.612      1.156                -0.456***
Number of workers in household
                                                   (0.984)     (1.003)   (0.949)                  (0.004)
                                                    2.085       2.081      2.087                  0.006**
Number of adults
                                                   (0.711)     (0.721)   (0.708)                  (0.003)
                                                    0.139       0.176      0.126                -0.050***
Fraction of children
                                                   (0.216)     (0.233)   (0.208)                  (0.001)
                                                    0.518       0.508      0.522                 0.014***
Fraction of women
                                                   (0.230)     (0.237)   (0.228)                  (0.001)
                                                    0.137       0.150      0.132                -0.018***
Household income <$25,000
                                                   (0.343)     (0.357)   (0.339)                  (0.001)
Household income <$50,000 and ≥                     0.271       0.327      0.251                -0.075***
$25,000                                            (0.444)     (0.469)   (0.434)                  (0.002)
Household income <$75,000 and ≥                     0.207       0.235      0.197                -0.038***
$50,000                                            (0.405)     (0.424)   (0.397)                  (0.002)
                                                    0.386       0.289      0.420                 0.131***
Household income ≥ $75,000
                                                   (0.487)     (0.453)   (0.494)                  (0.002)
                                                    0.886       0.892      0.884                 0.007***
White, only
                                                   (0.317)     (0.311)   (0.320)                  (0.001)
                                                    0.045       0.033      0.049                 0.016***
African-American, only
                                                   (0.207)     (0.178)   (0.216)                  (0.001)
                                                    0.019       0.016      0.020                 0.004***
Asian, only
                                                   (0.138)     (0.126)   (0.142)                  (0.000)
Number of households                              190,121      52,211    137,910

Notes: The main entries in columns 1, 2 and 3 report the mean level of the variables with standard deviations
in parentheses. Column 4 reports the differences and standard errors.

***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.



                                                    -47-
Table 2. Difference-in-Differences Ordinary Least Squares Results
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)                          (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)
 Matching effect          0.02027*** 0.02068*** 0.02006*** 0.02082***                     0.02169***     0.02091***    0.02119***    0.02093***
               gas
 (VMT x Price )             (0.0035)    (0.0031)    (0.0032)    (0.0035)                    (0.0031)       (0.0032)      (0.0034)      (0.0032)
                              -0.04149*** -0.04150*** -0.03931*** -0.03513*** -0.03275*** -0.03010*** -0.03000*** -0.03003***
 VMT                            (0.0079)    (0.0078)    (0.0083)    (0.0078)    (0.0080)    (0.0086)    (0.0096)    (0.0082)
                                0.00176      -0.10448*** -0.17568***           0.00166    -0.10258*** -0.18866***                     -0.25026**
 Pricegas                       (0.0702)       (0.0289)    (0.0263)            (0.0700)     (0.0251)    (0.0265)                        (0.1020)
 MSA dummies                                      X              X                               X           X                            X
 Year dummies                                                    X                                           X                            X
 MSA-Month dummies                                                                                                          X
 Demographic controls                                                             X              X           X              X             X
 Pricegas × Demographic                                                                                                                   X
 controls
 N=                             326,372        326,372        326,372          304,637         304,637    304,637       304,637        304,637
   2
 R                               0.002          0.024          0.024            0.015           0.038      0.038          0.062         0.038

Notes: The estimates are associated with the OLS model represented by Equation (6). The first column shows the results of the basic model with no
controls. MSA dummies are added in column 2 and year dummies in column 3. Columns 4-6 repeat the first three columns, but add demographic
controls. Column 6 represents the model in Equation (6) and is our preferred specification. Column 7 replaces the MSA and year dummies with
MSA-month dummies, which also removes variation in gas prices. Column 8 includes interactions between demographic controls and gasoline
prices. Demographic controls are number of household members, number of adults in the households, number of workers in the household, the
fraction of children (age <18) and women in the household and household income quartile. Standard errors clustered at the state level are in paren-
theses.

***Significant at the 1%level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                                                        -48-
Table 3. Difference-in-Differences with Linear Instruments — 2nd Stage Results
                                     (1)                   (2)              (3)                   (4)
 Matching effect                 0.01795**          0.02612***         0.02834***          0.02510***
 (VMT x Pricegas)                 (0.0087)            (0.0073)           (0.0085)            (0.0091)
                                  -0.16539           -0.22640          -0.36237***         -0.35375***
 VMT
                                  (0.1419)           (0.1497)            (0.1127)            (0.1073)
                                  -0.00542          -0.18731**         -0.27781***
 Pricegas
                                  (0.1038)            (0.0767)           (0.0911)
 MSA dummies                                                X                X
 Year dummies                                                                X
 MSA-Month dummies                                                                                X
 Demographic controls                X                      X                X                    X
 Pricegas × Demographic
                                    Instr.             Instr.              Instr.                Instr.
 controls
 N=                               304,637             304,631             304,631               304,034
 F-statistics of excluded instruments
 VMT                                18.2                   17.6             8.9                  12.1
 VMT × Pricegas                    393.9               220.6               196.6                 190.9

Notes: The estimates are associated with the coefficients estimates from the IV model represented by Equa-
tions (7) – (9), using demographics interacted with gas prices as excluded instruments. Column 1 omits
MSA and year dummies, which are successively added in columns 2 and 3. Column 4 replaces the MSA
and year dummies with MSA-month dummies, which also removes variation in gas prices. Demographic
controls are number of household members, number of adults in the households, number of workers in the
household, the fraction of children (age <18) and women in the household and household income quartile.
Standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses.

***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                                    -49-
Table 4. Difference-in-Differences with Non-Linear Instruments — 2nd Stage Results

                                   (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)

 Matching effect                0.01303       0.04995***       0.04567***       0.04810***         0.12510
 (VMT x Pricegas)               (0.0124)        (0.0131)         (0.0126)         (0.0133)         (0.0833)

                              0.19345**         -0.05216         -0.03613         -0.05365         -0.23407
            ̅                  (0.0898)         (0.0658)         (0.0657)         (0.0666)         (0.1822)

                                0.12687       -0.40959*** -0.46045***                             -1.10281**
 Pricegas
                                (0.1590)        (0.1331)    (0.1318)                                (0.5601)
 MSA dummies                                        X                X                                X
 Year dummies                                                        X                                X
 MSA-Month dummies                                                                    X
 Demographic controls              X                X                X                X               X
 Pricegas × Demo-
                                                                                                      X
 graphic controls
 N=                             270,146          270,138         270,138          269,419          270,138
 F-statistics of excluded instruments
            ̅                     20.9             23.8            22.7             18.3             23.6
        ̅       × Pricegas       138.3            118.7            135.1           163.2             23.9

Notes: The estimates reported are coefficients estimates for the second stage of the model represented by
Equation (13).         ̅  as predicted from the structural model of Bento et al. (2009) serves as the instru-
ment for VMT. Column 1 omits MSA and year dummies, which are successively added in columns 2 and
3. Column 4 replaces the MSA and year dummies with MSA-month dummies, which also removes varia-
tion in gas prices. Column 5 includes demographics interacted with price in the structural equation. Demo-
graphic controls are number of household members, number of adults in the households, number of workers
in the household, the fraction of children (age <18) and women in the household and household income
quartile. Standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses.

***Significant at the 1% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.




                                                    -50-
Table 5. Non-causal estimation of the matching effect
                                     (1)                   (2)                    (3)             (4)

 Matching effect                 0.01690*           0.02117***             0.01829**        0.01986**
 (    x Pricegas)                (0.0097)             (0.0075)              (0.0081)         (0.0085)

 VMT                                                             Not identified
                                  0.03864            -0.10021              -0.16299**            N/A
 Pricegas
                                  (0.1403)           (0.0754)                (0.0791)
 MSA FE                                                    X                      X
 Year FE                                                                          X
 MSA-Month FE                                                                                     X
 Demographic controls                 X                    X                      X               X
 N=                               304,637             304,637               304,637             304,637
 R2                                0.013               0.036                  0.036              0.060

Notes: The estimates are associated with coefficients estimates of the model represented by Equation (17).
Predicted VMT is a function of average gasoline prices, demographic characteristics, interactions between
these characteristics and average gasoline prices, year dummies and MSA dummies. Corrected standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                                    -51-
Table 6. Difference-in-Differences using Gallons-per-Mile

                                                  (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)

                                                 OLS              IV-lin         IV-nonlin         Non-causal

Matching effect                             -0.02626***         -0.03011**      -0.07034***         -0.01718
(VMT x Pricegas)                              (0.0048)            (0.0150)        (0.0213)          (0.0129)

                                             0.04283***         0.50233***       0.07288
VMT
                                               (0.0122)           (0.1584)       (0.1034)

                                             0.20975***          0.26835*       0.68844***          0.11845
Pricegas
                                               (0.0423)          (0.1617)         (0.2294)          (0.1304)

MSA FE                                             X                 X              X                  X
Year FE                                            X                 X              X                  X

Demographic Controls                               X                 X              X                  X

N=                                             304,637           304,631         270,138            304,637

                                                               Pricegas × De-                 ̅;
Instruments:                                       --           mographic                 ̅   ×        --
                                                                  controls        Price   gas


                                               Table 2            Table 3         Table 4           Table 5
Compare to:
                                               Col. 6             Col. 3          Col. 3            Col. 3

Equivalent value of matching effect
                                              0.0155***          0.0179**       0.0417***           0.0102
for MPG at mean

Notes: The dependent variable in these regressions is 1000 × GPM. The columns correspond to selected
models from Tables 2, 3, 4, and 5 respectively. In Column 3,          ̅  is estimated using Bento et al. (2009)
structural model. Standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in parentheses. The unit of obser-
vation is the vehicle.

***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                                        -52-
Table 7. Between-Household Analysis

                                   (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)
                                  OLS                 IV-lin       IV-nonlin        Non-causal
 A. Avg. MPG
 Matching effect               0.00753***       0.02474***        0.03134***        0.02093***
 (N = 160,539)                   (0.0021)         (0.0056)          (0.0084)          (0.0052)
 B. Top Car
 Matching effect               0.01165***       0.03642***        0.03971***        0.02381***
 (N = 159,815)                   (0.0022)         (0.0076)          (0.0107)          (0.0053)
 C. One-Car Households
 Matching effect               0.01073***       0.04535***          0.01378         0.02219***
 (N = 76,321)                    (0.0030)         (0.0117)          (0.0144)          (0.0076)
 MSA FE                             X                   X              X                 X
 Year FE                            X                   X              X                 X
 Demographic Controls               X                   X              X                 X

Notes: Each household is one observation. Panel A uses the households average MPG. Panel B
uses the MPG of the highest-VMT car. Panel C uses only one-car households. All specifications
control for year dummies and MSA dummies and household characteristics.

***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                               -53-
Table 8. Matching Effect of Gasoline Taxes

                                  (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
 Panel A. OLS.
 Matching effect             0.06404***      0.06409***        0.06212*        0.06154*        0.06212*
 (VMT x Tax)                   (0.0116)        (0.0119)        (0.0371)        (0.0371)        (0.0375)

 Matching effect             0.01844***      0.01905***      0.01937***       0.01857***      0.01882***
 (VMT x Net-of-Tax P)          (0.0016)        (0.0017)        (0.0046)         (0.0048)        (0.0050)
 Panel B. IV using gas
 tax as instrument
 Matching effect              0.03099**       0.03036**      0.03624***       0.03578***      0.03662***
 (VMT x Pricegas)              (0.0154)        (0.0150)        (0.0126)         (0.0126)        (0.0133)
 MSA dummies                                                       X               X
 Year dummies                                                                      X
 MSA-Month dummies                                                                                 X
 Demographic controls                              X               X               X               X
 N=                            322,866         301,311         301,311          301,311         301,311

This table shows the matching effect from gasoline taxes. Panel A separately estimates the matching effect
from taxes from the net-of-tax portion of gas prices. Panel B estimates the effect of gasoline prices when
gasoline taxes are used as an instrument.




                                                   -54-
Appendix A. Derivation of Equation (5).

We begin by taking the derivative of the expression for WTP in Equation (4) with respect to the
                                                                                                                ∗
car type c. Making use of Leibniz's rule when differentiating                                                       in the limits of integration, we

obtain:

          ( , ,    )               ( ,)
                                          +
                                                       ∗    ,,              ( ,,          )
                       =
                                     ∗    ,,
                           +                           ( , ,                    ∗)
                                                                                     −                 ( )                                           (A1)
                                                      ∗(                )
                                          −                 , ,                               .

This expression shows how the WTP for a car changes with the car type, as a function of the

individual type and gasoline prices. Next, we take the cross partial derivative with respect to the

individuals' utilization type.
                                                                            ∗    ,,                                      ∗)
                                                ( , )                                                  ( , ,
                                                           +
                                                     ∗(                )             ( , ,                 ∗)                  ( )
                                                            , ,
          ( , ,    )                +                                                                           −
                       =                                                                                                                             (A2)
                                                                       ∗(                )             ( , ,             ∗)
                                                                                , ,
                                                     +
                                                           ∗(               )
                                                                , ,                                        ∗)
                                     +                                                ( , ,                         −          ( )     .

Now taking the third derivative with respect to                             :
                                         ∗(           )             ( , ,                ∗)                         ∗(           )             ( )
                                               , ,                                                                       , ,
                                                                                              −
                                                      ∗(               )              ( , ,                ∗)                   ( )
                                                            , ,
                                   +                                                                                −
          ( , ,    )
                       =                        ∗(                                                ∗)                      ∗(                         (A3)
                                                     , ,        )       ( , ,                                                  , ,    )
                               +                                                                       −
                                                           ∗(               )
                                                                , ,                                        ∗)
                                     +                                                ( , ,                         −          ( )     .

                                                                                                                                      ∗)
But by the first-order condition for optimal VMT conditional on c, ( , ,                                                                   =         ( )    ;

that is, the marginal WTP for VMT equals the marginal cost. Thus, the last term in (A3) drops out

                                                                      -55-
and we are left, after re-arranging some terms, with:
                                                               ∗(             )           ( )
                                                                    , ,
                                                  −
                                                          ∗(              )       ( , ,         ∗)
                                                                , ,
                                         +
          ( , ,   )
                      =           ∗(                                      ∗)                ∗(                     (A4)
                                       , ,        )     ( , ,                                    , ,       )
                                                                               −
                                             ∗(          )          ( , ,          ∗)                ( )
                                                  , ,
                             +                                                          −                      .




                                                        -56-
Appendix B. Proof of the non-causal model

Consider the following two simultaneous equations:

                                =           +            +                +       ⋅       +                           (B1)

                                =           +            +            +           ⋅       +                           (B2)

where E(        ) = E(      ) = E(              ) = E(                    ) = 0. Let          = 1      ,     =        ⋅    ,    =

        ,       =         and           =                . Given the orthogonality conditions, (B1) and (B2) can be

estimated by OLS. By the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem:

                                            =(                        )                                               (B3)

where       = −           = −           (        )           .             is the projection matrix onto the space spanned by

                                                     (    | )
the columns of        and               = .                      =            +       =        . Call this ; this is the estimated

treatment effect of       . To estimate how                               is correlated with     , estimate the following regres-

sion:

                                                =            +                +                                       (B4)

where       =   +         + ̂       +            ⋅        , the structural parameters are estimated by OLS and                  =

∑       . Let       = 1         and         =                     .

                                                 =(                   )

                                                =(               )

                            =(              )                 (                   )                                   (B5)

Now consider the following model:

                                =       +            +                    +           ⋅   +                           (B6)

where       =         ⋅     . By the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem:

                                            =(                        )                                               (B7)


                                                                           -57-
Note that the projection of            onto the space defined by          will be the same for (B1) and (B6).

This implies that         =        : the partial effects of        in (B1) can be obtained when the residuals

from a regression of          on       are regressed on the set of residuals obtained when each column of

   is regressed on        . The partial effects of        in (B6) can be obtained when the residuals from a

regression       on       are regressed on the set of residuals obtained when each column of               is

regressed on         . Hence, in both cases the residual-maker is the same and             =     . Given this

results, the fact that            =    and using (B5) and (B7) we have,

        (        )            (           )                   =(          )                       (B8)

        (        )            (           )                   =(          )

             (        )            (          )               =(          )

                                                  =   ∎




                                                        -58-
