                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            AN ANALYSIS OF FISCAL POLICY
                                 UNDER OPERATIVE AND
                             INOPERATIVE BEQUEST MOTIVES




                                  Andrew B. Abel




                              Working Paper No. 2298




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 1987




This paper was prepared for the Pinhas Sapir Conference on the Economic Effects
of the Government's Budget, Tel Aviv University, December 22-24, 1986. Research
support from the National Science Foundation and the Sloan Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. I thank Allan Drazen and Philippe Weil for helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #2298
                                                                    June 1987




An Analysis of Fiscal Policy Under Operative and Inoperative Bequest Motives




                                              ABSTRACT




      This   paper presents a general equilibrium model with logarithmic preferences and

   technology. If the non-negativity constraint on bequests is strictly binding, then the bequest

   motive is characterized as inoperative. Alter determining the conditions for operative and

   inoperative bequest motives, the paper examines the effect of pay-as-you-go social security on

   the stochastic evolution of the capital stock. If the non— negativity constraint on bequests is

   strictly binding, then an increase in social security reduces the unconditional long—run expected

   capital stock. If the social security taxes and benefits are large enough, then thenon-negativity

   constraint ceases to bind, and further increases in social security have no effect. This paper

   extends previous analyses by examining bequest behavior outside of the steady state and by

   allowing a non—degenerate cross-sectional distribution in the holding of capital.




                                                                  Andrew Abel
                                                                  Department of Finance
                                                                  The Wharton School
                                                                  Steinberg Hall, Room 2319
                                                                  University of Pennsylvania
                                                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104
         It is well—known that if a consumer has an infirnte horizon, then his consumption and

 savrng behavior is invariant to changes in the timing of lump-sum taxes that leave the present

 value of his taxes unchanged. Barro (1 974) argued that if consumers have operative altruistic

 bequest motives, then they behave as if they have infinite horizons. This important insight

 implies that the Picerchan Equivalence Theorem, which is the proposition that changes in the

timing of lump—sum taxes have no effect, can hold even in en economy in which consumers have

firnte lifetimes. Since the appearance of Berros seminal paper, there have been several

challenges to the Picardian Equivalence Theorem that have shown that even with an operative

altruistic bequest motive, lump-sum tax changes can have an effect. Such effects arise if there

are not complete insurance markets for stochastic fluctuations in labor income (Barsky,

Nionkiw and Zeldes( 1 986)), if there are pre-existing nonlinear taxes on wealth or property

income (Abel (1986)), or if new consumers who do not receive bequests from current domestic

consumers enter the economy (Wei 1(1 986)).

   This paper also analyzes a reason for departure from Ricardian Equivalence but focusses on a

different channel then the research cited above. The assumption that the altruistic bequest

motive is operative, which is a maintained hypothesis in the work mentioned above, will be

critically examined in this paper. Specifically, I will assume that individual consumers are

indeed altruistic with respect to their heirs and I will then determine, in a specific model, how

strong the bequest motive must be in order to be operative. I will then show that lump-sum

fiscal policy affects whether the bequest motive is operative and will analyze the effects of

fiscal policy when the bequest motive is not operative.

     The question of whether the bequest motive is operative has received some attention in the

literature. Drazen (1 978) presented conditions on equilibrium marginal rates of substitution

which must hold for the bequest motive to be operative, but in his general non-separable

formulation of altruism, there is no single parameter, or set of pararnters, which measures the

strength of the bequest motive. In an elegantly simple analysis, Weil (1 984) derived a lower

bound for the strength of the bequest motive in order for there to be positive bequests in the
steady state. This lower bound is not stated directly in terms of preferences and technology, but

rather is expressed in terms of the steady state marginal product of capital in an economy

without bequests. Well's analysis is extended in Abel (1 987) to determine conditions under

which the gift motive (from child to parent) or the bequest motive (from parent to child) or

neither will be operative. However, Well's analysis and the extension are both confined largely

to steady states. Weil did explore bequest behavior outside of the steady state but did not find a

clean set of conditions which guarantee that the bequest motive would be operative for every

generation, even for specific examples of preferences and technology. It must be emphasized, as

noted by Weil, that the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem in general requires that the bequest

motive be operative for every generation. Therefore, the determination of conditions under

which the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem holds along the transition path remains an important

open question.

   In this paper derive conditions for operative bequests everywhere along the transition path

for a specific structure of preferences and technology. In particular, I restrict attention to a

logarithmic utility function and a Cobb- Douglas production function and present conditions

under which the bequest motive will always be operative, regardless of the initial level of

capital intensity. It should be recalled that Well also considered the case with a logarithmic

utility function and a Cobb—Douglas production function but was able to show that the bequest

motive is always operative only under the assumption that the initial capital stock was above a

certain critical level. The difference between Weil's example and the model in this paper is

that, unlike Weil's specification, my specification of the Cobb—Douglas production function

essentially assumes complete depreciation of capital in one period. The importance of this

assumption is simply technical: it implies that in equilibrium the logarithm of the capital stock

follows a linear (stochastic) difference equation whereas in Weil's specification the evolution of

the capital is not log—linear. This log—linearity permits the derivation of simple conditions for

operative bequests.

   Recently, Cukierman (1 986) and Feldstein (1 986) have each analyzed binding
 non-negativity constraints on bequests when individual consumers face uncertarnty. In

 Cukiermen (1 986), young consumers are uncertain about their state health in old age (modeled

 forrn&ly as uncertainty about tastes) and thus are uncertain about whether they will ultimately

 want to leave a positive bequest. In Feldstein (1 986) young consumers are also uncertain about

 whether they will ultimately want to leave a positive bequest but thisuncertainty arises from

 uncertainty about income in old age. The prospect that each young consumer may ultimately face

 a strictly brnding constraint on bequests leads to a violation of the Ricardian Equivalence

 Thereom because consumers who are constrained would prefer shifting taxes onto future

 generations.

     In this paper I introduce uncertainty by making the production function subject to random

 shocks. It turns out that with the specfication of preferences and technology in this paper, each

 young consumer knows whether his bequest motive will be operative in old age. Although this

formulation ignores an interesting aspect of the individual decision problem that is emphasized

in the partial equilibrium analyses of Cukierrnan and Feldstein, it permits aggregation across

consumers with heterogeneous wealth. I exploit the easy aggregation in the model to analyze the

general equilbirium effects of policy on endogenous factor prices as well as on the individuals

decision problem.

    In addition to introducing uncertainty, this analysis departs from the now-standard

representative consumer framework by allowing for a non—degenerate cross-sectional

distribution of capital holdings. In this simple model, I can study the evolution of the

distribution of wealth. In addition, I can determine how much variation in wealth iscompatible

with the requirement that all consumers have operative bequest motives.

   In section I I present a model with a stochastic production function and with altruistic

consumers. I then derive the optimal saving and consumption rules for an artificial decision

problem in which the old consumer is given control over the wage income of this children. This

artificial decision problem ignores the non—negativity constraint on bequests. In section II I

analyze conditions under which bequests will in fact be non—negative and present restrictions
                                                I

which are cuff icient to guarantee that the bequest motive will be operative in every period. In

section III I analyze individual end aggregate behavior when the bequest motive is not operative

end in section IV I present restrictions which guarantee that the bequest motive will never be

operative. The relation between dynamic efficiency end the possibility of operative bequests is

analyzed in section V. Section VI examines a laissez faire economy without taxes or transfers and

analyzes bequest behavior in the presence of cross-sectional variation in wealth. In section VII,

I confine attention to a representative consumer economy and examine the effects of changes in

the tax and transfer system on the stochastic evolution of the capital stock. Section VIII

concludes the paper.



I. Consumption and Capital Accumulation in the Absence of Non—negativity Constraints

    Consider an overlapping generations economy in which each consumer lives for two periods

and gives birth to n heirs at the beginning of the second period. Each consumer inelastically

supplies one unit of labor when young and does not work when old. A consumer born at the

beginning of period t receives a competitive wage W and consumes an amount CY in period t

when he is young and consumes ct+ 1 in period t+ 1 when he is old. Let kt be the stock of capital

(per worker) held by an individual family at the beginning of period t. This capt& is actually

owned by the old consumers in the family and represents their saving from the previous period.

Let P be the gross rate of return on capital held from period t- 1 to period t. Therefore the

capital stock held by the family evolves according to

              nkt+i = Rtkt +             - cJ — c0/n                                            (1)
Equation (1) states that the amount of capital carried into period t+ I is equal to the familys

total income in periodt, Ptkt + W, minus the consumption of the youngandoldconsumers. Let

Kt, cY, and C°, denote the economy-wide average values of kt, cY end C10, respectively. With

competitive factor markets, all families face the same wage rate, W, and the same return to

capital P. Therefore, since (1) is linear in kt, C.tY and c0,

               nKt+ 1 = PtK1 + W - CY - C0/n                                                    (2)
                                                   5




   Suppose that consumers have altruistic bequest motives. Letting Ut be the utility of a

consumer born at the beginning of period t, we specify the utility function to be

                 U = E{ u(ctY,ct+i°) + 6Ut+i}                  0 6<1                           (3)
where Et{ } denotes the expectation conditional on information available at the beginning of

period t. The parameter 6, which is assumed to be nonnegative and less than one, measures the

strength of the bequest motive. One goal of this analysis is to determine how large 6 must be in

order for the bequest motive to be operative.

   Now suppose that the utility function is logarithmic

                               = pInctY + (l—p) lnct+i°                      0<p<1             (4)
and that the production function is Cobb-Douglas

                               =                                                               ()
where Vt is output per worker and 't is a positive random variable. With the Cobb-Douglas

production function in (5) the competitive wage rate is

                           W1 = (1_a)qK(                                                       (6)
and the competitive rate of return on capital is

                               =                                                               (7)
   It is useful first to consider the artifical decision problem in which the old consumer

maximizes his altruistic utility function (3) subject to the familys budget constraint in (1).

This problem is artificial in that the old consumer is allowed to consume some or all of the wage

income of his children. This decision problem can be solved using the value function

  V(k,*p,K) = maxE(1—)lnc1° + SplnctY                  + 6Et(V(kt+i,Ipt+i,Kt+i)}]              (8)
where the maximization in (8) is with respect to Ct°, ctY and kt+1 and is subject to the family

and aggregate capital accumulation constraints in (1) and (2).

   The value function is the expected present value of utility from the old consurners own

consumption when old plus the utility the old consumer obtains from his heirs utility. The

value function is a solution to the functional equation in (8). I have used the method of

undetermined coefficients to solve (8). Because the solution procedure is neither novel nor
                                                       6


instructwe, and because the solution is easily verified, I will simply present a solution to the
functional equation

 V(k,q', Kt) = [(1-+ 6)/(1-6)I in [(1-a)Kt + (1-6)akt)                         +   $ in Kt+         + 0 (9)
where                 + = — (1—+ Lp)(1—a)/[(1—6)(1-6a)1

and                        =   [(i-+ 6p)/(1-6a)] lnlpt + 6
and D is an unimportant constant.

  Using equation (9) it is straightforward but tedious to derive the optima] consumption and

capital accumulation for the artificial decision problem and to derive the behavior of aggregate

consumption and capita] accumulation. The behavior of an individual family is given by

                           =
                    cY         [/(1-+6p)]%ptKt'{(1-a)Kt+                    (1—6)akt]}                       (10)


                   ct°/n       ((i—)/(1 -+5p)]         tKta_l{(1_a)Kt + (1—6)kt)}                            (11)

                                           1
                                                                                                             (1 2)
                   nkt+ 1 =                    kt

To illustrate the "artificial" nature of this problem, observe that if 6 =           0, then   (1 0)— (1 2)


                   0, Ct° = n(Wt   +                          0.   That is, if the consumer does not   care
imply that c!i =                       Ptkt) and    kt+ 1 =


about the utility of his children, then he will consume the family's entire income, including his


children's wages. He would neither        save nor allocate        any current consumption to his children.


Clearly, this allocation would imply a negative bequest. As shown in section II, the consumer


will make a positive bequest if    6   is sufficiently large.


 Because   the optimal   consumption and capital accumulation decision rules are linear in kt, it is


easy   to aggregate these rules to obtain

                    cY = [sp(1_6a)/(1_+6p)]1KU                                                               (13)

                           =                                                                                 (14)
                               R1-p)(1_6a)I(1_+6p)]qK°
                  t+i =        Ptt°                                                                          (15)


   By distinguishing an individual family's holding of capital, kt, from average               capital per

worker, Kt, I have allowed for cross—sectional variation in kt. Observe that with the assumed

specification of preferences and technology, the cross—sectional distribution of capital remains

fixed over time. More precisely, dividing (1 2) by (1 5) yields kt+ 1 /Kt+ i = k/K1 so that any
                                                  7



 initial inequality in the distribution of capital is preserved forever.



  I. The Nonnegativity Constraint on Bequests

    The formal analysis to this point has ignored any nonnegativity constraint on bequests. In

 this section we determine how strong the bequest motive must be in order to be operative, i.e.,

 for the non- negativity constraint to be non- binding. Let t° be the disposable resources

available to an old consumer in period t and let bt be the bequest left by this consumer so that

                               bt = t° - Ct°                                                    (16)
    Suppose that there is a permanent tax and transfer system which taxes wage income at rate t

and uses the tax revenues t to finance a lump-sum transfer of ntWt to each old consumer in

period t. If t s positive, then the tax and transfer scheme is a pay-as-you-go social security

system. Because labor supply is inelastic, the tax is non-distortionary. Furthermore, since the

taxes paid by the young consumers in each family are equal to the transfers received by the old

consumers in that family, this scheme has no effect on the present value of taxes paid by any

family. Therefore, if the bequest motive is always operative, then the path of consumption and

capital accumulation is invariant to c. The optimal consumption and capital accumulation rules

presented for the artificial decision problem is section I continue to hold in the presence of this

tax and transfer scheme.

   The disposable resources of an old consumer consist of the gross return on his capital as well

as the fiscal subsidy he receives so that

                           = n*tKt{(1—a)tKt+ Qkt}                                               (17)
Substituting (11) and (17) into (16) yields an expression for the bequest that an old consumer

in period t would like to leave

           = (1—p+sp)—1 IKt' {(1—cx)[tSO— (1—)(1—i)] + aS(kt/Kt)}                               (18)
The desired bequest will be positive if and only if the term in curly brackets on the right hand

side of (1 8) is positive. Recall that in an equilibrium in which all families have operative

bequests, each farnilys kt/kt is constant over time so that the condition that the right hand side
                                                8



of (1 8) be poeitive is time- invariant.

   It is convenient to express the condition that the bequest motive be operative in terms of how

strong the bequest motive must be as measured by 6. Define 6 = 6 (t, kt/Kt ) where

             6°(c, kt/Kt) = (1 -a)( I -)( 1 -)/[a kt/Kt + (1 -a)J                             (1 9)

Observe that 6 > 60 is a necessary and sufficient condition for the right hand side of (1 8) to be

positive. Therefore, if 6 ' 6°(i, kt/Kt) for all relevant values of kt/Kt, then the bequest

motive is operative for all families.



III. Inoperative Bequests

   In this section I analyze the dynamic behavior of an economy in which the bequest motive is

not operative. It might appear that to analyze an economy with an inoperative bequest motive,

one can simply analyze the behavior of a standard Diamond (1 965) model. However, in general,

this strategy would not be appropriate because it is possible that if though the bequest motive is

currently inoperative, it may become operative at some date in the future. Therefore, to

describe the dynamics of an economy with a currently inoperative bequest motive, I must use a

procedure that allows for the possibility that the bequest motive will be operative at some

future date(s). It turns out that for the particular preferences and technology assumed in this

paper, the bequest motive will always be operative or will always be inoperative in a

representative consumer economy, but this is a result to be derived from studying the model and

should not be assumed at the outset.

   The decision problem facing an old consumer in period t can be solved using the value

function. Indeed, the functional equation (8) applies to consumers with inoperative bequest

motives. However, because the constraint bt 0 is binding, the solution to the functional

equation V(kt, Ipt, K) differs from that in (9). It can be verified that the value function in this

case is

          V(k,q,K) = (1-p)ln[(l-a)tKt + aktJ + dlnK1 + H(Ipt) + E                             (20)
where             d = ISa— (l-a)(1-)1/(1-cz6)
                                                       9



                H(%pt) = [1 — + 6 + 6d]ln t + 6                        1


and E is an urnmportant constant which depends on the parameters of preferences and technology

as well as on the tax rate t.

   Using the value function in (20) it is straightforward to derive the optimal consumption and

capital accumulation for an individual family with capital per worker

                 cY = (1-a)(1-c)1(a+(1_a)t)/(a+(1_a)c)]qtKta                                                   (21)

                 ct°/n =      g0/n =             11 akt+ (1 -a)tKt)                                            (22)

                 nkt+i =      1a(1_a)(1_)(1_t)/(a+(l_a)t)Jqa1Ka                                                (23)
With a   binding constraint on bequests, the consumption of each            old consumer   is equal   to his

disposable income           If there is cross   -sectional variation       in y', and if all consumers face


binding nonnegativity      constraints on bequests, then there will of course         be cross—sectional

variation in   Ct°;   however, there   will be no cross-sectional variation in the consumption of


young consumers or in the accumulation of capital for the next period.               Any cross-sectional

variation in   wealth is eliminated in one period.     The reason for       this strong result is that   the only

source of cross-sectional variation is the variation in the initial           holdings of capital. If all

consumers leave zero bequests, then this inequality in the distribution of wealth is not


transmitted to subsequent generations. It should be noted that this result contrasts sharply with


the result   that under   operative bequests any inequality in the distribution of wealth is preserved


forever.


  Aggregate    consumption and    capital accumulation are easily      calculated from (21) -         (23) to     be


                      C = (1—a)(1-e)[(a+(1-a)t)/ (a+(1_a)t)JipK1a                                              (2'1)


                  Cf/n =        tKt°[ a+(1-ct)t]                                                               (25)

                  nKt+ = fa(1—a)(1—p)(1 -t)/(a+(1—a)))ptKt'                                                    (26)




IV. The Nonnegativity Constraint on Bequests


   I now determine      under what   conditions the nonnegativty constraint on bequests will be


binding. Formally, I could derive the optimal consumption and capital accumulation rules by
                                                10



substituting (1) and (2) into (20) and then performing the indicated maximization in the

functional equation (8). Letting G be the Lagrange rnultipher associated with the constraint bt

= t° - O 0, the Kuhn—Tucker conditions are

                  p/c1!J = 6a(i—p)/[(1—cz)tKt+i + akt+ 11/n                                   (27)

               (1-)/ct° = 6a(1-p)/1(1—a)cKt+i + akt+iJ/n2 +                                   (28)

               Ot( t° - Ct°) = 0                                                              (29)

                             oo                                                               (30)
Conditions (27) and (28) are obtained by differentiating with respect to     and ct°,

respectively. Substituting (27) into (28) yields the simpler expression

               (1-P)/ct° =               + °t                                                 (31)
When the nonnegativity constraint is strictly binding, the Lagrange multiplier at is positive. In

this case, (31) indicates that the appropriately-weighted marginal utility of the old consumers

consumption exceeds the appropriately-weighted marginal utility of the young consumers

current consumption. Thus, the appropriately-weighted sum of utilities could be increased if

some consumption could be shifted from the young consumer to the old consumer by a negative

bequest. However, because the nonnegativity constraint is binding, this reallocation is not

possible.

   When the non—negativity constraint binds, C10 =      and >0 so that (31) implies that

                        (1-)ctY > 6p°/n                                                       (32)
Substituting (1 7) and (21) into (32) motivates the definition of SC,the cntic& value of the

bequest motive parameter, as     = SC(t,k1/K1) where

               L(1—p)(1-a)(1—t)/(o÷(1—a)t)JxI(a+(i-a)t)/(ak1/K1+(1—a)t)] (33)
Observe that 6 < S'(t,k1/K1) is a necessary and sufficient condition for (32) to hold. This

condition is applicable in an equilibrium in which all old consumers face binding non— negativity

constraints.



V. Dynamic Efficiency
                                                 11




        , Mankiw, Summers and Zeckhauser (1 986) have shown that if, in a competitive

stochastic economy, the rate of return on some asset is always less than the growth rate of the

aggregate capital stock, then the economy is dynamically inefficient in the sense that it suffers

from an inefficient overaccumulation of capital. If the rate of return on some asset always

exceeds the growth rate of the aggregate capital stock, then the economy is dynamically efficient.

   To determine whether the economy is dynamically efficient, observe from (7) and (1 5) that

the growth rate of the aggregate capital stock in the economy with operative bequests, 610, is

                         (nK4.1/K)° = 6                                                        (31)
where the superscript      denotes the equilibrium value of a variable in the economy with

operative bequests. Under the assumption that S is less than 1, it follows immediately from

(34) that P0 >         for all t, and hence the economy with operative bequests is dynamically

efficient. Of course, the dynamic efficiency of the economy in which the bequest motive is

always operative is to be expected because the consumers behave as if they have infinite

horizons.

  The growth rate of the aggregate capital stock in the economy without bequests, Gtc,       be

calculated from (7), (19) and (26) tobe

                 61c      (nKt+ 1 ,K1)c = 8O(,1) pc                                            (35)
where the superscript "c" denotes the equilibrium value of a variable in the economy with

constrained bequests. Equation (35) implies that the ratio Gtc/Ptc is constant and equal to

60(i,i). If 6°(t,i) is less than or equal to one, then the economy without operative bequests is

efficient; if S°(t,i) is greater than one, the economy is inefficient. Because in this model

dynamic inefficiency implies 6°(t,1)> 1 end because a positive bequest requires 6 '

there is no admissable vlaue of 6 under with bequests will be positive if the no—bequest economy

is inefficient. This result was originally derived by Weil (1 984). WeiVs result is more

general in that it is not restricted to logarithmic utility and Cobb—Douglas production functions;

however, his result is less general in that he did not consider stochastic economies and, more

importantly, his result could not be applied everywhere along the transition path.
                                                  12




VI. Bequests in the Absence of Fiscal Transfers

   In this section I examine bequest behavior in the competitive economj without fiscal

transfers (c = 0). Observe from (1 9) and (33) that when t = 0

              6°(0, kt/Kt) = 6c(0,kt/Kt) = (I -a)( I —p)Kt/(a kt)                                (36)
Although the critical values 6°(i, kt/Kt) and 8c(1,kt/Kt) are not, in general, equal to each

other, equation (36) states that in the absence of taxes, these critical values are equal for all

values of kt/Kt. The critical value is a declining function of kt/Kt which illustrates that a

stronger bequest motive is required in order to induce a poorer consumer to leave a positive

bequest.

     The critical values of the bequest parameter were derived under the alternative

assumptions that all consumers have operative bequest motives or that all consumers face

binding nonnegativit constraints on their bequests. However, if there is a non-degenerate

cross—sectional distribution of capital holding, then there is a range of values of 6 for which

neither of these assumptions is satisfied. This range depends on the range of values of          in

the population as illustrated in Figure 1. If 6 is greater than (1 -a)( 1 -)Kt/aktm111, where

km is the minimum value of kt, then the bequest is operative for all families and hence the




            i—':'.(1—E)




                                                                 E;(O) k /          cia.. k K)




                                                                                      I.. IV
                                                                                      .t •.t
                                             Fiqure 1
                                                   13



 Ricardmn Equivalence Theorem holds. This range of values of 6 and the corresponding values of

 kt/Kt are shown in the shaded region of Figure 1 labelled Picardian Equivalence. Alternatively,

 if the bequest motive is sufficiently weak so that 6 is less than (1 —a)( 1 _)K/okmax , not even

 the richest families in the economy will leave positive bequests. In this case, there will be no

 bequests. As discussed earlier, if there are no positive bequests, then any inequality in the

distribution of capital is eradicated completely after one period and kt/Kt equals one for all

families in subsequent periods.



VU. The Effects of Taxes and Transfers in a Representative Consumer Economy

    In this section we analyze the effects of permanent changes in C, the tax rate on labor income

which finances pay—as—you-go social security. For simplicity I consider only representative

consumer economies, i.e., economies in which the cross-sectional distribution of wealth is

degenerate so that kt/Kt      1 for all families. It follows immediately from (1 9) and (33) that if

kt/Kt =1 ,the critical values of the bequest parameter, 60 and S, are equal to each other.

   To derive the stochastic process governing the evolution of the capital stock in the economy

with operative bequests, substitute (7) into (1 5) and take logarithms to obtain

                  in Kt+ 10 = inS + ln(a/n) + a in Kt°                in                       ()
The unconditional mean of the aggregate capital stock per worker, Eon K°}, is equal to (inS +

in(a/n) + E{ln 'p}]/(l -a) where E{ln qs} is the unconditional mean of in qi.

    If the bequest motive is not operative, then it follows from (7) and (35) that

               ln Kt+ 1 C =     In 6°(i,i) + in(a/n) + cx in Ktc + in                          (38)
The stochastic process followed by the capital stock in the absence of bequests ,(38), is identical

to the stochastic process followed by the capital stock the presence of bequests, (37), except

thettheunconchtion& mean,E{lnK9,isequalto[inS°(c,1) + ln(a/n) + E{lnU}JI(1-a)
rather thanto E1n6+ ln(a/n) + E{lnqz}J1(1-a).

   Now consider the effects of permanent changes in t on the stochastic process for capital.

According to (37), if the bequest motive is operative, then the stochastic process for capital is
                                                   11



  rnverianl to t, as predicted by the Pcerdien Equivalence Theorem, If the bequest motive is

  inoperative, then according to (38) all autocovariances of the stochastic process for capit& are

  invariant to c. However, since 6°(t,1) is a decreasing function of t, the unconditional mean of

  in Kt is a decreasing function of t. Thus, if the bequest motive is inoperative, then a permanent

  increase in pay-es-you-go social security reduces the long—run expected value of in Kt.

  However, if the tax rate t becomes sufficiently large, then eventually old consumers will have

  sufficiently large disposable resources that the bequest motive becomes operative. At this point,

  further increases in t would have no effect.

        The effects of changes in tare illustrated in Figure 2.



                 (1—cc.:t(1—)
                      U




                                                                                          T
                                            1*
                                                                        1
                                                 Fquro 2


     Define

                                exp[(1-a)E{lnK} - ln(a/n)-E(ln'p}]                               (39)
- &d observe that i is an increasing function of the unconditional expectation of in K. If the

  bequest motive is operative, then, as discussed above, i is equal to Sand S >

  Alternatively, if the bequest motive is not operative, then i is equal to S°(t,l) endS <S°(C,l).

  Therefore, we have
                                                  15



                                = max[6,8°(t,l)J                                                (40)
 The heavy hne in Figure shows the value of t as a function of the tax rate . This figure is drawn

 under the assumption that in the absence of taxes, the bequest motive is inoperative. This

 assumption is illustrated in the figure by the fact that 6°(0,1) > 6. As the tax rate t is increased

 from zero, the value of i, and hence the expected long— run capital stock, falls monotonically as

 predicted from previous analyses of the Diamond model. Eventually when t reaches t, the old

 consumers are receiving large enough transfers that the bequest motive now becomes operative.

 Any increases in t beyond t will have no effect on the stochastic behavior of the capital stock.




VIII. Conclusion

    Barros (1 974) formulation of intergenerationally altruistic consumers has become the

basis for a widely used framework to study competitive economies with overlapping generations

of consumers. Much of the subsequent work in this tradition has been conducted in deterministic

models with a representative consumer in each generation, and the bequest motive is often

simply assumed to be operative. The model in this paper was developed to relax these three sets

of restrictions with the goal of understanding channels by which lump—sum taxes and transfers

can affect economic activity. I derived conditions for the bequest motive to be operative and

expressed these conditions in two different ways: first, I expressed the conditions in terms of

the perarneterc of preterencec and technology; then, a in Weil (1 Q84), I expreed the€e

conditions in terms of the rate of return on capital and the growth rate of the capital stock in an

economy without bequests.

   After determining conditions under which the altruistic bequest motive will be operative, I

then examined the effects of a pay-as—you—go social security system financed by a proportional

tax on (exogenous) wage income. If the bequest motive is initially inoperative, then the

intreduction of social security increases the consumption of old consumers and reduces the

unconditional capital stock. Further increases in social security will continue to reduce the
                                                16



unconditional capital stock until eventually old consumers receive a large enough transfer that

the bequest motive becomes operative. Once this point is reached, further increases in social

security have no effect on consumption or capital accumulation.

   An additional feature of the model examined in this paper is that we can examine an economy

with cross—sectional variation in the distribution of capital holdings. If the bequest motive is

operative for all families, then, in the particular model examined in this paper, the initial

inequality in the distribution of capital holdings is preserved forever. By contrast, if the

bequest motive is inoperative, then any inequality in capital holdings is eradicated after one

generation.

   This paper departs from the representative consumer framework and presents conditions

which guarantee that the bequest motive will always be operative for all consumers or,

alternatively, wifl always be inoperative for afl consumers. An interesting extension of this

research would be to analyze the behavior of an economy in which some consumers have

operative bequest motives while other consumers face binding constraints on bequests. At this

ste, we can say that the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem would not hold in such an economy, but

the effects of fiscal policy in such an economy merit further study.
                                          References




Abel, Andrew B., "Operative Gift and Bequest Motives,' mirneo, The Wharton School of the
     University of Pennsylvania, March 1 987.

                 "The Failure of Rrnardian Equivalence under Progressive Wealth Taat ion,"
    Journal of Public Economics, 30, 1 , June 1 986, 11 7- 1 28.

              N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence ft Summers and Richard J. Zeckhauser, "Assessing
    Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper No. 2097, December 1 986.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth'," Journal of Political Economnu, 82,
    November/December 1 974, 1 095- 111 7.

Barsky, Robert, N. Gregory Mankiw and Steven Zeldes, "Ricardian Consumers with Keynesian
    Propensities," American Economic Review, 76, '1, September 1 986, 676-691.

Cukiermnon, Alex, "Uncertain Lifetimes and the Ricardian Equivalence Proposition," mimeo,
    Tel-Aviv University, 1 986.

Diamond, Peter A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American Economic Review,
    55,Decemnber 1965,1126-1150.

Drazen, Allan, "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a Lifecycle Model," Journal of
    Political Economu, 86, June 1 978, 505-51 6.

Feldstein, Martin S. , "The Effects of Fiscal Policies when Incomes are Uncertain: A
    Contradiction of Ricardian Equivalence," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
    Paper No. 2062, November 1 986.

Weil,Philippe, "Love Thy Children: Reflections on the Barro Debt Neutrality Theorem,"
    mimeo, Harvard University, 1 984, forthcoming in Journal of Monetaru Economics.

              "Overlapping Families of Infinitely Lived Agents," mimneo, 1 986.
