NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KILLER INCENTIVES:
STATUS COMPETITION AND PILOT PERFORMANCE DURING WORLD WAR II
Philipp Ager
Leonardo Bursztyn
Hans-Joachim Voth
Working Paper 22992
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22992

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

For helpful comments we thank Ran Abramitzky, Karol Borowiecki, Ernesto Dal Bó, Daniel
Chen, Paul David, Thomas Dohmen, David Dorn, Barry Eichengreen, Armin Falk, Ernst Fehr,
Raquel Fernandez, Joe Ferrie, Bruno Frey, Paul Gertler, Morgan Hardy, Mitch Hoffman, Simon
Jäger, Patrick Kline, Jonathan Leonard, David Levine, Jason Long, Joel Mokyr, Petra Moser,
Susanne Neckermann, Ignacio Palacios Huerta, Michael Peters, Konrad Raff, Debraj Ray,
Christy Romer, Mara Squiccarini, David Stasavage, Noam Yuchtman, and Fabrizio Zilibotti as
well as seminar audiences at the AEA meetings, Academy of Behavioral Economics, Bonn,
NYU, Northwestern, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UC Berkeley Haas, Southern Denmark, and Zurich.
We are indebted to Veit Scherzer for general advice and generous help in dealing with German
World War II data, and to Jim Perry and Tony Wood for sharing their data. We thank Jacob
Miller and Lukas Leucht for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Philipp Ager, Leonardo Bursztyn, and Hans-Joachim Voth. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Killer Incentives: Status Competition and Pilot Performance during World War II
Philipp Ager, Leonardo Bursztyn, and Hans-Joachim Voth
NBER Working Paper No. 22992
December 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. D03,J20,N14,Z00
ABSTRACT
A growing theoretical and empirical literature shows that public recognition can lead employees
to exert greater effort. However, status competition is also associated with excessive expenditure
on status goods, greater likelihood of bankruptcy, and more risk taking by money managers. This
paper examines the effects of recognition and status competition jointly. In particular, we focus
on the spillover effects of public recognition on the performance and risk taking of peers. Using
newly collected data on monthly “victory” scores of more than 5,000 German pilots during World
War II, we find that status competition had important effects: After the German armed forces
bulletin mentioned the accomplishments of a particular fighter pilot, his former peers performed
considerably better. This outperformance varied across skill groups. When a former squadron
peer was mentioned, the best pilots tried harder, scored more, and died no more frequently; in
contrast, average pilots won only a few additional victories but died at a significantly higher rate.
Hence our results show that the overall efficiency effect of nonfinancial rewards can be
ambiguous in settings where both risk and output affect aggregate performance.
Philipp Ager
Department of Buisness and Economics
University of Southern Denmark
Campusvej 55
5230 Odense M, Denmark
phag@sam.sdu.dk
Leonardo Bursztyn
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bursztyn@uchicago.edu

Hans-Joachim Voth
University of Zurich
Department of Economics
Schönberggasse 1
CH-8001 Zurich
and CREI
voth@econ.uzh.ch

2

I. INTRODUCTION
Humans crave recognition. In the Theory of Moral Sentiments, Adam Smith defined
“bettering our condition” as “to be observed, to be attended to, to be taken notice of
with sympathy … and approbation.” From baseball’s Hall of Fame to the
Congressional Medal of Honor, from the fellowships of scholarly societies to the
employee‐of‐the‐month award, symbolic rewards exploit the human need for
approbation as a motivating force. By creating an artificial scarcity, awards are meant
to spur effort and increase output (Bénabou and Tirole 2003, 2006; Frey 2007;
Moldovanu et al. 2007; Besley and Ghatak 2008).1 Empirical evidence from the field
and from experimental settings suggests that nonpecuniary rewards generally lead to
reduced absenteeism, greater effort, and higher accuracy (Markham et al. 2002;
Kosfeld and Neckermann 2011; Ashraf et al. 2014a; Chan et al. 2014).2
At the same time, “[a] medal glitters, but it also casts a shadow” (Winston
Churchill).3 Competing for awards and recognition is similar to other forms of status
competition, from conspicuous consumption to prominent donations (Veblen 1973;
Glazer and Konrad 1996; Frank 2010; Layard 2005). A recent literature has shown
that relative status concerns are real and can have negative effects. The neighbors of
lottery winners spend much more on cars (Kuhn et al. 2011) and face substantially
higher risks of bankruptcy (Agarwal et al. 2016).4 Consumers of financial services
demand the same products purchased by their peers because of social learning and
because consumers are affected by the utility of what others have (Bursztyn et al.
2014). Similar effects also obtain in the workplace. Card et al. (2012) and Ashraf et al.
(2014b) show that job satisfaction and performance suffer from direct rankings and
explicit comparisons with others in the same group.5 The net effect of competing for
relative standing and symbolic awards may be ambiguous: the result may be to
“crowd in” effort, giving rise to social multiplier effects; alternatively, competition
effects may crowd out effort as a function of relative rank or innate skill (Frey and
Oberholzer‐Gee 1997; Dohmen 2008; Ariely et al 2009; Apesteguia and Palacios‐
Huerta 2010; Gonzalez‐Dias and Palacios‐Huerta 2016).6

Career concerns and a desire for reciprocity may drive the incentive effects of symbolic awards
(Dewatripont et al. 1999a, 1999b; Fehr and Schmidt 1999).
2 Neckermann et al. (2014) find that employees continue to perform strongly after receiving an award.
Malmendier and Tate (2009) fin the opposite – superstar CEOs significantly underperform after
receiving major awards.
3 Cited in Knowles (2014, p. 215).
4 Cf. also Luttmer 2005. Bertrand and Morse (2016) show that, in US states with rising inequality, the
bottom 80% spend a higher proportion of their income. Relatedly, Borowiecki and Kavetsos (2015)
show that more competition between composers was associated with higher mortality.
5 Charness et al. (2014) show that informing individuals of their relative performance may increase
unethical behavior.
6 Ashraf et al. (2014b) find that explicit rankings undermine effort whereas awards increase them.
Schwarzwald et al. (1992) also report that social comparisons increase absenteeism, and Greenberg
1

3

In this paper we look at the joint effects of recognition and status competition. The
focus is on the spillover effects of public recognition on the performance and risk
taking of peers. We use new monthly data on victory claims for all German pilots
with at least one such claim in World War II – a data set that includes the highest‐
scoring aces of all time. Aerial combat is an ideal setting for analyzing the incentive
effects of public recognition: the stakes are high, effort is extremely difficult to
observe, and principal–agent problems are rife. In a single‐seater fighter plane, the
pilot operates alone; and once a battle is joined, there is no effective control of
individual planes by superior officers. Each pilot was responsible for deciding
whether to pursue victory or break off contact. Pilots could try to boost their score by
flying more days a week, flying additional sorties per day, and taking extra risks
during missions.
Although it cannot be known ex ante whether status competition will sharpen or
instead dull incentives there is ample anecdotal evidence that such competition was a
strong motivating force. During the Battle of Britain in the summer of 1940, for
example, two German aces – Adolf Galland and Werner Mölders – were neck and
neck in terms of total victories (Galland 1993). When Mölders was ordered to confer
with the head of the Luftwaffe, Hermann Göring, he went to Berlin for three days of
meetings but only on the condition that Galland be grounded for the same number of
days. Remarkably, at a time when the air battle against Britain hung in the balance,
Göring (himself a WWI fighter ace) accepted that one of his best pilots would be
grounded for no militarily justifiable reason.
We combine data on social distance in pre‐existing networks with data on the timing
of awards to demonstrate that public recognition systematically crowded in effort.
Fellow pilots tried harder after another fighter pilot received public recognition,
significantly increasing their score of aerial victories during the month in question.
This effect was especially pronounced for the best pilots, among whom competition
was intense, and for those who were closest (in terms of social distance) to the pilot
receiving recognition. To examine the effects of such public recognition, we focus on
mentions by name in the German armed forces daily bulletin (Wehrmachtbericht).7 We
take this approach for several reasons: First, mentions were rare and were reserved
for recognizing spectacular accomplishments (e.g., a very high number of enemy
ships sunk, tanks destroyed, or fighters shot down, either cumulatively or over a
period of time). Second, mentions became known instantly over a wide area since
they were broadcast on the radio, published in the press, and distributed at
command posts throughout German territory. Third, mentions in the daily bulletin
were largely unexpected; there was no straightforward rule that “entitled” a pilot to
(1987) and Cohn et al. (2014) find that such comparisons reduce effort. Competing against a superstar
(e.g., Tiger Woods in a golf tournament) may likewise reduce effort (Brown 2011).
7 We draw on Wegmann (1982), an edited compendium of all Wehrmachtbericht issues.

4
being mentioned. Fourth, mentions in the Wehrmachtbericht were a fleeting form of
recognition – providing the recipient with nothing more tangible than a short‐term
elevation of status in the eyes of others. For all these reasons, we consider those
mentions in the daily bulletin to be a useful source for identifying variation as we
analyze the effects of status competition.
The top panel of Figure 1 shows the average victory score for aces and non‐aces
when a former peer (from the same squadron) is mentioned in the daily armed forces
bulletin. We exclude peers still serving in the same squadron in order to avoid
contamination from correlated shocks. Aces always scored more, but they increased
their monthly victory rate by 1.1 victories (over the base level of 1.9) when a fellow
pilot was mentioned in the bulletin. In addition, non‐aces scored 0.12 victories more
than their baseline of 0.23.
[insert Figure 1 about here]
Pilots who are no longer serving in the same unit are unlikely be exposed to
correlated shocks. The results hold when we impose a “minimum distance”
requirement between the two units. We interpret these effects as being driven by
competition for status in the spirit of “keeping up with the Joneses”. Moreover, we
provide evidence ruling out a variety of alternative interpretations: learning about
one’s own type, common shocks to peers, joint learning of particular skills in the
past, and differences in equipment available to pilots.
As the monthly rate of aerial victories by peers increased, so did the casualty rate.
This raises the question of whether social multiplier effects may have compromised
the Luftwaffe’s overall fighting efficiency. The best pilots reacted to awards
bestowed on competitors by increasing their own performance, and their exit rate
actually declined (a little).8 Yet even though average pilots also tried harder, they
paid a high price in the form of much greater casualty rates (Panel B, Figure 1). We
are not in a position to assess how the “mentions” system affected efficiency overall,
but there are some reasons to believe that it may have reduced the German air force’s
effectiveness.
Our work relates to the literatures on tournaments and peer effects. There are strong
theoretical grounds for believing that – in a single‐shot setting – tournaments can
induce greater effort from participants (Lazear and Rosen 1981; Green and Stokey
1983; Nalebuff and Stiglitz 1983a, 1983b). However, many tournaments are dynamic
in nature. Scholars have increasingly examined the effects of information release in
such a setting (Lizzeri et al. 2002; Yildirim 2005; Aoyagi 2007; Ederer 2010; Goltsman
and Mukherjee 2011). Genakos and Pagliero (2012) show how risk taking in
Once we analyze exit including controls using survival analysis, we find a (small and insignificant)
increase.
8

5
professional weightlifting competitions follows an inverted‐U curve as a function of
relative standing. Fershtman and Gneezy (2011) similarly find that increasing the
stakes of a tournament can lead to more effort yet also to quitting by lower‐ranked
competitors.9 Our own results indicate that status concerns can indeed promote risk
taking, and we demonstrate this dynamic in a setting with high stakes (and no
tangible upside, financially). Far from pilots “giving up”, though, we find additional
effort exerted and greater risks taken – with deadly consequences.
The rich literature on peer effects studies how collaborating with others affects
worker effort and performance (Falk and Ichino 2006; Mas and Moretti 2009;
Bandiera et al. 2010). Peer effects are typically driven by knowledge spillovers, task
complementarities, or social pressure. In our setting, the first two of these drivers can
essentially be ruled out. It is worth remarking also that evidence for peer pressure is
relatively strong for low‐skilled individuals but is distinctly mixed among the highly
skilled (Jackson and Bruegmann 2009; Azoulay et al. 2010; Waldinger 2012). In this
paper we offer an example of social interactions creating greater incentives to
perform among highly skilled (and motivated) individuals.
Finally, we contribute to the literature on the determinants of military performance.
Classic studies in military history have emphasized the importance of collaborative
efforts (Stouffer et al. 1949; McPherson 1997; Van Creveld 2007). Along these lines,
unit cohesion has been shown to be higher when soldiers are from similar
backgrounds. For instance, Costa and Kahn (2003) document lower rates of desertion
from units with low occupational and birthplace fragmentation; these authors also
report that survival rates in a prisoner‐of‐war camp were much higher for prisoners
embedded in richer social networks (Costa and Kahn 2007). In contrast to the
literature emphasizing the importance of joint production and unit cohesion in
military units, we emphasize the importance of individual incentives and of
competition.
Our results are of general interest despite the highly specific nature of this study. We
present novel evidence that the effects of symbolic rewards depend on social context.
Status competition can lead to a crowding in of effort. At the same time, high‐
powered incentives – in the form of public recognition – may backfire precisely
because concerns about status can induce too much risk taking. A clear analogy is the
performance incentive in the compensation that a financial institution pays to its
traders; in that case, the desire to be the “best” trader can lead to catastrophic
losses.10

For example, Brown (2011) shows that golf players underperform when competing against Tiger
Woods.
10 The closest paper to ours in spirit is the one by Brown et al. (1996), who show that relative
performance incentives can lead to excessive risk taking in asset management.
9

6
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides background on the German air
force during World War II and on the data we use. In Section III we present the main
findings, and Section IV discusses alternative channels and interpretations. We
conclude in Section V.
II. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DATA
In this section we describe our study’s setting: the organization of the German air
force in World War II; and its rise and fall as a fighting force. We also discuss the
sources and limitations of our data.
A. German air force during World War II
Aerial combat began during World War I. Initially, planes were unarmed. They
quickly evolved into specialized types, ranging from single‐seat fighters to bombers.
During that war, the highest‐scoring ace – the “Red Baron” Manfred von Richthofen
– notched 80 victories (Castan 2007). By the time World War II began, both fighters
and bombers had become faster and more powerful. The German air force had sent
planes and men to participate in the Spanish Civil War (on Franco’s side), gaining
valuable experience. There, the Luftwaffe carried out the first mass bombing of a
civilian target at Guernica in 1936. German air support was crucial for the ultimate
victory of the fascist forces (Westwell 2004).
The German air force was organized into air fleets composed of several flying corps.
The flying corps contained several wings (Geschwader), most of which comprised
three groups each consisting, in turn, of three or four squadrons (Staffel). Each
squadron had an authorized strength of twelve aircraft, but actual strength could be
as many as sixteen or as few as four or five aircraft (Stedman and Chappell 2002).
The German air force began the war in 1939 with 4,000 planes, including 1,200
fighters, and 880,000 men (Kroener et al. 1988). It had initially been designed for joint
arms operations; during the Blitzkrieg campaigns, it mostly operated as close air
support for the army. The wars against Poland, France, and Russia opened with
successful attacks on enemy air forces, destroying many planes on the ground. This
tactic ensured that the Luftwaffe quickly achieved air superiority. The only exception
before 1943 was defeat in the Battle of Britain. There, Germany’s failure to dominate
the skies ultimately led the planned invasion of the British Isles being called off.
By 1943, both personnel and the number of planes had approximately doubled (since
1939) to 2,000,000 men and some 7,000 planes (Kroener et al. 1988). As the Allied
bomber offensive against German cities gathered pace, ever more fighter units were
called back to defend the Reich. Air attacks on hydrogenation plants and on airframe
and aero‐engine factories threatened the Luftwaffe especially, and from 1943 onward
its efforts were devoted mainly to fending off the growing tide of bomber incursions.

7
Despite these efforts, German cities were quickly reduced to rubble as the strength of
British and American air forces continued to increase.
Having started the war with modern planes and a large air fleet, Germany first lost
its quantitative edge. Once it invaded Russia and US forces joined the fight, the
Luftwaffe was heavily outnumbered in all theatres of war. It eventually fell behind
also in terms of equipment quality; the outdated BF‐109 remained Germany’s main
fighter plane until the war ended. New planes with advanced technology, such as the
ME‐262 jet, arrived too late to make a difference. Pilot training suffered in addition.
Until 1942, German pilots received at least as much training as their Allied
counterparts; but by 1944, a typical German pilot accumulated less than half the
flying hours of UK and US pilots before being sent into combat (Murray 1996).
Loss rates rose to staggering heights. During January 1942, the air force lost 1.8% of
its fighter pilots; by May 1944, it was losing 25% of them every month (Evans 2009).
Destruction of planes was even more rapid. The Luftwaffe lost 785 planes in combat
(and another 300 in accidents, etc.) during the six months between May and
December 1940; between January and June 1944, it lost 2,855 aircraft in combat (plus
another 1,345 in accidents). Actual planes available relative to authorized strength
fell from 95% in January 1942 to 45% in September 1944 (Murray 1996). Nonetheless,
due to the prolific output of German armament factories, the actual number of
fighters in combat units rose until the end of 1944.
Air attacks against German cities may not have dented morale as much as British
planners had hoped, and “precision” daylight bombing by the US air force destroyed
much less industrial capacity than anticipated. Even so, the Anglo‐American air
offensive was clearly able to degrade substantially the German air force’s capabilities
– to the extent that the Normandy landings in the summer of 1944 were largely
unopposed from the air (Neillands 2001).
Although the Luftwaffe lost air superiority in the West from 1942–1943 onward, it
continued to be a match for the Red Air Force almost until the war’s end. Outdated
planes like the Stuka dive bomber were withdrawn from Western theatres after 1942,
but they continued to operate successfully in the East until 1945. Better training and
better equipment gave German units an edge against Russian planes and pilots;
when it made an effort, the Luftwaffe could establish temporary air supremacy on
the Eastern Front. Not until late 1944 did it began to lose that ability as more and
more units were transferred to the Western Front.
B. Public recognition
A mention in the daily bulletin was among the highest forms of recognition given by
the German armed forces. A typical report would describe only major events at the
different fronts, listing gains and losses of territory or individual battles. Mentions

8
were rare: during the entire war, fewer than 1,200 men were recognized in this way
(Wegmann 1982) out of the 18 million German men who served.11 Mentions by name
were introduced in April 1940. One of the first soldiers receiving this recognition was
Erwin Rommel for his role in leading the German armoured thrust into France in the
spring of 1940. A typical example is Hans‐Joachim Marseille’s second mention on
June 18, 1942: “First Lieutenant Marseille shot down ten enemy planes in a 24 hour
period in North Africa, raising his total score of aerial victories to 101” (Wegmann
1982).
The Wehrmachtbericht was produced by the propaganda department within the
operations staff of the German armed forces and under the direction of General
Hasso von Wedel. Like all propaganda produced by the Third Reich, it skilfully
mixed truth and distortions to create support for the war and the regime (Scherzer
2005). Highlighting the superiority of German fighting men was an integral part of
this strategy.
Mentions in the daily bulletin were part of an elaborate system of awards and medals
operated by the German armed forces. Some were widely distributed, such as
“campaign medals” handed out to every soldier who participated in a particular
operation – one example is the Russia 1941 campaign medal, commonly known as
the “Order of the Frozen Flesh”. Some awards recognized particular skills or feats of
arms, such as the close‐combat badge and tank destruction badge. The primary
medals for valor were the Iron Cross (1st and 2nd class) and the Knight’s Cross. By
the end of the war, four additional types of the Knight’s Crosses had been
introduced. During World War II, about 3.3 million Iron Crosses 2nd class were
awarded but only 7,300 Knight’s Crosses, 890 Knight’s Crosses with Oak Leaves, 160
with Swords, 27 with Diamonds, and one with Golden Oak Leaves.
C. Data
The high command of the German air force (Oberkommando der Luftwaffe, OKL)
received fighter claims throughout the war. A special staff for recognition and
discipline was in charge of collecting and validating claimed aerial victories. Pilots
were required to file extensive documentation before a claim was recognized. The
OKL records contain information on every reported aerial victory of German fighter
pilots during WWII by wing (Geschwader), unit (Gruppe), squadron (Staffel), and
pilot’s name and rank as well as by the day, location (grid reference), type of
damage, witnesses, and type of the claimed aircraft.
German rules for counting a claim as an aerial victory were relatively demanding
(Caldwell 2012). Each claim had to be accompanied by a witness’ report confirming
There are 1,182 individual surnames in the Wehrmachtbericht. Because first names are not always
recorded, there could be as many as 1,739 soldiers mentioned (if each mention with an identical last
name is of a different subject).
11

9
either the destruction of the enemy plane (impact or explosion in the air) or that the
enemy pilot was seen bailing out. Many claims were not accepted, and rightly so.
There is some evidence of “over‐claiming”, by 50‐100% in some cases, on the part of
both the Western and German air forces (Caldwell 2012), when the records of
German and British squadrons are compared, for example. It was not unusual for
claims to be investigated further before being finally accepted or disallowed. This has
probably less to do with systematic dishonesty, and more with the highly volatile
conditions of air combat itself (Galland 1993).
Our database of German fighter pilots during WWII draws on two principal sources:
Jim Perry’s and Tony Wood’s Oberkommando der Luftwaffe combat claims list, and the
Kracker Luftwaffe Archive. 12 The OKL fighter claims list was extracted from
microfilms of the handwritten records of the Luftwaffe Personalamt stored at the
German Federal Archives (Bundesarchiv) in Freiburg. Because some OKL fighter
claims records did not survive the war, Tony Wood augmented the list with claims
from other published sources – such as Donald Caldwell’s (1996) JG26 war dairy – to
obtain a comprehensive list of German fighter claims for the years 1939–1945.
We clean the Perry–Wood fighter claims records by correcting typos (e.g., misspelled
names, incorrect rank or unit) and then construct a monthly panel by aggregating the
information for every pilot by month and year. This panel contains the number of
monthly victories per pilot together with pilots’ first and last name, rank, wing, unit,
and squadron. We then match the panel data with additional information from the
Kracker Luftwaffe Archive. Kracker’s archive consists of data collected from many
sources of detailed personal data on German fighter pilots, such as their war status
(e.g., killed in action, prisoner of war, WWII survivor) and for some pilots also the
starting date of their Luftwaffe career. Thus for every pilot in the sample we have
information on when he received an award, his war status, and how long he was
active during WWII. Our first observation of a pilot is typically when his first OKL
claim is filed; our database does not include pilots who never scored during combat.
Our analysis employs information based on day fighter pilots. This is because the
tasks and skills required of night fighter pilots were substantially different. Whereas
day fighters often battled against other fighter pilots, night fighters were mainly used
to intercept bombers (Murray 1996).
The sample is unbalanced and consists of more than 5,000 fighter pilots of the
German Luftwaffe that made at least one combat claim during WWII. Pilots are
observed for 19 months, on average, yielding a total of 96,127 observations. Of the
5,081 pilots in our data, 3,242 (or 64%) exit the sample – which means they are not in
For more information about Tony Wood’s combat claims list and the Kracker Luftwaffe Archive, see
https://web.archive.org/web/20130928070316/http://lesbutler.co.uk/claims/tonywood.htm
and
http://www.aircrewremembered.com/KrackerDatabase/.
12

10
the next month’s data set (provided the war has not yet ended). We count these exits
as casualties. Spot checks suggest that the vast majority of cases so identified do
indeed reference pilots who were either killed or severely wounded.
D. Pilot performance
The German air force in WWII counted among its ranks the highest‐scoring aces of
all time. During the war, 409 pilots scored 40 or more victories: 379 were from
Germany, 10 from the Soviet Union, 7 from Japan, 6 from Finland, one from the
United States, and one from the British Commonwealth. The best‐scoring fighter
pilot in history was Erich Hartmann, who had 352 aerial victories. The highest‐
scoring non‐German ace was Ilmari Juutilainen from Finland, with 94 victories; the
best‐performing Soviet, Commonwealth, and American pilots were credited with
(respectively) 66, 40, and 38 kills. Figure 2 plots the distribution and nationality of
WWII aces.
[insert Figure 2 about here]
The high concentration of aces in the German air force reflects three factors, of which
the first was its “fly till you die” rule. While Western air forces rotated pilots out of
active duty after a fixed number of sorties, German pilots continued to fly until they
were shot down.13 Second, the poor quality of planes and training in the USSR at the
start of WWII gave German pilots great opportunities to rack up victory claims.
Third, German pilots had much greater experience vis‐à‐vis enemy air forces during
the conflict’s early stages, a result of their participation in the Spanish Civil War
(Bungay 2001).
Altogether, German air force records document 53,008 aerial victories. These are
credited kills, not simply claims. In an average month, the average German pilot
scored 0.55 victories and faced a 3.4% risk of exiting the sample permanently (which
was practically synonymous with death). In the East (resp., West), the victory rate
was 0.97 (0.32) and the exit rate 0.029 (0.037). In other words, the exchange ratio (the
number of enemy planes shot down before a pilot was lost) was 33 in the East and 8.6
in the West.14
The distribution of scores was extremely uneven. The top‐scoring 110 pilots achieved
as many aerial victories as the bottom 4,900 pilots combined. In an average month,
the vast majority (more than 80%) of pilots failed to score even a single victory. At
the same time, other pilots quickly notched up large numbers of victories: Emil Lang

The number of total sorties is a key factor in skewing the distribution of victory scores (Neillands
2001).
14 Ours is not the standard definition of the exchange ratio, which normally measures either planes for
planes or pilots for pilots. Here we calculate the number of enemy planes shot down in exchange for
every pilot lost.
13

11
shot down 68 enemy planes in October 1943, and Hans‐Joachim Marseille scored 17
victories in a single day (September 1, 1942). Figure 3 graphs the number of monthly
victories per pilot by the quantiles of the distribution.
[insert Figure 3 about here]
There was a large seasonal component to air combat. The summer season – when
ground operations were common and hours of daylight were long – also saw
substantial spikes in aerial activity; the winter months brought a lull in fighting.
Figure 4 plots the mean victory and exit (death) rates over time. The time‐series
peaks mostly coincide, except for the end of the war when the victory rate
plummeted and the exit rate spiked.
[insert Figure 4 about here]
E. Organization and training
The Luftwaffe was divided into air fleets (Luftflotten), each of which was responsible
for a particular geographical area. The number of fleets rose from four to seven
during World War II. Air corps within each air fleet controlled the planes and men;
air “districts” were responsible for infrastructure.
The air corps consisted of wings (Geschwader) of approximately 100 planes each. The
wings were organized by function, with different Geschwader for fighter planes, long‐
range bombers, dive bombers, reconnaissance, and so forth. Each wing contained
several groups, all dedicated to the same specialized function.
There is no evidence that better graduate of the air combat schools were sent to elite
squadrons. Allocation of new pilots to units was largely random, driven by
operational needs, recent losses, and – sometimes – personal connections (Caldwell
1996). Pilots were trained to fly before they received training in more specialized
skills such as aerial combat. They would first attend “boot camp”, which emphasized
physical fitness and military discipline. After some basic training in aeronautics, they
would then move on to an elementary flying school. Once they had their pilot’s
wings (after 100–150 hours), prospective fighter pilots were sent to air combat
schools. Upon completing that course, the pilot would be attached to a squadron or
group in an operational training unit at the front. The plan was for them to learn
from experienced pilots before transferring to actual combat. Yet often – and
especially as Germany’s war situation worsened – training units were quickly sent
into battle. By 1943, newly trained German airmen received markedly fewer training
hours than their Western counterparts (Murray 1996).

12
III. MAIN RESULTS: INDIRECT EFFECTS OF PEER RECOGNITION
In this section, we examine how recognition of outstanding performance influenced
the monthly victory score of peers. We define peers as pilots who are of similar
quality, who served together, or who hail from the same regions.
A. Results by pilot quality
We first examine whether a good pilot being recognized via mentioning in the
Wehrmachtbericht changed the performance of other “good pilots” during the same
month. For that purpose, we estimate the following equation
(1)
Here vici,t is the victory score of pilot i at time t, Mentionp is an indicator variable set
equal to 1 if a Luftwaffe pilot is mentioned in the bulletin during month t (and set to
0 otherwise), Pi is the “performance bracket” to which a pilot belongs (i.e., bottom
80th percentile, 80th–90th percentile, 90th–95th percentile, 96th–99th percentile,
topmost percentile), X’ is a set of controls, and  is the variable of interest – namely,
the term for the interaction between pilot quality and the period with a pilot
mention. We control for pilot experience, aircraft type, front, and for the possibility
that the month of mention was itself unusual. We are interested in the interaction 
between the pilot quality percentile dummy Pi and the mention period dummy
Mentionp. If  is large and significant, then pilots in bracket Pi scored more during a
month in which one of their fellow pilots was recognized (the mentioned pilot is
excluded from the data.)
Table 1 reports the results. We find that all highly‐ranked pilots exhibit improved
performance during periods when an ace is mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht
dispatches. The additional outperformance – that is, beyond their outperformance
due to inherent higher quality – is substantial. Note also that the relative increase in
performance is greatest for the highest‐ranked pilots. For example, those in the upper
1st percentile increase their score in months of mentions by about two thirds of their
average whereas pilots in the 90th–95th percentile increase their scores by about a
fifth of their average.
[insert Table 1 about here]
At the lower end of the skill distribution we find that pilots (a) perform better overall
during periods when aces are mentioned but (b) underperform relative to higher
ranked‐pilots during mention periods.15 In Section D, we document that the exit rate
of low‐ranked pilots increased sharply during periods when peers were mentioned.
To see this, note that the mention period effect is positive and also larger than the interaction effect.
Average pilots perform less well than top pilots in average months, and that difference grows in
months of mentions – with the net effect still positive.
15

13

B. Past peers
The definition of fellow pilots in Table 1 is based on performance tiers only. The key
threat to identification is that the returns to being highly skilled (or extremely risk
tolerant) may be strongly time‐varying. Skilled pilots may all do well in a particular
month, resulting in a high number of victories – with one pilot then being mentioned
in the daily bulletin in the same month.
[insert Figure 5 about here]
Figure 5 illustrates our identification strategy. Instead of calling everyone a peer who
flies at the same time and then distinguishing them by their rank in the quality
distribution, we focus on pilots who flew with the mentioned pilot in the past but
have since been posted to another unit. Figure 5 presents the example of two pilots:
Günther Rall, one of the highest‐scoring aces of World War II; and Karl Gratz. From
Autumn 1941 until March 1943, they served together in Squadron 8 of Fighter Wing
52. Rall remained with the squadron when Gratz was transferred to the command
squadron (“Stab”) in Group II, Fighter Wing 2. Eventually Rall was moved to the
“Stab” of Group III, Fighter Wing 52. In August 1943, Rall was mentioned in the
Wehrmachtbericht. We therefore classify Gratz as a “past squadron peer” and compare
his performance in the month of Rall’s citation with other months.
Because we focus on past peers, our strategy has the advantage of being
uncontaminated by correlated shocks (e.g., a major offensive, good weather) that
could increase victory scores for everyone in the same unit. We estimate
(2)
where Pastpeeri, t is set to 1 if pilot i was a former peer of the pilot(s) mentioned at
time t (and is set to 0 otherwise). For example, for Karl Gratz, Pastpeer equals unity
for August 1943, when Günther Rall is mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht.
PastpeerX’ is a set of dummy variables – one for each eventually mentioned pilot –
indicating whether pilot i ever flew with a mentioned ace in the past. In the case of
Rall, this variable equals unity for all pilots who had flown with him in different
squadrons previously, even before August 1943. This allows us to control for pilots
with peers potentially being of a higher average quality. In the aggregate, pilots who
are peers of mentioned pilots do not perform notably better or worse than those who
never flew with mentioned pilots (see Figure A5 in the Appendix). We again exclude
pilots in the same squadron at the time of the mention.16
[insert Table 2 about here]
Peers of the pilots mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht do not always outperform, as the distribution
of fixed effects makes clear (see Figure A4).
16

14

Table 2 shows first that past peers from the same squadron reacted strongly during
periods when a former comrade is mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht. The variable’s
significance survives adding a large set of controls as well as squadron and time
fixed effects (columns 2–4).17 Using the most demanding specification, we check to
see if pilots in the same group also exhibited a bump in performance. Recall that
“groups” were larger units comprising three or four squadrons; they often (but not
always) operated from the same airfield. We find outperformance also for former
“group peers”, but the effect is smaller. Finally, we form even broader comparison
groups by tracking the location of every airfield from which German fighter units
operated during World War II (Appendix figure A2); we then use this information to
create a dummy variable for “base peers”. Many such peers would have been in the
same group, yet also other groups would sometimes have operated from the same
airfield. We continue to find an effect but again it is smaller. As the intensity of (past)
interaction declines, our regressions indicate progressively weaker effects from a
mention in the daily bulletin.
Our initial analysis suggested that outperformance amongst former peer was heavily
concentrated amongst the highest‐performing aces. We now subdivide our sample
into three groups – those below the 80th percentile of victories, those above the 80th,
and alternatively, above the 90th percentile. Table 3 reports the results. There is only a
small and insignificant coefficient for former peer mentions for the bottom 80% of the
sample – equivalent in size to about half of the Eastern front dummy. The top 20% of
pilots show outperformance by 0.76 victories in the month a former peer gets
mentioned; this is equivalent to a 70% boost relative to the baseline rate of scoring
(on the Western front). For the top 10%, effects are even larger. The more demanding
difference‐in‐difference specification for former peers thus confirms the results from
Figure 1 – it is the top aces who react most strongly to another pilot being publicly
recognized.
[insert Table 3 about here]

C. Birthplace peers
We interpret the effects of peer recognition as being driven by a desire to “keep up”
with one’s peers. In other words, the increase in the number of victories is compatible
with an interpretation that emphasizes status competition.

In Table A1, we useeven more demanding specifications. Column 2 reports results with pilot fixed
effects instead of the PastpeerX’ set of dummies; results are almost identical. Column 3 uses past
squadron fixed effects, and column 4 intreacts squadron and time fixed effects. The magnitude of
results is largely unchanged.

17

15
To examine further whether such status competition could reasonably explain our
findings, we test to see if those born in nearby towns react more strongly to a
mention in the dispatches. We were able to determine the birthplaces of 352 aces. We
already know that, among aces, the average score and the incremental effect of a peer
mention is relatively large. But how much greater is the increase in the number of
victories when a pilot from the same region is mentioned? While not every high‐
performing ace knew every other ace, many of them would have been familiar with
each other’s careers and background. In addition, last names often contain
information about regional origins.
[insert Figure 6 about here]
Figure 6 shows that, for pilots born close to each other, the effect of a mention in
dispatches is especially large.18 At a distance of less than 100 miles, the peer‐induced
boost during mention months amounts to more than 4 extra victories. Yet at a
distance of (say) 400 miles, the performance bump amounts to only two additional
victories.19
D. Risk
Fighter pilots faced high risks. Every aerial victory came at the risk of death. We do
not have exact data on casualties, but we can construct a proxy based on exit from
our sample. In those cases where it was possible to check (i.e., the subsample of 352
aces for whom we have additional information), the pilot was killed in almost every
case. Any analysis of the Luftwaffe incentive system must consider both dimensions:
the number of enemy fighters downed and the number of own men lost.
To examine these effects, we repeat the analysis from Tables 2, using risk of exit from
the sample as our dependent variable. We employ survival analysis by performing
Cox regressions on the data. Table 4 reports the hazard ratios for pilots conditional
on the mention (in the Wehrmachtbericht) of a past squadron peer. Experience has
only a limited effect on exit rates. On the Eastern Front, the death rates are clearly
much lower.
[insert Table 4 about here]
For the sample as a whole, we find a markedly higher coefficient during periods with
such mentions; in fact, the risk of exit is twice as high. This effect is even greater for
pilots below the 80th percentile of average performance (column 2), with an increase
We use the simple specification from Table 2, column 1 because our sample is small.
Overall levels are high because the small subset of 352 pilots with detailed biographical data is
dominated by aces with very high overall performance. We also perform regression analysis to
demonstrate the statistical strength of these findings. In Figure A.1 we plot the marginal effect of
being a peer of a mentioned pilot in the month of the mention as a function of (the log of) birthplace
distance, for four different specifications. In each case we obtain a clearly downward sloping pattern.
18
19

16
of 250%. According to the estimates with controls from Panel B, for pilots above the
80th percentile, there is a 25% increase in the hazard rate. For the best pilots (those at
the 90th percentile or higher), the effect is even smaller (+1.5%) and not significantly
different from zero.
The findings summarized in Table 4 put the results on performance improvement in
context. Even though performance increased for pilots on average in months when a
former peer was mentioned, that increase came at the cost of higher exit rates. This
effect differs by pilot ability. Those below the 80th percentile of scores earned 0.1
additional victories during months in which a former peer is mentioned (cf. Table 1,
col. 6); at the same time, their exit rate increased by a factor of more than 2. In contrast,
top pilots (99th percentile or higher) earned 2.5 more victories during such months.
IV. ADDITIONAL RESULTS AND ALTERNATIVE INTERPRETATIONS
We next attempt to rule out potential confounding mechanisms. In addition, we
examine the robustness of our findings.
A. Correlated shocks
A natural confounding factor is the possibility of unobserved and correlated shocks
simultaneously affecting the outcomes of different peer groups. To deal with the
most likely correlated shocks, we focus on peers who are not part of the same
squadron when measurements are made. This approach deals with
contemporaneous, squadron‐level shocks; however, we must still consider whether
other omitted variables could be driving the results.
One direct way of addressing the risk of correlated shocks is to see if our findings
hold when pilots from nearby units are excluded. For this purpose, we impose a
minimum distance requirement for the airfields from which pilots’ squadrons
operated. During World War II, German forces were fighting from the Arctic Circle
to the deserts of North Africa and from Stalingrad to the Spanish frontier with
France. The minimum distance between air fields in our data is 9 miles; the
maximum, 2,600 miles (see Figure A2).
Having imposed minimum distance requirements on our data, Figure 7 gives the
coefficients on the former peer interaction variable as those requirements become
increasingly stringent. A distance of even 100 miles usually corresponded to a
marked change in combat conditions (for example, the northern and southern sectors
in the battle of Kursk and Orel were approximately 100 miles apart). At a distance of
500 miles, units would be operating with different army groups (North, Center, or
South) on the Eastern Front. Units flying bomber intercept missions over Germany
were separated by up to 1,000 miles from their counterparts on the Eastern Front.
[insert Figure 7 about here]

17

Figure 7 demonstrates that the coefficient for outperformance becomes greater as we
impose increasingly stringent distance requirements. 20 This tendency holds for
squadron peers, group peers, and (to a lesser extent) base peers. These results
strongly suggest that our results are not driven by correlated shocks.
Another issue is possible confounding by differential but correlated upgrades in
aircraft equipment. Since aerial combat performance depends not only on pilot
ability but also on equipment quality, it follows that changes in performance could
reflect changes in planes. Thus a sudden increase in the number of aerial victories
could be driven by aces receiving nearly simultaneous upgrades in the planes they
piloted.
However, that mechanism does a poor job of explaining our results. We have
information on the type of aircraft used for 83,000 of our total 96,000 observations
(see Figure A3 for the distribution of aircraft types used). Most missions were flown
in one of just four aircraft types – the BF‐109E, F, and G and the FW‐190 – which
together accounted for 86% of all aircraft types used.
Did correlated upgrades of equipment across former peers contribute to the increase
in performance during mention months? This is unlikely. The Luftwaffe often
upgraded entire squadrons to facilitate maintenance and training. Its usual
procedure involved squadrons being recalled to Germany, re‐equipped, and then
sent back to the front. There is no anecdotal evidence of aces being given special
treatment. To the contrary, at least one ace (Hans‐Joachim Marseille) was forced to
pilot an “upgraded” BF‐109G – despite his protests – because his entire squadron
was being re‐equipped. Marseille died shortly thereafter when the more powerful
but unreliable new engine failed on one of its first missions.
Furthermore, we directly control for the effect of aircraft type. The results reported in
Tables 1–3 are from regressions that include dummy variables for the different types
of aircraft. Any systematic increase in performance as a result of aircraft upgrades
should be captured in our data. Finally, we check to ensure that the probability of
flying a similar type of aircraft is not systematically higher in months during which
an ace is mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht. This is not the case.21
B. Social learning
One potential concern is a general co‐movement of scores among pilots who
belonged to the same squadron in the past. Suppose that pilots learned some specific
skills from other pilots or in special circumstances in their area of operation while
We use the stringent specification from Table 2, column 4. If we use the simpler baseline
specification with few controls (column 1, as for Figure 6), results are nearly identical.
21 Results available upon request.
20

18
previously flying together, and assume that skill became especially useful in some
later period. If outstanding pilots do so well that they are mentioned in the daily
bulletin, then also other pilots with whom they trained – or who developed similar
skills in the same environment – might likewise do better. In that event we would
find higher performance by past peers in periods when aces are mentioned in the
daily bulletin; yet the reason would be correlated on‐the‐job learning rather than
motivation effects.
We do not believe that this mechanism, either, is likely to drive our findings. In the
first place, our results in Table 2 already control for whether pilots ever served
together in the past. This allows for general spillovers from the mentioned pilot to his
former peer in all quiet periods, i.e. those without a mention. Also, note that fixed
effects of having flown with an ace are not uniformly positive (see Figure A4): Some
44% of mentioned‐pilot fixed effects are negative. There is no evidence that those
who flew with later‐mentioned pilots are themselves noticeably better pilots.
One remaining possibility is that, by flying together, pilots picked up skills that
become useful in particular, novel situations. A pilot with a good enough month to
be mentioned in dispatches may have had many former peers who could similarly
exploit the skills jointly acquired in the past. Instead of estimating a level difference
for pilots who are former peers, we allow for co‐movement of victory scores of pilots
in different squadrons if they flew together in the past, and ask whether this co‐
movement strengthens during months when a former peer is mentioned. In this way,
we allow the payoff from joint experience to be time‐varying, as it should be if
different combat conditions reward particular skills differentially.
To examine this question empirically, we first restrict the sample to former peers –
that is, all pilots who flew at some earlier time with a pilot who is mentioned in a
WWII daily bulletin. We then regress the log of victories by pilot i (+.01) on the log of
victories of the mentioned pilot m (+.01), to allow for a direct estimation of the
performance elasticities as follows:
log(vici + .01) = C + α ∙ log(vicmi + .01) + β ∙ Mmi + γ ∙ Mmi ∙ log(vicmi + .01) + δ ∙ X′ + ε.

(3)

In this expression, C is a constant, α measures the correlation of victory scores
between pilot i and his dispatch‐mentioned peer m,  is the average change in (log)
victories in a mention month for pilot m, and  is the coefficient of interest – for the
change in the co‐movement between pilot i’s victory score and that of his mentioned
former peer. There is a high bar for validating this hypothesis: there must be an
increase in the correlation during the mention period. Any pilot cited in the
Wehrmachtbericht must by definition have had an exceptionally good month. So for
his former peer to exhibit an even greater victory score correlation during mention
periods would require a dramatic change in the latter’s fortunes.

19
[insert Table 5 about here]
That is exactly what Table 5 reports. In non‐mention periods, there is co‐movement
between the victory scores of former squadron peers. The correlation is 0.114; in
mention periods it is 0.18, or more than 50% higher (column 1). This effect holds also
when we control for front, experience, and aircraft type (column 2) as well as for time
fixed effects (column 3). The results in column 3 indicate that the correlation during
mention periods is stronger, by a factor of more than 2, than the correlation during
quiet periods. After excluding pilots from the same group (because they might be
subject to correlated shocks), we find a strong co‐movement during mention periods
but only a small and negative baseline correlation (column 4).
C. Learning about one’s own ability versus status competition
Pilots who knew that their former peer had just been recognized may have updated
their beliefs about their own skill and potential – and all the more so if they viewed
the mentioned pilot as someone similar to themselves. These pilots might then exert
more effort and/or take more risk, which would result in time‐varying correlation in
victory scores but not because of status concerns.
We consider this to be an unlikely account. We tackle the problem empirically by
separating our data into two categories: mentions of a former peer whose monthly
victory score exceeds the treated pilot’s own past performance, and those that had
never scored so much in a single month. For instance, when Rall is mentioned with a
monthly score that far exceeds Gratz’s, the latter may be learning about his own type.
However, if in August 1943 (the month of Rall’s Wehrmachtbericht mention) Gratz had
already scored as much as Rall had, then it is more likely that status competition
motivated Gratz to do better.
[insert Table 6 about here]
The results of this comparison are reported in Panel A (columns 1 and 2) of Table 6.
The spillover effect is strong in the group of pilots who had already performed at the
same level, with large and significant coefficients at the squadron, group, or base
level. Amongst pilots who had never performed at the same level, results are
insignificant, and two of the three coefficients are even negative. This leads us to
conclude that learning about one’s own type is not the main channel for our results.
D. Placebo tests and Monte Carlo simulations
The statistical properties of our estimators certainly merit further attention. Both
squadron membership and victory scores are observed with error, and our coding of
the former affects the explanatory variable because we form peer groups based on
who previously flew with whom.

20
We perform two exercises to address potential concerns. First, we generate “fake
mentions” for pilots who satisfy performance criteria that are similar to pilots who
are actually mentioned in dispatches. Our fake‐mention dummy is set equal to 1 only
for pilots who had more than 59 victories and had scored either (a) more than 11
victories in a single month or (b) a “round number” of victories (100, 150, 200, 250,
300). We chose these cut‐offs based on the average characteristics of mentioned
pilots.
The results of this test, under the most rigorous specification, are reported in column
5 of Table 5. The coefficient for placebo mentions is actually negative but
insignificant. Table A2 (in the Appendix) gives results for all specifications. Although
some of these are positive, none is significant. Importantly, once we exclude same
group pilots (column 4), we find placebo effects that are very close to (and
statistically indistinguishable from) zero.
We examine our estimation’s statistical properties more broadly by performing some
Monte Carlo exercises. We draw 0.01% of the observations randomly and designate
them as placebo mentions. This procedure generates 93 instances, which is close to
the actual number (84) of mentions. We use these faux mentions to code new peer
variables and then run regressions of pilot performance against them (as in Table A1,
column 2). This simulation is repeated 100 times, and the results are plotted in Figure
A6. The size of the coefficients are skewed slightly rightward. The actual coefficient
estimated in Table A1 (column 2) is larger than the fake one in 92 out of 100 cases,
and the former’s t‐statistic is greater than that in 97% of all simulated cases. In short:
although our data may exhibit some upward bias, we find no evidence – either from
placebo tests or our Monte Carlo simulations – of our results being driven by such
a bias.
E. Type of mention
Mentions in the Wehrmachtbericht came in different types – mentions for high
cumulative accomplishments, for achieving a round victory score (like 100, 150, 200,
etc.), or for an unusually high score in a short time period like a day, a week, or a
month. Only 15 mentions are for pure “flow” mentions, 55 are for “level” mentions
(round or cumulative), and 13 combine both elements.
If high‐performing aces were motivated by status competition, we would expect all
of these types to have an effect. However, competing for a high cumulative score or a
round number of victories will have less of an immediate effect in our data than to
aim for a high rate of victory over a few days or weeks.
In Figure A7, we plot outperformance results for each mention type. The coefficients
are plotted for the specification from Table 2 column 4 including a full set of fixed

21
effects. Flow mentions give the largest effect, but coefficients are not different from
each other.
F. Results by front
Next we see whether results are similar for the Eastern Front and the Western Front.
In Panel A of Table 6, columns 3 and 4 report coefficients for the various categories of
peer by front. There are positive coefficients in both theatres of combat operations for
squadron and group peers, but those for the Western Front are uniformly lower –
and not significant at conventional levels. For “past base” peers we find a negative
results. Subdividing the sample reduces sample size, which inevitably leads to lower
significance. If we simply use the estimated mean effects, effects in the West are
somewhat smaller but not dramatically so. For squadron peers, background
performance was 0.98 and 0.33 victories in the East and West, and outperformance in
months of peer mentions 0.55 to 0.09, meaning that the boost was on the order of 55%
in the East and 27% in the West. The smaller and insignificant result in the West
probably also reflects differences in combat conditions. German air superiority was
never re‐established in the West after the Battle of Britain, but it prevailed for a long
time in the East. That may have given high‐performing pilots greater degrees of
freedom to increase their score in the West.
G. Officers’ versus other pilots’ reaction
Status is a multifaceted concept. It is not clear ex ante if higher‐status pilots should
react more or less (than other pilots) to a former peer being recognized. In Panel B of
Table 6, columns 1 and 2 report results when our main analysis is replicated while
grouping the sample into officers versus non‐officers. 22 We find that officers in
general show very similar performance increases when a former peer is mentioned in
the daily bulletin. The difference in coefficients is 0.35 versus 0.3. For group peers,
results also look very similar. Finally, we find that non‐officers who shared a base
with a mentioned pilot in the past seem to react more strongly, but coefficients are
not statistically different from each other.
Officer status mainly reflected a difference in social background, education, and
career choice. One possible interpretation is that spillovers were similar for officers
and non‐officers suggest a relatively egalitarian environment – amongst fighter
pilots, status was predominantly defined by combat performance (Galland 1993).23

Contrary to the practice in the USAAF, German pilots were not all officers.
The lack of differences in the effects for the two groups might mask other, potentially
counterbalancing, sources of heterogeneity, such as individual concerns about relative status or
differences in average skill by rank.

22
23

22
H. Stability by period
Next, we split the data set into observations before and after August 1942, when the
war was approximately half over (month 35 of the 69 in our data). August 1942 is
also close to the war’s turning point.
In Panel B of Table 6, columns 3 and 4 replicate our peer analysis for WWII’s first and
second half. During the first half, effects are smaller and less significant. One reason
is that at first there are fewer observations of peers; as the war goes on, though, pilots
accumulate more past peers and so our statistical tests become stronger. In fact, two
thirds of our observations on peers of mentioned pilots are from the war’s second
half. We find that spillovers from peer recognition are more pronounced for the
post–August 1942 period than for the full sample – a generalization that holds no
matter which peer‐group definition is used.
I. Lags and leads
It is crucial for our analysis that pilots do not react to their peers’ performance before
it actually occurs. Using lags and leads is a simple way to test the assumption of
identical counterfactual trends for treatment and control pilots (Angrist and Pischke
2009). To test for pre‐event trends and effects, we align observations in event time, so
t = 0 is the time of peer mention, and we drop all observations of pilots who were
never the peer of a mentioned pilot.
[insert Figure 8 about here]
Figure 8 plots average performance in event time. We distinguish between pilots
above the 80th percentile and all other pilots. As clearly shown in the left panel of
Figure 8, there is no positive trend among pilots prior to the mention of a peer. The
same is true in periods after the peer’s mention. Thus the only period that stands out
is the one in which the mention occurs, where we see outperformance to the tune of
1.8 more victories per month by the best pilots. For pilots below the 80th percentile, as
expected given the results in Table 3, we do not find a substantial jump in
performance during the mention month relative to other months.
J. Effects by time since joint service
Our analysis is based on the assumption that pilots who served together in the past
typically viewed themselves as peers. Such a bond should be relatively weak for
those who flew together long ago; however, it should be stronger for those who
recently shared the same officers’ mess, commanding officer, and missions. To
confirm that our hypothesized channel for differential outperformance is a viable
one, we compare effect sizes as a function of how recently pilots served together.
[insert Table 7 about here]

23
In Table 7 we replicate the previous results for two subgroups: those pilots for whom
more than the sample’s median time (six months) had elapsed since joint service; and
those for whom less time had elapsed. We find smaller effects for past squadron
peers and past base peers who served together in the most distant past (but slightly
larger effects for past group peers). Although the differences in magnitude are not
significant, the results for squadron and base peers are in line with our hypothesis.
V. CONCLUSION
Social comparisons can demotivate employees, leading to lower job satisfaction and
higher quit rates (Card et al. 2012). There is also strong evidence that status
competition is a potent force in human behavior, especially when it comes to
consumption (Kuhn et al. 2011; Bertrand and Morse 2016).
Our paper explores whether status competition can induce greater effort and more
risk taking in a high‐stakes setting. Using data from the German air force during
World War II, we focus on pilots who flew together and were then assigned to
different squadrons. When one of them is mentioned in the daily bulletin of the
German armed forces for his outstanding accomplishments, former colleagues on
average exert more effort and score more victories. The effect varies by skill group:
performance gains are concentrated among highly skilled pilots; and though average
pilots also score more, their gains are relatively small.
An important finding is that risk increased significantly for the low‐skilled pilots:
unlike high‐skilled pilots, they die at a higher rate following the official recognition
of a peer. Our findings suggest that status competition can be a key motivator for
individuals in a high‐risk setting with severe principal–agent problems. Yet high‐
powered incentives can backfire, possibly reducing efficiency in contexts where risk
matters.24

References
Agarwal, Sumit, Vyacheslav Mikhed, and Barry Scholnick. 2016. “Does Inequality Cause
Financial Distress? Evidence from Lottery Winners and Neighboring Bankruptcies.”
Philadelphia Fed Working Paper 16–04: 1–47.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Aoyagi, Masaki. 2007. “Efficient Collusion in Repeated Auctions with Communication.”
Journal of Economic Theory 134 (1): 61–92.
Apesteguia, Jose, and Ignacio Palacios-Huerta. 2010. “Psychological Pressure in Competitive
A full accounting of the overall efficiency effect would have to take into account the cost of training
replacement pilots, their (time‐varying) quality, and the aggregate impact of engineering a culture
where status was closely tied to aerial victories. Neither parameter can be pinned down by our
analysis.
24

24
Environments: Evidence from a Randomized Natural Experiment.” American
Economic Review 100 (5): 2548–64.
Ariely, Dan, Anat Bracha, and Stephan Meier. 2009. “Doing Good or Doing Well? Image
Motivation and Monetary Incentives in Behaving Prosocially.” American Economic
Review 99 (1): 544–55.
Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and B. Kelsey Jack. 2014. “No Margin, No Mission? A Field
Experiment on Incentives for Public Service Delivery.” Journal of Public Economics
120 (December): 1–17.
Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Scott S. Lee. 2014. “Awards Unbundled: Evidence from
a Natural Field Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 100
(April): 44–63.
Azoulay, Pierre, Jialan Wang, and Joshua S. Graff Zivin. 2010. “Superstar Extinction.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2): 549–89.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. 2010. “Social Incentives in the
Workplace.” Review of Economic Studies 77 (2): 417–58.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation.” Review of
Economic Studies 70 (3): 489–520.
———. 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” American Economic Review 96 (5):
1652–78.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2016. “Trickle-Down Consumption.” Review of
Economics and Statistics (forthcoming): 1–17.
Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2008. “Status Incentives.” American Economic
Review 98 (2): 206–11.
Borowiecki, Karol Jan, and Georgios Kavetsos. 2015. “In Fatal Pursuit of Immortal Fame:
Peer Competition and Early Mortality of Music Composers.” Social Science &
Medicine 134 (June): 30–42.
Brown, Jennifer. 2011. “Quitters Never Win: The (Adverse) Incentive Effects of Competing
with Superstars.” Journal of Political Economy 119 (5): 982–1013.
Brown, Keith C., W.V. Harlow, and Laura T. Starks. 1996. “Of Tournaments and
Temptations: An Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry.”
Journal of Finance 51 (1): 85–110.
Bungay, Stephen. 2001. The Most Dangerous Enemy: A History of the Battle of Britain.
London: Aurum Press.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman, and Noam Yuchtman. 2014.
“Understanding Mechanisms Underlying Peer Effects: Evidence From a Field
Experiment on Financial Decisions.” Econometrica 82 (4): 1273–1301.
Caldwell, Donald L. 1996. The JG 26 War Diary. London: Grub Street.
———. 2012. Day Fighters in Defence of the Reich: A War Diary, 1942–45. Barnsley, South
Yorkshire: Frontline Books.
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. “Inequality at
Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction.” American Economic Review
102 (6): 2981–3003.
Castan, Joachim. 2007. Der Rote Baron: Die Ganze Geschichte Des Manfred von Richthofen.
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Chan, Ho Fai, Bruno S. Frey, Jana Gallus, and Benno Torgler. 2014. “Academic Honors and
Performance.” Labour Economics 31 (December): 188–204.
Charness, Gary, David Masclet, and Marie Claire Villeval. 2014. “The Dark Side of
Competition for Status.” Management Science 60 (1): 38–55.
Cohn, Alain, Ernst Fehr, Benedikt Herrmann, and Frédéric Schneider. 2014. “Social
Comparison and Effort Provision: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 12 (4): 877–98.

25
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew. E. Kahn. 2003. “Cowards and Heroes: Group Loyalty in the
American Civil War.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2): 519–48.
———. 2007. “Surviving Andersonville: The Benefits of Social Networks in POW Camps.”
American Economic Review 97 (4): 1467–87.
Dewatripont, Mathias, Ian Jewitt, and Jean Tirole. 1999a. “The Economics of Career
Concerns, Part I: Comparing Information Structures.” Review of Economic Studies 66
(1): 183–98.
———. 1999b. “The Economics of Career Concerns, Part II: Application to Missions and
Accountability of Government Agencies.” Review of Economic Studies 66 (1): 199–
217.
Dohmen, Thomas J. 2008. “Do Professionals Choke Under Pressure?” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 65 (3–4): 636–53.
Ederer, Florian. 2010. “Feedback and Motivation in Dynamic Tournaments.” Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy 19 (3): 733–69.
Evans, Richard. 2009. The Third Reich at War: 1939-1945. New York, NY: Penguin.
Falk, Armin, and Andrea Ichino. 2006. “Clean Evidence on Peer Effects.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24 (1): 39–57.
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and
Cooperation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 817–68.
Fershtman, Chaim, and Uri Gneezy. 2011. “The Tradeoff Between Performance and Quitting
in High Power Tournaments.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (2):
318–36.
Frank, Robert H. 2010. Luxury Fever: Weighing the Cost of Excess. Paperback reissue.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
Frey, Bruno S. 2007. “Awards as Compensation.” European Management Review 4 (1): 6–14.
Frey, Bruno S., and Felix Oberholzer-Gee. 1997. “The Cost of Price Incentives: An Empirical
Analysis of Motivation Crowding-Out.” American Economic Review 87 (4): 746–55.
Galland, Adolf. 1993. Die Ersten und die Letzten: Die Jagdflieger im Zweiten Weltkrieg.
München: Schneekluth.
Genakos, Christos, and Mario Pagliero. 2012. “Interim Rank, Risk Taking, and Performance
in Dynamic Tournaments.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (4): 782–813.
Glazer, Amihai, and Kai. A. Konrad. 1996. “A Signaling Explanation for Private Charity.”
American Economic Review 86 (4): 1019–28.
Goltsman, Maria, and Arijit Mukherjee. 2011. “Interim Performance Feedback in Multistage
Tournaments: The Optimality of Partial Disclosure.” Journal of Labor Economics 29
(2): 229–65.
González-Díaz, Julio, and Ignacio Palacios-Huerta. 2016. “Cognitive Performance in
Competitive Environments: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Public
Economics 139 (July): 40–52.
Green, Jerry R., and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. “A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts.”
Journal of Political Economy 91 (3): 349–64.
Greenberg, Jerald. 1987. “Reactions to Procedural Injustice in Payment Distributions: Do the
Means Justify the Ends?” Journal of Applied Psychology 72 (1): 55–61.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, and Elias Bruegmann. 2009. “Teaching Students and Teaching Each
Other: The Importance of Peer Learning for Teachers.” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 1 (4): 85–108.
Knowles, Elizabeth, ed. 2014. Oxford Dictionary of Quotations. Eighth edition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kosfeld, Michael, and Susanne Neckermann. 2011. “Getting More Work for Nothing?
Symbolic Awards and Worker Performance.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 3 (3): 86–99.

26
Kracker Luftwaffe Archive, last modified Januar 22, 2016,
http://www.aircrewremembered.com/KrackerDatabase/.
Kroener, Bernhard, Rolf-Dieter Müller, and Hans Umbreit. 1988. Organisation und
Mobilisierung des Deutschen Machtbereichs. Das Deutsche Reich und der Zweite
Weltkrieg, Bd. 5. Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt.
Kuhn, Peter, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn. 2011. “The Effects of
Lottery Prizes on Winners and Their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode
Lottery.” American Economic Review 101 (5): 2226–47.
Layard, Richard. 2005. “Rethinking Public Economics: The Implications of Rivalry and
Habit.” In Economics and Happiness: Framing the Analysis, by Pier Luigi Porta and
Luigino Bruni, 147–70. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lazear, Edward P., and Sherwin Rosen. 1981. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy 89 (5): 841–64.
Lee, Jungmin. 2004. “Prize and Risk-Taking Strategy in Tournaments: Evidence from
Professional Poker Players.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1345: 1–23.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, Margaret A. Meyer, and Nicola Persico. 2002. “The Incentive Effects of
Interim Performance Evaluations.” Penn CARESS Working Paper 02–09: 1–25.
Luttmer, Erzo. F. P. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3): 963–1002.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate. 2009. “Superstar CEOs.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 124 (4): 1593–1638.
Markham, Steven E., K. Dow Scott, and Gail H. McKee. 2002. “Recognizing Good
Attendance: A Longitudinal, Quasi-Experimental Field Study.” Personnel Psychology
55 (3): 639–60.
Mas, Alexandre, and Enrico Moretti. 2009. “Peers at Work.” American Economic Review 99
(1): 112–45.
McPherson, James M. 1997. For Cause and Comrades: Why Men Fought in the Civil War.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Moldovanu, Benny, Aner Sela, and Xianwen Shi. 2007. “Contests for Status.” Journal of
Political Economy 115 (2): 338–63.
Murray, Williamson. 1996. The Luftwaffe, 1933-45: Strategy for Defeat. Potomac Books.
Nalebuff, Barry J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1983a. “Information, Competition, and Markets.”
American Economic Review 73 (2): 278–83.
———. 1983b. “Prizes and Incentives: Towards a General Theory of Compensation and
Competition.” The Bell Journal of Economics 14 (1): 21.
Neckermann, Susanne, Reto Cueni, and Bruno S. Frey. 2014. “Awards at Work.” Labour
Economics 31 (December): 205–17.
Neillands, Robin. 2001. The Bomber War: The Allied Air Offensive Against Nazi Germany.
London: Overlook Press.
Scherzer, Veit. 2005. Ritterkreuzträger 1939-1945. Bayreuth: Scherzers Militärverlag.
Schwarzwald, Joseph, Meni Koslowsky, and Boaz Shalit. 1992. “A Field Study of
Employees’ Attitudes and Behaviors after Promotion Decisions.” Journal of Applied
Psychology 77 (4): 511–14.
Stedman, Robert F., and Mike Chappell. 2002. Luftwaffe Air & Ground Crew 1939-45.
Oxford: Osprey Publishing.
Stouffer, Samuel A., Arthur A. Lumsdaine, Marion H. Lumsdaine, Robin M. Williams Jr, M.
Brewster Smith, Irving L. Janis, Shirley A. Star, and Leonard S. Cottrell Jr. 1949. The
American Soldier: Adjustment During Army Life. Vol. 1. New Jersey, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Tesser, Abraham. 1988. “Toward a Self-Evaluation Maintenance Model of Social Behavior.”
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 21: 181–227.

27
Van Creveld, Martin. 2007. Fighting Power: German and US Army Performance, 1939-1945.
Contributions in Military History, no. 32. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Veblen, Thorstein. 1973. The Theory of the Leisure Class. With an Introduction by John
Kenneth Galbraith. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Waldinger, Fabian. 2012. “Peer Effects in Science: Evidence from the Dismissal of Scientists
in Nazi Germany.” Review of Economic Studies 79 (2): 838–61.
Wegmann, Günter, ed. 1982. “Das Oberkommando der Wehrmacht gibt bekannt--”: Der
Deutsche Wehrmachtbericht: Vollständige Ausgabe der 1939-1945 durch Presse und
Rundfunk veröffentlichten Texte. Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag.
Westwell, Ian. 2004. Condor Legion: The Wehrmacht’s Training Ground. Spearhead 15.
Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allan.
Wood’s Combat Claims, last modified October 21, 2013,
https://web.archive.org/web/20130928070316/http://lesbutler.co.uk/claims/tonywood.
htm.
Yildirim, Huseyin. 2005. “Contests with Multiple Rounds.” Games and Economic Behavior
51 (1): 213–27.

28
FIGURES
Figure 1: Victory and Exit Rates per Month for Fighter Pilots (Aces and Non‐Aces)
during Periods of Fighter Pilot Mentions

Victories

former peer mentioned in bulletin

4
no peer mentioned

3.5

1.09***

victories per month

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.12***

0.5
0
NON-ACES

ACES

Exit
0.08

0.014

0.07

exit rate per month

0.06
0.009*

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
ACES

NON-ACES

Note: The figure shows mean monthly victory and exit rates for aces and non‐aces (without any
additional controls). Aces are defined as being in the top 20% of the average monthly victory rate
during all of World War II. Pilots are “former peers” if they previously flew in the same squadron as a
pilot mentioned in the German armed forces daily bulletin (Wehrmachtsbericht) but no longer do at the
time of mention.

29

0

WWII Aerial Victories
100
200
300

400

Figure 2: Aerial Victories – Total for WWII by Rank

0

100

200
rank
Germany

300

400

other

Note: The figure shows the overall score, by pilot, for pilots ranked 1 through 400 during World War
II. The gaps signify ties.

30

0

20

Victories
40

60

80

Figure 3: Cumulative Distribution of Monthly Victory Scores

0

.25

.5
Fraction of the data

.75

1

Note: This figure shows the cumulative distribution of monthly victory scores by German pilots in our
data set during all of World War II.

31

1939m1

0

0

.02

.5

(mean) vic
1

.04
.06
(mean) exit

1.5

.08

2

.1

Figure 4: Mean Victory Rate per Pilot and Month
from September 1939 through April 1945

1940m1

1941m1 1942m1 1943m1 1944m1
identifier time by year and month
(mean) vic

1945m1

(mean) exit

Note: The figure plots the per‐pilot average monthly victory score (left‐hand y‐axis) and the exit rate
per month (right‐hand y‐axis) over time (x‐axis).

32
Figure 5: Identification strategy.

Unit of Pilots

8./JG 52
III./JG 52
II./JG 11
II./JG 2
Karl Gratz
Günther Rall

Rall
mention

Joint service
Note: red dashed line indicates mention in the Wehrmachtbericht for Günther Rall

33

Figure 6: Victory Score during Mention Periods (Past Squadron Peers Only)
As a Function of Birthplace Distance

Note: The figure shows a binscatter of the number of additional victories of peers of a mentioned past
peer, during mention periods of that particular pilot, as a function of birthplace distance (mentioned
pilot minus pilot in question). Past peers are former squadron peers who are no longer serving in the
same unit. The underlying specification is identical to the one used in Table 2, column 1. The analysis
is based on data from 352 aces for whom birthplace location is available.

34

Figure 7: Peer Effects by Minimum Distance

Note: The figure plots the coefficient for outperformance (x‐axes) during mention months – of the
peers of mentioned pilots – as a function of minimum distance (y‐axes) for squadron, group, and base
peers. It uses the same specification as Table 2, column 1.

35

Figure 8: Pilot Outperformance in Event Time by Quality Group

-1

average outperformance
0
1

2

3

Panel B: Bottom 80%

-2

-2

-1

average outperformance
0
1

2

3

Panel A: Top 20%

-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Event time

-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Event time

Note: Each panel plots the coefficient for outperformance of past peers of a mentioned pilot in event
time (the pilot’s mention in the Wehrmachtbericht corresponds to t = 0). The left (right) panel shows
results for past peers in the top 20% (bottom 80%) of overall performance as defined by average
monthly victory scores. Period of mention highlighted in red.

36

TABLES
Table 1: Percentile of Pilot’s Rank and Mention in Dispatches of Other Pilots –
By Overall Performance

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Mentionperiod is a dummy variable that takes the value zero if no Luftwaffe
fighter pilot is mentioned in the Wehrmachtsbericht during a month, and 1 otherwise. Pilots nth pcn is a
dummy for whether a pilot belongs to the nth percentile (indicated by the column heading), capturing
average outperformance by quality‐percentile. We define pilot quality by ranking pilots based on their
average monthly victory score during the entire conflict. Mentionperiod x Pilots nth pcn gives the
outperformance of pilots in the nth percentile during periods when a Luftwaffe fighter pilot is
mentioned. Eastern front is a dummy for pilots serving on the Russian front. Experience is the number
of months of wartime service since the start of World War II, beginning with the first victory claim in
our records (except for veterans of the Spanish Civil War, for whom we add months of service there
after the first victory claim). In col. (1) – (4), we exclude higher‐ranked pilots from the comparison
group. Example: In col (2), for pilots in p95‐99, we compare pilot performance for pilots in the 95th to
99th percentile with pilots in the 0th to 94th percentile, but exclude the top 1%. In the next column, we
drop all pilots ranked 95th to 100th percentile.

37
Table 2: Spillover Effects during Mention Periods

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Starting with column 2, dummy variables for aircraft type are included.
Mentionperiod is a dummy variable that takes the value zero if no Luftwaffe fighter pilot is
mentioned in the Wehrmachtsbericht during a month, and 1 otherwise. Past squadron peer is a dummy
for pilots who, in the past (but not at the moment of the mention), served with the mentioned pilot in
the same squadron (“Staffel”). Past group peers are pilots who served in the same group
(“Geschwader”) in the past, but not at the time of mention. Past base peers are all pilots who served in
units flying from the same airfield as the mentioned pilot at any point in the past (but not at the time
of mention). All regressions include individual dummy variables (PastpeerX’) indicating whether a
pilot had flown with an eventually mentioned pilots in the past. Eastern front is a dummy for pilots
serving on the Russian front. Experience is the number of months of wartime service since the start of
World War II, beginning with the first victory claim in our records (except for veterans of the Spanish
Civil War, for whom we add months of service there after the first victory claim).

38
Table 3: Spillover Effects during Mention Periods – by Performance Subgroup

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). The table repeats the analysis of Table 2, column 4, but stratifies by performance
subgroup (results reported in columns 2‐4).

Table 4: Risk of Death – Peer Performance Effects

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Exponentiated coefficients. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered at the level of the squadron (“Staffel”). Estimates of hazard ratios from Cox regressions. T‐
statistics in parentheses. Panel B estimates also control for aircraft type (dummy variables for FW and
BF models). Mentionperiod is a dummy variable that takes the value zero if no Luftwaffe fighter pilot
is mentioned in the Wehrmachtsbericht during a month, and 1 otherwise. Past squadron peer is a
dummy for pilots who, in the past (but not at the moment of the mention), served with the mentioned

39
pilot in the same squadron (“Staffel”). All regressions include individual dummy variables
(PastpeerX’) indicating whether a pilot had flown with an eventually mentioned pilots in the past.
Eastern front is a dummy for pilots serving on the Russian front. Experience is the number of months
of wartime service since the start of World War II, beginning with the first victory claim in our records
(except for veterans of the Spanish Civil War, for whom we add months of service there after the first
victory claim).

Table 5: Correlation of Pilot Performance, Past Peers and Mentioned Pilot
(Mention vs Other Periods)

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Dummy variables for aircraft type are included from col (2) onwards.
Log(vicmi+0.01) is the natural logarithm of pilot m’s victory score (+.01), when m is a former peer of
pilot i. Mention period is a dummy variable that takes the value one when a former peer is mentioned
in the Wehrmachtbericht. In col (4), we only keep those observations for which pilots and their
eventually mentioned squadron peer are not in the same group. Col (5) uses the same specification as
the preceding column but is based on placebo mentions (cf. Appendix for details). Eastern front is a
dummy for pilots serving on the Russian front. Experience is the number of months of wartime
service since the start of World War II, beginning with the first victory claim in our records (except for
veterans of the Spanish Civil War, for whom we add months of service there after the first victory
claim).

40

Table 6: Sample Splits

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Each entry in this table shows the coefficient of interest from a regression as
specified in Table 2, col. 4‐6. Hence the first entry in column 1 here is the coefficient on past peer of
mentioned, using the specification from Table 2, col. 4, etc. For variable definitions cf. Table 2.

Table 7: Time Since Joint Service

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Each entry in this table shows the coefficient of interest from a regression as
specified in Table 2, col. 4‐6. Hence the first entry in column 1 here is the coefficient on past peer of
mentioned, using the specification from Table 2, col. 4, etc. For variable definitions cf. Table 2.

41

APPENDIX

-10

-10

Effects on Linear Prediction
-5
0

Effects on Linear Prediction
-5
0

5

5

Figure A1: Marginal Effect of Being a Past Peer of a Mentioned Pilot
As a Function of (log) Birthplace Distance (in Miles)

4

5

6
Log(distance to peer in miles)

7

4

8

5

6
Log(distance to peer in miles)

7

8

Controls for experience, front, and
fighter model

-10

-10

Effects on Linear Prediction
-5
0

Effects on Linear Prediction
-5
0

5

5

no controls

4

5

6
Log(distance to peer in miles)

7

8

4

Adding Squadron FE
Note: Specifications analogous to Table 2, columns 1‐4.

5

6
Log(distance to peer in miles)

Adding Time FE

7

8

42
Figure A2: Airfield Locations of Luftwaffe Squadrons, 1939–1945

Note: This map plots the location of every airfield from which pilots in our dataset flew at least once
during the period September 1939 to May 1945.

Table A1: Adding Pilot and Squadron Fixed Effects

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the level of the
squadron (“Staffel”). Each column gives the result of three regressions, reporting only the coefficient
on past peers. The first column of this table replicates the results of Table 2, col. 4‐6. Column 2 repeats
the same specifications but include pilot fixed effects instead of the PastpeerX’ dummies. Column 3
includes individual dummies for each past squadron of pilots instead of normal squadron fixed
effects, and column 4 includes the interaction of squadron and time fixed effects. For variable
definitions cf. Table 2.

44
Figure A3: Aircraft Type – Usage and Fixed Effect
(95% and 99% CIs) on Victory Scores
BF109D
Bf 109G
FW 190A
Bf 109F
Bf 109E
BF 109G/K
BF 109F/G
Fw 190A, Bf 109G
Bf 109E/F
Fw 109A/D
Bf 109E/F/G
Bf 109F, Fw 190A
Bf 109G, Fw 190A
Bf 109F/G, Fw 190A
Bf 109F/ Fw 190A
Bf 109K
Fw 190D
Me 262A
Bf 109E/Bf 109F
Fw 190A**
Bf 109G/K, Fw 190D

Aircraft fixed effects

BF109E

BF109F

BF109G

BF109K

FW190A

FW190D
0

10,000
20,000
number of man-months

30,000

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

Note: The left panel of Figure A3 plots the number of man‐months in our data set of different aircraft
types (or combinations) flown by squadrons. The right panel plots the fixed effects for the main
aircraft types in a regression using the specification of Table 2, col. 4.
.

Figure A4: Fixed Effects of Pilots Who Are or Become Peers of Mentioned Pilots

Note: Each point represents the estimated fixed effects for pilots who become peers of a pilot who is
eventually mentioned in the Wehrmachtsbericht (estimated for the sample as a whole).

45

Figure A5: Average Score over Time: Neverpeers versus Everpeers
2.5

Average Victory Rate per Month

2

neverpeers
1.5

1
everpeers

0.5

0
1939m9

1940m9

1941m9

1942m9

1943m9

1944m9

Note: The graph plots mean monthly victory scores for pilots who never flew with a mentioned pilot
(“Neverpeers”, solid curve) and for pilots who did fly with one at least once (“Everpeers”, dashed
curve).

46
Table A2: Placebo Mentions Conditional on Peer Performance
(Correlations Data Set)

Note: * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the
level of the squadron (“Staffel”). Columns 1-4 show all coefficients of interest from
regressions as specified in Table 5, columns 1-4. All results are based on placebo mentions
instead of real mentions.

47
Figure A6: Monte Carlo Simulations – Distribution of Coefficients and t‐statistics

Note: The left panel shows the distribution of coefficients for the Pastsquadronpeer variable based on
the specification in column (2) of Table A1. As described in the text, we randomly draw 0.01% of
observations and designate them as placebo mentions; the distribution gives values after 100
simulations. The red horizontal line marks the estimated coefficient when instead actual mentions are
used (and as reported in column (2) of Table A1). The right panel plots the corresponding t‐statistics;
here the red line marks the estimated t‐statistic when the actual mentions are used.

48
Figure A7: Outperformance during Mention Periods, Former Peers, by Type of
Mention

