NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OUT-OF-STATE TUITION DISTORTION
Brian G. Knight
Nathan M. Schiff
Working Paper 22996
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22996

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

James Bernard provided exceptional research assistance. We thank seminar and conference
participants at Brown University, University of Texas-Austin, Northwestern University,
University of Chicago Harris School, the Federal Reserve Board, University of WisconsinMadison, Drexel University, the NBER Education Meetings, the NBER Public Economics
Meetings, the Tel Aviv University Applied Micro Workshop, and New York Federal Reserve
Bank, Georgetown University, and the Guanghua School of Management at Peking University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank the Higher Education Research Institute
(HERI) and the Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP) at UCLA for access to the
Freshman Survey.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Brian G. Knight and Nathan M. Schiff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Out-of-State Tuition Distortion
Brian G. Knight and Nathan M. Schiff
NBER Working Paper No. 22996
December 2016
JEL No. D7,H7,I2
ABSTRACT
Public universities in the United States typically charge much higher tuition to non-residents.
Perhaps due, at least in part, to these differences in tuition, roughly 75 percent of students
nationwide attend in-state institutions. While distinguishing between residents and non-residents
is consistent with welfare maximization by state governments, it may lead to economic
inefficiencies from a national perspective, with potential welfare gains associated with reducing
the gap between in-state and out-of-state tuition. We first formalize this idea in a simple model.
While a social planner maximizing national welfare does not distinguish between residents and
non-residents, state governments set higher tuition for non-residents. The welfare gains from
reducing this tuition gap can be characterized by a sufficient statistic relating out-of-state
enrollment to the tuition gap. We then estimate this sufficient statistic via a border discontinuity
design using data on the geographic distribution of student residences by institution.

Brian G. Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Brian_Knight@brown.edu
Nathan M. Schiff
Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics
School of Economics
777 Guoding Road
Shanghai, China 200433
nschiff@gmail.com

1

Introduction

This research examines economic distortions associated with differences between resident and
non-resident tuition at public universities in the United States. It is well-known that public institutions charge much higher tuition to non-residents, with the University of California System,
for example, charging $12,294 in tuition and fees for California residents and $38,976 for nonresidents during the 2016-2017 academic year.1 Perhaps due, at least in part, to these differences
in tuition, roughly 75 percent of students nationwide attend in-state institutions (NCES, 2012).
While distinguishing between residents and non-residents is consistent with state welfare maximization, it may lead to economic inefficiencies from a national perspective, with potential welfare gains associated with reducing the gap between in-state and out-of-state tuition. To see this,
consider a hypothetical example of two students, one living in Illinois and one in Wisconsin. Suppose that both have competitive application profiles so that neither is constrained by admissions
processes. In addition, assume that the student from Illinois finds the University of WisconsinMadison to be a better fit and that the student from Wisconsin finds the University of Illinois to
be a better fit. Given this, in the absence of tuition differences, both would attend out-of-state
institutions. But, suppose that, due to much higher out-of-state tuition, both students choose to
attend the home-state institution. Then, both students would be better off, with universities receiving identical tuition revenue, if they could pay in-state tuition rates at the out-of-state institution.
As should be clear, there are two crucial ingredients underlying this inefficiency. First, students
must have heterogeneous preferences over institutions, with rankings, absent tuition differences,
differing across students. Second, in choosing institutions, students must be responsive to tuition
differences.
While this example is extreme, it illustrates a more general point. Distinguishing between residents and non-residents when setting tuition may lead to inefficiencies from a national perspective,
with students attending institutions that may not be the best fit for them. In this research, we first
formalize this idea in the context of a simple model in which students, taking tuition as given,
choose between in-state and out-of-state institutions. We begin by showing that a social planner
maximizing national welfare does not distinguish between residents and non-residents for tuition
purposes. We then consider how state governments, accounting for enrollment responses, set tuition policies, under the assumption that they maximize the welfare of their residents. We show
that, by ignoring the welfare of non-residents, state governments cross-subsidize in-state students
by charging higher tuition for out-of-state students. Finally, following the literature on sufficient
statistics for welfare analysis, we show that narrowing the gap between resident and non-resident
tuition leads to a welfare gain, and this gain can be characterized by a sufficient statistic relating
1 See

http://admission.universityofcalifornia.edu/paying-for-uc/tuition-and-cost/ (accessed October 21, 2016).

2

out-of-state enrollment patterns to non-resident tuition.2
In estimating this sufficient statistic, a key identification problem that we face involves separating these distortionary effects of tuition policies from geography. That is, students may disproportionately attend in-state institutions due to either discounted tuition for in-state students or
due to a preference for attending institutions close to home. To isolate the distortionary effects
of this out-of-state tuition markup, we use a border discontinuity design, comparing attendance at
institutions for students living close to state borders.3 That is, by comparing in-state students and
out-of-state students living near each other, we can remove the effects of geography and isolate the
effects of tuition.
To implement this border discontinuity design, our baseline analysis uses data on the geographic distribution of students by institution. The key data source is the Freshman Survey, administered by the Higher Education Research Institute (HERI). The survey includes a question on
zip code of permanent residence, allowing us to measure the geographic distribution of enrollment
at institutions. Using these data from 1997 to 2011, we find large discontinuities, with a sharp
jump in enrollment when moving from the out-of-state side of the border to the in-state side of the
border.
Complementing these baseline findings, we present four additional pieces of evidence. First,
we address two alternative explanations for our documented border discontinuities, one based upon
differential admissions standards and another based upon endogenous sorting around the border.
Second, using information on tuition, we document larger discontinuities along borders with larger
differences between out-of-state and in-state tuition. Along these lines, we also show that enrollment discontinuities are smaller along borders with reciprocity agreements that offer tuition
discounts to non-residents. Third, using separate survey data on student choice sets, we find that,
conditional on being admitted and geography, students are more likely to select in-state institutions
from their choice sets and especially so when there are large tuition discounts for residents. Fourth,
we document smaller border discontinuities for private institutions, which do not provide tuition
discounts to residents.
Finally, we use our estimates of enrollment responses to tuition in order to conduct a welfare
analysis. In particular, we consider a marginal reduction in out-of-state tuition, offset by a budget
balancing increase in resident tuition. We show that the welfare gains from this policy change are
substantial, implying significant distortions associated with the existing gap between in-state and
2 The sufficient statistics approach involves using well-identified estimates of behavioral responses in order to the
quantify the welfare implications of policy changes. Representative studies include Chetty et al. (2008) on unemployment insurance, Finkelstein et al. (2015) on Medicaid, and Saez (2001) on income taxation. Chetty (2008) provides
an overview of this literature.
3 For an analysis of how housing prices differ along school district attendance zones borders, using similar variation,
see Black (1999).

3

out-of-state tuition.
The paper proceeds as follows. First, we summarize the related literature and describe our
contribution. Second, we develop a theoretical model in which we formally derive our sufficient
statistic approach. In the context of this model, we then describe possible corrective policies.
Next, we describe the data and our empirical results. Relating this back to the theory, we then use
our estimates to compute the welfare gains associated with reducing the tuition gap. Finally, the
conclusion outlines some future directions for the research and summarizes.

2

Literature Review

This is, of course, not the first study examining the gap between out-of-state tuition and in-state
tuition in the U.S.45 Cohodes and Goodman (2014) analyze a program in Massachusetts that provided academically strong students with tuition waivers at in-state public colleges and find that
eligible students disproportionately attended in-state institutions and had lower college completion
rates. Kane (2007) evaluates a program offering residents of the D.C. up to $10,000 per year to
cover tuition at select out-of-state institutions. He finds increases in the number of first-time federal financial aid applicants, the number of first-year college students receiving Pell Grants, and
college attendance. Likewise, Abraham and Clark (2006) document that the program increased
the likelihood that students applied to eligible institutions and also increased college enrollment
rates. Other studies on out-of-state tuition include Groat (1964), Morgan (1983), and Noorbakhsh
and Culp (2002). Relative to existing studies, our paper is the first in this literature to attempt to
estimate the role of non-resident tuition on enrollment via a border discontinuity design, and, more
importantly, to use these estimates to calculate any welfare gains associated with reducing the gap
between non-resident and resident tuition.
This research is also related to a literature on interstate migration. Studies in this literature
include Blanchard et al. (1992), who study migration responses to state labor market shocks. DePasquale and Stange (2015) examine the role of state licensing requirements for nurses in interstate
migration and other labor market outcomes. Moretti (2012) documents that highly educated individuals in the U.S. are more mobile, and our results suggest that this difference could be even
larger were the gap between out-of-state and in-state tuition to be lowered. Moretti (2012) also
4 There

is also a literature examining student enrollment patterns within and across countries in Europe. Dwenger
et al. (2012) examine enrollment responses to the introduction of tuition in some German states. Mechtenberg and
Strausz (2008) analyze the Bologna process, which harmonized higher education within the European Union in the
hopes of increasing student mobility.
5 More broadly, this paper contributes to a literature on the role of tuition and financial aid in college attendance.
Representative studies in this literature include Avery and Hoxby (2004), Dynarski (2003), and Hoxby and Bulman
(2016). While this literature is often focused on the decision of whether or not to attend college, our study focuses on
the choice between in-state and out-of-state institutions, conditional on attending college.

4

argues that mobility is inefficiently low and makes the case for relocation vouchers. A related
literature examines the likelihood that students remain in the state when transitioning from college to the workforce. State governments often justify higher tuition for non-residents based upon
the argument that out-of-state students tend to return to their state of residence and thus neither
contribute to the future tax base nor generate human capital externalities for state residents. In a
recent contribution, Kennan (2015) estimates a dynamic migration model in which students decide
where to go to college, accounting for, among other factors, differences between resident and nonresident tuition. He finds that reductions in tuition lead to increases in college enrollment and the
subsequent stock of college educated workers. This is in contrast to Bound et al. (2004), who find
little relationship between the production of college graduates and the subsequent stock of college
educated workers.
This paper also contributes to a literature on federalism. A key issue in the design of federations involves the vertical delegation of authorities between different levels of government (i.e.
national, state, and local governments). A common argument against decentralization is that, in
setting policy, localities maximize the welfare of residents and thus may fail to internalize crossjurisdiction externalities that either benefit or harm non-residents. Among others, see Oates (1972),
Oates (1999), Inman and Rubinfeld (1997), Besley and Coate (2003), and Knight (2013). Like this
work, the welfare loss in our model is generated by the assumption that local policymakers only
value resident welfare. Our paper contributes to this literature by examining differential pricing for
accessing public services between resident and non-residents, a novel mechanism through which
decentralization creates welfare losses.

3

Theoretical Model

This section develops a simple theoretical model in which students, accounting for tuition policies and geography, choose between colleges.6 We first develop expressions for welfare and then
consider how a social planner maximizing national welfare would set policies. We then consider
a positive model in which state governments set in-state and out-of-state tuition. After linking our
expressions for welfare to a literature on sufficient statistics, we consider two extensions of the
model.
6 This model is related to Epple et al. (2013), who consider resident and non-resident tuition but also private public
universities. While their model takes tuition rates as given, public universities face incentives to admit out-of-state
students for both financial and non-financial reasons. One key finding of their analysis is that increases in tuition at
public institutions leads to a reduction in college attendance, with little switching to private universities.

5

3.1

Setup

Consider two states (s), East (s = E) and West (s = W ), each with population normalized to one.7
Each state has a public college (c), and each college sets two variables: resident (in-state) tuition
(rc ) and non-resident (out-of-state) tuition (nc ). Student i receives the following monetary payoff
from attending college c:
uic = αqc − tic − δic + (1/ρ)εic
where qc represents (exogenous) quality of college c, δic represent travel costs, and εic is assumed
to be distributed type-1 extreme value. Tuition for student i attending college c is represented by tic ,
and this equals rc for in-state students and nc for out-of-state students. The parameter ρ > 0 represents the precision of unobserved preferences (i.e. ρ = 1/σ ). When there is a significant degree of
heterogeneity in preferences, then ρ will be small, and students will be relatively unresponsive to
tuition. Conversely, with a small degree of heterogeneity, then ρ will be large, and students will be
relatively responsive to tuition. Finally, assume that out-of-state students face higher travel costs,
relative to in-state students. In particular, we normalize travel costs for in-state students to zero
(δic = 0 for in-state colleges) and assume uniform travel costs (δ ic = δ > 0) for students attending
out-of-state colleges.
Then, let Ps denote the probability that a student from s attends the in-state institution. For
students from state W and E, these probabilities are given by:
PW =

exp(αρqW − ρrW )
exp(αρqW − ρrW ) + exp(αρqE − ρnE − ρδ )

PE =

exp(αρqE − ρrE )
exp(αρqE − ρrE ) + exp(αρqW − ρnW − ρδ )

Otherwise, students attend out-of-state institutions, with probabilities 1 − PW and 1 − PE .
We next consider the budget constraint facing colleges. Let fc denote the fraction of in-state
students attending college c. For state W , this is equal to fW = PW /[PW + (1 − PE )]. Assume that
educating a student requires a constant expenditure, or marginal cost, equal to m.8 Then, college
W faces the following budget constraint:
fW rW + (1 − fW )nW = m
That is, the weighted average of resident and non-resident tuition must equal the unit cost of educating a student.
7 We
8 We

later consider an extension to more than two states.
later consider an extension to fixed costs.

6

3.2

Welfare

We begin by developing expressions for welfare and the associated responses to changes in tuition
policy. Utilitarian welfare, averaged across states, equals 0.5(VE +VW ), where VW and VE are the
inclusive values for a representative student, after scaling by ρ so that welfare is money metric:
VW (rW , nE ) = (1/ρ) ln[exp(αρqW − ρrW ) + exp(αρqE − ρnE − ρδ )]
VE (rE , nW ) = (1/ρ) ln[exp(αρqE − ρrE ) + exp(αρqW − ρnW − ρδ )]
Then, consider changes in non-resident tuition equal to ∆nW and ∆nE , offset by budget-balancing
changes in resident tuition. In this case, the change in welfare equals:


∂VE
∂VE
∂VW
∂VW
∆nW +
∆nW +
∆nE +
∆nE
0.5
∂ nW
∂ nW
∂ nE
∂ nE



Using the envelope condition, this can be re-written as:



∂ rE
∂ rE
∂ rW
∂ rW
0.5 {−PW
− (1 − PE ) − PE
}∆nW + {−PE
− (1 − PW ) − PW
}∆nE
∂ nW
∂ nW
∂ nE
∂ nE
Thus, evaluating changes in welfare requires information on the change in resident tuition associated with an increase in non-resident tuition at both colleges.
In the case of equal increases in non-resident tuition in both states, we have that ∆nW = ∆nE =
∆n. Further, let ∂∂rnW = ∂∂ nrWW + ∂∂ rnWE represent the combined change in required resident tuition at W
and likewise for ∂∂rnE . Then, the change in welfare is given by:


∂ rW
∂ rE
0.5∆n −PW
− (1 − PE ) − PE
− (1 − PW )
∂n
∂n
Thus, the change in welfare depends upon the changes in resident tuition in both states associated
with this uniform increase in non-resident tuition. In the Appendix, we show that, using the institution budget constraints, these required changes in resident tuition can be characterized by the
following two equations:



∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
(
− 1) [rW − m] + PW
−
(
− 1)[nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
∂ rW ∂ n
∂n
∂ rE ∂ n

7




∂ PE ∂ rE
∂ rE ∂ PW ∂ rW
(
− 1) [rE − m] + PE
−
(
− 1)[nE − m] + (1 − PW ) = 0
∂ rE ∂ n
∂n
∂ rW ∂ n

In order to build intuition, we next note several special cases. First, if tuition is at nonE)
discriminatory levels (i.e. rW = nW = m and rE = nE = m), then we have that ∂∂rnW = −(1−P
PW

W)
and ∂∂rnE = −(1−P
. Inserting these into the welfare expression, we have that the change in welPE
fare equals zero. This is consistent with non-discriminatory tuition being socially optimal, as will
be shown more formally below. Second, we consider the case of no behavioral responses (i.e.
−(1−PE )
∂ PW
∂ rW
∂ PE
W)
and ∂∂rnE = −(1−P
. Then, folPW
PE
∂ rE = ∂ rW = 0). In this case, we again have that ∂ n =
lowing standard logic in public economics, there is no welfare loss in the absence of behavioral
responses. Thus, any prospects for increasing welfare when reducing the gap between non-resident
and resident tuition will require a behavioral response.
Third, in the symmetric case (qW = qE , rE = rW = r, and nE = nW = n), attendance probabilities
are also symmetric (PE = PW = P), and the required change in resident tuition can be written more
compactly as:
∂ r −(1 − P) − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
=
∂n
P − ∂ P (n − r)

∂r

Based upon this expression, Figure 1 plots the relationship between resident and non-resident tuition. In the absence of a behavioral response ( ∂∂Pr = 0), this relationship is linear, with a slope
equal to −(1 − P)/P. That is, resident tuition can be reduced by an amount equal to (1 − P)/P
when increasing non-resident tuition by one dollar. This simply reflects the mechanical effect
through which, by increasing non-resident tuition by one dollar, the institution raises a per-student
amount equal to 1 − P, which is then re-distributed to the resident students, which comprise a fraction P. Also, note that it is always feasible for colleges to set non-discriminatory tuition such that
r = n = m. With a behavioral response, the relationship is no longer linear. At the point of nondiscriminatory tuition (r = n = m), the slope again equals −(1 − P)/P, regardless of the size of
the behavioral response. Behavioral responses play no role in this case since residents and nonresidents pay equal tuition. As non-resident tuition increases beyond m, the relationship flattens
and the ability to cross-subsidize resident students is weakened. This is due to the financial loss
associated with losing non-resident students, who cross-subsidize resident students. Eventually,
“profits” from non-residents are maximized at n = m + (1/ρ) and additional increases in nonresident tuition require increases in resident tuition.9 That is, beyond n = m + (1/ρ), there is no
additional scope for reducing in-state tuition. This is due to the fact that, beyond this minimum
can be derived by setting the numerator of ∂∂ nr equal to zero (i.e., −(1 − P) = ∂∂Pr (n − r)) and noting both that
= −ρP(1 − P) and that the institutional budget constraint can be written as P(n − r) = (n − m).
9 This

∂P
∂r

8

feasible resident tuition, the behavioral response by non-resident students, which leads to a reduction in total tuition revenue collected from non-residents, more than offsets the mechanical effect
associated with increasing non-resident tuition, which leads to an increase in total tuition revenue
collected from non-residents.
Further, in the symmetric case, the change in welfare can be written more compactly as:


∂r
∆n −P − (1 − P)
∂n
This simple expression reflects the envelope condition for the discrete choice case. In particular, a
fraction 1 − P of students attending out-of-state institutions are directly affected by the change in
non-resident tuition. Likewise, a fraction P of students attending in-state institutions are directly
affected by the change in resident tuition according to ∂∂ nr . While some students do switch institutions in the event of a change in tuition, they were indifferent between institutions and thus their
utility is not directly affected by marginal changes in tuition policies.
Using the above expression for ∂∂ nr , we then have the following change in welfare in the symmetric case:
!
"
#
−(1 − P) − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
∆n −P
− (1 − P)
P − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
when n > r, we have that welfare is reduced when non-resident tuition is further
Since ∂∂ nr > −(1−P)
P
increased. Equivalently, we can say that welfare will increase when reducing existing gaps between
non-resident and resident tuition. This is consistent with the initial idea that gaps between nonresident and resident tuition may lead to economic inefficiencies and that reducing these gaps may
lead to welfare gains.
Finally, from an empirical perspective, the change in welfare can be characterized by a sufficient statistic relating in-state enrollment to resident tuition ( ∂∂Pr ). That is, to measure the change in
welfare, one does not need to separately estimate the underlying parameters (ρ, δ , qW , qE ). Instead,
the response of enrollment to tuition is a sufficient statistic for the change in welfare and, given
this, the key objective of our empirical analysis will involve estimating this sufficient statistic via
a border discontinuity design.

3.3

Socially optimal policies

Returning to the more general case, in which we allow for non-symmetric quality, we have that
the social planner chooses the set of policies (rW , nW , rE , nE ) in order to maximize national social
welfare, subject to the two institutional budget constraints. As above, we consider changes in
non-resident tuition, offset by changes in resident tuition. Building upon intuition from the prior
section, marginal changes in non-resident tuition do not induce distortions in the absence of pre9

existing differences between resident and non-resident tuition. Thus, non-discriminatory tuition is
optimal. This result is summarized in the following Proposition, and the Proof is provided in the
Appendix.
Proposition 1: Socially optimal tuition policies are non-discriminatory in nature. That is,
optimal policies are given by nW = rW = m and nE = rE = m.

3.4

Policies under decentralization

For comparison purposes with policies set by a national planner, we next consider how states set
tuition policies under decentralization. From a positive perspective, this analysis also sheds light
on why states distinguish between residents and non-residents when setting tuition.
To begin, we assume that states choose policies to maximize the welfare of their residents and
do not account for the welfare of non-residents.10 In this case, taking the policies of E as given,
the first-order-condition for state W is given by:
∂VW ∂ rW
=0
∂ rW ∂ nW
Thus, states set out-of-state tuition in order to minimize in-state tuition ( ∂∂ nrWW = 0). Using the
state budget constraint, and taking the derivative with respect to non-resident tuition, holding fixed
tuition in state E, one can show that:
∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW
∂ PE
[rW − m] + PW
+ (1 − PE ) −
[nW − m] = 0
∂ rW ∂ nW
∂ nW
∂ nW
Since

∂ rW
∂ nW

= 0 in equilibrium, we have that non-resident tuition can be characterized by:
nW = m +

(1 − PE )
∂ PE /∂ nW

Thus, since ∂ PE /∂ nW is positive, we have that states set higher tuition for non-residents (nW >
m > rW ) in equilibrium. These results, along with additional results in the symmetric case, are
summarized in the following Proposition, with a proof in the Appendix.
Proposition 2: In equilibrium, states set higher tuition for non-residents (nW > m > rW
and nE > m > rE ). In the symmetric case (qW = qE ), there is a unique equilibrium. In this
equilibrium, increases in the response of enrollment to tuition, as captured by the parameter
ρ, lead to reductions in non-resident tuition. That is, ∂∂ ρn < 0.
10 In

assuming that policymakers maximize resident welfare, we thus abstract from the possibility that state governments and state universities may have different objectives. For example, it is possible that state governments maximize
resident welfare and that state universities maximize revenue. See Groen and White (2004).

10

The intuition for this comparative static is that, when students are responsive to tuition, ∂∂ Pn is
large, and there is stiff competition for students. Due to this competition, states lower non-resident
tuition. When students are unresponsive to tuition, by contrast, ∂∂ Pn is small, the demand curve is
steep, and there is sufficient variation in student preferences that states can extract some of the
rents earned by non-resident students.
Moreover, one can show that this decentralized problem is equivalent to states maximizing
“profits” on out-of-state students, defined by (nW − m)(1 − PE ), and using the proceeds to crosssubsidize in-state students. Again, profits are maximized by setting out-of-state tuition such that
in-state tuition is minimized.
As a summary of these theoretical results, Figure 2 provides a graphical overview of how
welfare changes as a function of non-resident tuition in state W . For the purposes of this Figure,
we focus on the symmetric case and assume that policies in E are fixed at Nash equilibrium levels,
with resident tuition below non-resident tuition, and then consider changes in policies in state W .
The x-axis depicts non-resident tuition in state W (nW ), with resident tuition adjusting such that
the budget remains balanced. The Figure depicts the welfare of residents (VW ), the welfare of
non-residents (VE ), and combined welfare (VW + VE ). At Nash equilibrium non-resident tuition
(nW = n∗ ), we have that, by definition, the welfare of residents (VW ) is maximized. Decreases in
non-resident tuition from this point generate first-order welfare gains for residents of E but only
second-order welfare losses for residents of W . Thus, reductions in non-resident tuition generate
national welfare gains, as exhibited by the curve for national welfare (VW +VE ). Further reductions
in non-resident welfare generate national welfare gains until the point at which policies are nondiscriminatory (nW = rW = m). As shown, national welfare is maximized at this point, and thus
non-discriminatory tuition in an individual state maximizes national welfare even when other states
set discriminatory tuition.

3.5

Extensions

In the Appendix, we consider two extensions of the model, one involving fixed costs and another
involving more than two states. First, while the baseline model focuses on a simple cost structure
with only marginal costs, we consider the case in which institutions also face fixed costs. Given that
these costs must be paid by institutions regardless of student enrollment patterns, the key welfare
calculations are unchanged in this case. That is, it remains the case that equating resident and
non-resident tuition is socially optimal. Moreover, the welfare gains associated with reducing outof-state tuition can be characterized by the same sufficient statistic relating enrollment to tuition
policies. We also consider decentralization with fixed costs. It remains the case that universities
attempt to maximize variable profits from non-residents and charge non-resident tuition in excess

11

of m. Moreover, so long as fixed costs are sufficiently small, institutions charge higher tuition to
non-residents, when compared to resident tuition. To summarize, the introduction of fixed costs
does not change the welfare analysis, and the tuition gap remains in equilibrium so long as these
fixed costs are sufficiently small.
Second, we examine the case of more than two states. The key difference here is that students
have a greater degree of choice among out-of-state institutions, potentially yielding increased competition between institutions for non-resident students. From a normative perspective, we find that
the key welfare lesson is again unchanged: equating resident and non-resident tuition remains socially optimal. Moreover, the welfare gains associated with reducing out-of-state tuition can be
characterized by the same sufficient statistic relating enrollment to tuition policies, under the interpretation that 1 − P reflects out-of-state attendance aggregated over all out-of-state institutions.
Turning to decentralization, we show, in a calibrated version of the model, that an increase in the
number of states leads to a reduction in non-resident tuition due to competition for non-resident
students. This decrease is small, however, and resident tuition falls more quickly, reflecting the
financial windfall to institutions associated with a mechanical increase in out-of-state attendance
due to the increased choice set. Moreover, non-resident tuition is bounded from below, above m,
even as the number of states grows large. This reflects the fact that universities retain market power
due to product differentiation. To summarize, an increase in the number of states beyond two does
not change the welfare analysis, and the tuition gap remains in the decentralized equilibrium even
with a large number of states.

4

Corrective Policies

This section considers three possible solutions to the distortion associated with higher non-resident
tuition under decentralization. We first discuss interventions by the federal government followed
by reciprocity agreements between state governments. Finally, we consider residence-based tuition
vouchers.
Given that the federal government internalizes the welfare of both residents and non-residents
of a given institution, it is natural that higher-level governments may be able to solve this problem. The judicial branch is one possible forum for this debate, and non-resident students have
indeed challenged the constitutionality of state universities discriminating against non-residents
when setting tuition. Federal courts, however, have generally ruled in favor of states and against
non-resident students due to the fact that non-residents do not pay taxes in the state supporting
the public institution. In addition, federal courts have given states significant leeway in defining
residency for tuition purposes, allowing, for example, one-year residency requirements (Palley
(1976)). Importantly, attending the university does not typically count towards the residency re12

quirement, and students thus do not qualify for in-state tuition following their first year of study.
Given this, another possibility involves new federal law requiring state institutions to charge the
same tuition to non-residents coupled with a plan that would involve a series of payments between
states.11
In the absence of federal intervention, and given the hypothesized welfare losses associated
with this non-resident tuition distortion, it is natural that state governments may attempt to reduce
barriers via reciprocity agreements under which students can pay in-state tuition rates at out-ofstate institutions. Four regional exchanges provide discounts to non-resident students from member
states: the Western Undergraduate Exchange, the Midwest Student Exchange Program, the Academic Common Market, and Tuition Break (New England). A vast majority of states (44 out of 50)
participate in at least one of these exchanges (Marsicano, 2015).12 There are several limitations of
these agreements in practice. First, participation is selective, with not all public institutions in these
states participating. Second, slots are not guaranteed and tend to be made available to students only
when excess space is available. Third, these exchanges may only be available to students whose
major field of study is not offered in their home state. Finally, students receive only discounts from
the non-resident rate and pay more than residents.13 Despite these limitations, we provide some
11 There

are two key details that need to be addressed when designing such a plan. First, while states set symmetric
in-state rates in the theoretical model, tuition rates differ across states in the U.S. depending upon the level of subsidies
from the state government and other factors. Given this, one limitation of eliminating non-resident tuition involves
a free-rider problem. In particular, the incentives for states to subsidize public colleges and universities with tax
revenue collected from residents would be diminished. Given this, any transfer plan may need to involve payments
from states that have relatively small subsidies to states that have relatively large subsidies. Second, while the baseline
model assumed that states are of equal population, state sizes differ in the United States and smaller states will tend
to experience net inflows of students in these programs. Given this, and in the presence of state subsidies for higher
education, any transfer plan may also need to involve payments from states that are net exporters of students, typically
large population states, to states that are net importers of students, typically small population states. For further
information on a possible federal interstate payment plan, see Palley (1976).
12 In addition, specific state universities sometimes provide discounts to students living in nearby border areas. The University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth, for example, while participating in Tuition Break,
also offers the Ocean State Proximity Plan, which offers discounts to residents of Rhode Island.
See
http://www.umassd.edu/undergraduate/tuition/ (accessed October 16, 2015). Also, the most comprehensive reciprocity
agreement is between Minnesota and three of their neighbors, Wisconsin, North Dakota, and South Dakota. This program is designed to completely remove tuition and admissions barriers and has been in existence since the 1960s.
During the fall of 2013, over 40,000 students participated in this program. Given that institutions charge different instate tuition rates, this reciprocity program involves students paying the maximum of the tuition in the home state and
in the state in which the institution is located. Also, given heterogeneity in population and that these states subsidize
their institutions, there are typically payments from large states to small states. For example, North Dakota receives
a net inflow of students from Minnesota and, as compensation, the state of Minnesota makes an interstate payment to
the state of North Dakota. For more information, see http://archive.leg.state.mn.us/docs/2015/mandated/150402.pdf
(accessed October 16, 2015).
13 In some cases, these discounts are substantial and participating students pay tuition that is close to resident rates,
while in other cases participating students receive relatively small discounts.For example, students participating in
Tuition Break during the 2015-16 academic year and attending the University of Maine pay $12,570 in tuition, substantially less than the $26,640 paid by non-residents not participating and closer to the resident rate of $8,370. At
the University of New Hampshire, by contrast, participants pay $24,588, closer to the non-resident rate of $27,320

13

evidence below that these reciprocity agreements are efficiency-enhancing.
Another natural solution would be for states to provide their residents with tuition vouchers.
In the context of the model, state E, for example, could provide vouchers in an amount equal to
nW − rE that could be used at the out-of-state college W. This would equalize tuition at in-state and
out-of-state institutions as residents of E would pay tuition equal to rE regardless of institution.14
One potential problem with these vouchers involves economic incidence. In particular, since residents of state E would no longer internalize out-of-state tuition, state W , given their objective
to maximize total tuition revenue from non-residents, would have an incentive to further increase
out-of-state tuition by an amount equal to the voucher (nW − rE ). This would increase non-resident
gross tuition from nW to 2nW − rE , and net tuition paid by students would remain equal to nW .
Thus, the benefits of tuition vouchers may be captured by the out-of-state institution, rather than
by the state resident, with no change in the allocation of students across institutions.

5

Data

To estimate the sufficient statistic identified in the model, we use a border discontinuity design,
as detailed below, in which we examine institutional enrollment patterns for students living close
to state borders. To measure this distribution, we use the restricted access version of the HERI
Freshman Survey, covering the years 1997-2011. In this survey, incoming freshman at select
institutions are asked a battery of questions involving their demographics, high school experience,
and, importantly for our analysis, the zip code of their permanent residence.15 In addition, we can
distinguish between public and private institutions, and the restricted access version also includes
a measure of the state in which the institution is located. Further, our restricted access version also
includes measures of in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees for each institution included in the
analysis.16 To summarize, our analysis uses information on student permanent residence (zip code
and state), institution state, institutional status (public or private), and tuition and fees, separately
for residents and non-residents.
Given the survey design, note that this is a sample of institutions, not a sample of students.
Hence, our unit of analysis to follow involves institutions, rather than students. Further, this is
than to the resident rate of $11,128. These figures are taken from http://www.nebhe.org/info/pdf/tuitionbreak/201516_RSP_TuitionBreak_TuitionRates.pdf (accessed October 16, 2015).
14 The closest such system is the program discussed above, under which residents of Washington D.C. receive up
to $10,000 to attend out-of-state institutions. One important difference, however, is that this system is funded by the
federal government, rather than by the District itself.
15 We exclude institutions that had fewer than 100 respondents to the survey in a given year. In addition, to focus on
a consistent set of institutions, we exclude two-year institutions.
16 These tuition measures are taken from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) at the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES).

14

not necessarily a representative sample of institutions as colleges choose to participate in the survey in order to gather information about their incoming students. Nonetheless, participation is
widespread, with over 1,000 institutions participating at least once during our sample period.17
To implement the border discontinuity design, we use zip code maps to first calculate the
distance from each zip code centroid to every state border.18 For each zip code, we then focus on
the closest state border. More formally, let δz be the distance from zip code z to the closet border.
Then, we code distance as negative (dzc = −δz ) for students attending institutions in the closest
border state and code distance as positive (dzc = δz ) for students attending in-state colleges. We
focus on bandwidths of 20km, and, as a robustness check, we also present results for bandwidths
of 10km and 30km.
Using this sample, we then collapse zip codes into larger geographic units, which we refer
to as distance bins. In our baseline analysis, we create two distance bins for each border, one
representing the out-of-state side of the border and one representing the in-state side of the border.
Each of these border sides includes students living within the bandwidth of 20 kilometers of the
border. We also refer to these 20km border bins as border sides. Second, we create two-kilometer
distance bins. That is, for the baseline bandwidth of 20 kilometers on either side of the border,
there are 20 distance bins for each border, the first between 18 and 20 kilometers outside of the
border, the second between 16 and 18 kilometers outside of the border, etc.
We complement this analysis of HERI data with two additional datasets. First, we analyze
information on student payments from the restricted access version of the National Postsecondary
Student Aid Study (NPSAS), collected by the NCES. 19 These data have information on both
official tuition and fees, separately for residents and non-residents, and as well as actual payments
made by students surveyed. While our baseline HERI data include the former measure, they do
not include the latter measure. In the analysis to follow, we use two measures of payments, one
being tuition and fees paid and the second being net tuition and fees, which subtracts out any grants
received by the student.
Second, as a further complement to our analysis of the baseline HERI data, we examine the
Educational Longitudinal Study (ELS 2002-2006). These data consist of a nationally representative longitudinal study of 10th graders in 2002 and 12th graders in 2004. In addition to measures
of the zip code of permanent residence, these data include information on the set of colleges to
which students applied and the set of colleges to which they were accepted.20 We then infer the
17 This

is an unbalanced panel of institutions as few participate in all 15 years of the sample.
use 2000 Census zip code maps for the 1997-2000 HERI data and 2010 Census zip code maps for the 20012011 HERI data.
19 We analyze data from the following waves: 1999-2000, 2003-2004, 2007-2008, and 2011-2012.
20 These choice sets are based upon retrospective survey questions during the third wave, conducted in 2006, during
which students were attending college.
18 We

15

choice from this set of acceptances based upon the school that they chose to attend. Using these
data, we then examine both admissions decisions by institutions and student enrollment decisions
given these choice sets.

6

Methods

As described above, the goal of the empirical analysis involves estimating the responsiveness of
out-of-state enrollment to out-of-state tuition (i.e. ∂∂ Pn ). We begin by describing a simple border
discontinuity (BD) design, which compares enrollment between residents and non-residents, both
living close to the border. While the border discontinuity design does not use any information on
tuition, we also develop a tuition discontinuity design (TD). This design also compares enrollment
between residents and non-residents, both living close to the border, but also uses information on
the drop in tuition when crossing the border. Finally, we discuss a hybrid design, which compares the border discontinuity in enrollment between institutions with large and small differences
between resident and non-resident tuition.
A key identification challenge involves separately measuring the effects of distance and the
effects of the tuition gap. In particular, to separate distance and responses to the tuition gap, we
estimate the responsiveness of non-resident enrollment to the tuition gap via the following border
discontinuity (BD) design:
ln(Nbct ) = g(dbct ) + ρ BD 1[dbct > 0] + θct + θbt
where Nbct is the number of students from distance bin b attending college c in year t, and dbct
represents the distance from b to the border associated with c. The function g is smooth in distance,
which, as described above, is negative (positive) for out-of-state (in-state) students. Finally, θct
represents college-by-year fixed effects, and θbt represents bin-by-year fixed effects. Thus, the
comparison is both within institutions and within geographic areas.
By focusing on students living close to state borders, we can separate the role of tuition from
the role of geography. In particular, ρ BD is the percent change in enrollment when crossing the
border:
ρ BD = lim [ln(Nbct )|in − state) − ln(Nbct )|out − o f − state)]
dbct →0

Using the theoretical model outlined above, we have that, considering college c, this key border
discontinuity parameter can be written as:
ρ BD = ρ(nc − rc )
16

Thus, the key coefficient from this border discontinuity design identifies the product of ρ, the
responsiveness of enrollment to tuition, and (nc − rc ), the tuition gap between residents and nonresidents. That is, any border discontinuity reflects both an underlying difference in tuition and
student responses to this difference in tuition.
In order to separate these two channels, tuition differences and enrollment responses to these
differences, behind any border discontinuity, we next discuss the tuition discontinuity design,
which incorporates information on tuition for residents and non-residents. In particular, we estimate the following tuition discontinuity design regression:
ln(Nbct ) = f (dbct ) − ρ T Dtbct + θct + θbt
where tbct represents tuition for students attending institution c from distance bin b at time t. This
equals in-state tuition for residents and out-of-state tuition for non-residents. More formally, tbct =
nct 1[dbct < 0] + rct 1[dbct > 0]. Thus, this tuition discontinuity design is identified by measuring the
change in enrollment associated with the discontinuous drop in tuition when crossing the border
from neighboring states into the institution state.
As before, the key measured discontinuity can be interpreted as follows.
ρ T D (nc − rc ) = lim [E(ln(Nbct )|in − state) − E(ln(Nbct )|out − o f − state)]
dbct →0

Given the results above, in the context of the border discontinuity design, we have that:
ρTD = ρ
Thus, by incorporating measures of resident and non-resident tuition, the tuition discontinuity design allows us to identify the key theoretical parameter measuring the responsiveness of enrollment
to tuition.
Finally, we investigate whether any measured effects in our tuition discontinuity design are
driven by tuition differences or other reasons that students may attend in-state institutions (in addition to geography). For example, if public institutions primarily recruit in-state students, then our
tuition discontinuity design will attribute this recruiting to lower in-state tuition. To separate these
other reasons why students may attend in-state institutions from both tuition and geography, we
also estimate the following hybrid discontinuity design that includes both distance and tuition:
ln(Nbct ) = f (dbct ) − ρ T Dtbct + ρ RD 1[dbct > 0] + θct + θbt
As shown, this hybrid design is identified both by border discontinuities and by differences in the

17

tuition gap across institutions. In particular, this design now compares the enrollment discontinuity
between institutions with large and small tuition gaps. The parameter from the border discontinuity
design (ρ RD ) captures all non-tuition factors, such as recruiting, contributing to the border discontinuity, and the parameter from the tuition discontinuity design (ρ T D ) isolates the role of tuition.

7

Results

Before estimating the border discontinuity models developed above, we provide evidence on differences in tuition between residents and non-residents using information on both posted tuition
prices and actual payments by students. Having established that non-residents pay more than residents, we then describe the results from our border discontinuity design. We then address two alternative explanations for our border discontinuity, one involving differential admissions standards
and another involving endogenous sorting. We then present results from the tuition discontinuity
design and the hybrid discontinuity design. We also investigate whether reciprocity agreements reduce border discontinuities. We then conduct a similar analysis using a separate dataset on student
choice sets. Finally, our results are compared for those for private institutions.

7.1

Differences in Tuition Payments

As a starting point, we document differences in posted tuition and fees, which we also refer to as
sticker prices since they are not adjusted for any discounts in the form of grants. Table 1 provides
average tuition and fees (2011 dollars), separately by year and for residents and non-residents, in
the sample of institutions included in the HERI data. As shown, in-state tuition rose from just
over $5,000 in 1997 to just over $8,000 in 2011. For non-residents, by contrast, tuition rose from
roughly $13,500 in 1997 to over $19,000 in 2011. As shown in the final column, tuition rose more
rapidly for non-residents, as the gap rose from just over $8,000 in 1997 to just over $11,000 in
2011. Averaged across all years, and as shown in the final row, resident tuition is roughly $6,000
and non-resident tuition is roughly $15,000, implying an average gap of $9,000 during our sample
period.
Of course, student payments are often well below these posted tuition prices due to grants and
other forms of financial aid. To examine student payments, we turn to evidence from the NPSAS,
which, as described above, includes information on both tuition payments and payments net of
grants. We begin by analyzing payments by students to public institutions in Table 2. As shown
in the first column, in-state students pay around $7,200 less than out-of-state students, and this
difference is statistically significant at conventional levels. This gap is similar in magnitude to,
but a bit lower than, the $9,000 average gap across the HERI sample years, as documented in
18

Table 1. We next regress payments on the sticker price adjusted for whether or not the student
is a resident or a non-resident. If payments are perfectly correlated with sticker prices, then we
expect a coefficient of one. If payments are uncorrelated with sticker prices, by contrast, then we
expect a coefficient of zero. As shown in column 2, we find that there is a correlation, with an
increase in the sticker price of one dollar associated with an increase in student tuition payments
of 76 cents. Column 3 controls for both this sticker price and a simple indicator for whether or
not the student is in-state. As shown, even after controlling for residency status, sticker prices
matter. Said differently, the difference in tuition payments between residents and non-residents is
larger at institutions with larger differences between resident and non-resident tuition. Columns
4-6 provide results from analogous specifications in which the dependent variable is net tuition and
fees, which adjust for all grants received by the student. As shown, resident pay about $6,400 less
than non-residents on net. Likewise, sticker prices also matter, with an increase in the sticker price
of one dollar associated with a 70 cent increase in student net payments. Finally, as in column 3,
the difference in net tuition payments between residents and non-residents is also larger when the
difference in sticker prices is larger.

7.2

Border Discontinuity Design

Having established that residents pay less than non-residents at public institutions, we next provide
results from our border discontinuity design. We begin with graphical evidence. Figure 3 plots the
number of students in the HERI data attending a given institution in a given year from a given 2km
distance bin. The x-axis depicts distance, in kilometers, from the border, where negative distance
represents out-of-state bins and positive distance represents in-state bins. Naturally, as distance
on the x-axis crosses zero, bins change from being non-resident to resident. Each bar represents
the average enrollment in that distance bin across all public institutions. For example, on average
across public institutions and years 1997-2011, there are roughly 4 students in bins between 0 and
2 kilometers inside the border.21
As shown, there is a striking discontinuity in enrollment, jumping from below one on the outof-state side of the border to around 6 on the in-state side of the border. Also, there is no discernible
slope in enrollment on either side of the border, with fewer than one out-of-state student on average
and roughly 6 in-state students, regardless of distance to the border. As the HERI data combine
large and small institutions, we next present results in which the number of students in a given
bin attending a given institution is scaled by the total number of students attending that institution
and within 20 kilometers of the border. As shown, we see a similar discontinuity, with an increase
21 Note

that there are fewer students living very close to the border (within two kilometers). This is due to the fact
that there are few zip codes with centroids within two kilometers of the state border. Note that all regressions include
bin fixed effects, which control for this pattern.

19

of 8 percentage points, from roughly one percent of enrollment in each two-kilometer bin on the
non-resident side of the border to roughly 9 percent of enrollment in a given bin on the in-state
side of the border.
Table 3 presents regression versions of these figures, based upon two border sides, which, as
noted above, aggregate the ten 2km distance bins into a single geographic unit of observation.
Also, as noted above, these specifications all include institution-year fixed effects and border sideyear fixed effects. As shown, using a baseline bandwidth of 20km, there is an increase of roughly
60 students when crossing the border. Column 2 presents results using the percentage of students
in each border side (i.e., dividing enrollment in each border side by the total enrollment around the
border). As shown, there is an increase in enrollment of 81 percentage points when crossing the
border. Finally, in order to measure the percent change in enrollment when crossing the border,
column 3 presents results using ln(Nbct + 1) as the dependent variable.22 As shown, we again have
that enrollment increases substantially when crossing from the out-of-state side of the border to
the in-state side.
We next consider three robustness checks. First, Tables 4 and 5 present results using our baseline larger geographic unit, border sides, but for alternative bandwidths. As shown in Table 4, when
considering all zip codes within a smaller bandwidth, 10 kilometers around the border, the change
in the enrollment is smaller. This is due largely to the mechanical effect of having fewer potential
enrollees when considering a smaller bandwidth. The results in columns 2 and 3, which do account
for differences in the number of potential enrollees, are a bit smaller in magnitude when compared
to the baseline results in Table 3 but remain positive and statistically significant at conventional
levels. Likewise, when considering all zip codes within a larger bandwidth (30 kilometers around
the border) in Table 5 , the results in columns 2 and 3 are a bit larger in magnitude when compared
to the baseline results in Table 3. These larger effects for larger bandwidths may reflect the fact
that the analysis now includes students further away from the border, and travel costs may make
the out-of-state students less comparable to the corresponding in-state students. Taken together,
these results are robust to alternative bandwidth measures.
As a second robustness check, we next examine results using our baseline bandwidth of 20km
but using 2km distance bins, our smaller geographic unit. These specifications allow for us to
separately control for distance to the border, which, as noted above, is negative on the out-of-state
side of the border and positive on the in-state side. The results are presented in Table 6. As shown
in column 1, we have an increase of roughly 8 students when comparing the distance bin between
the border and 2km inside the border to the distance bin between the border and 2km outside of the
border. Likewise, in column 2, we have an increase in enrollment of 7.5 percentage points, relative
22 Note

that we use ln(Nbct + 1) rather than ln(Nbct ) since some border sides have zero enrollment. Results dropping
these bins and using ln(Nbct ) yield similar results.

20

to the total enrollment within 20km of the border. Finally, in column 3, we again have a substantial
increase in enrollment when crossing the border.
As a third robustness check, we drop institutions that are close to state borders since the nonresident side of the border may no longer be comparable to the resident side of the border. For
example, differences in travel times could be substantial for an institution located 10 kilometers
inside the border. To do so, we drop institutions within 30 kilometers of the border, and, as shown
in Table 7, the results are robust to dropping these institutions.
Taken together, the graphical and regression estimates point towards a strong and robust border
discontinuity, with large increases in enrollment at public institutions when crossing the border.
This suggests that there may be substantial welfare gains associated with reducing the gap between
resident and non-resident tuition.

7.3

Alternative Explanations

We next consider two alternative explanations, beyond geography, for our border discontinuity.
The first alternative explanation involves differential admissions thresholds. While our theoretical
model does not include an admissions margin, state universities maximizing resident welfare may,
in addition to setting differential tuition, have an incentive to set lower admissions standards for
residents, relative to non-residents. Indeed, an analysis of self-reported student acceptance decisions, as detailed in Section 7.5 below, documents that in-state applicants are more likely to be
accepted by colleges, and especially so at public institutions.23 Given this, our border discontinuity in enrollment could be explained by a difference in student composition when crossing the
border, with high ability students on both sides of the border but only low ability students on the
in-state side of the border.
We address this alternative explanation in three ways. First, we restrict the sample to high
ability students, defined as students with SAT/ACT test scores that are above the institutional median, defined separately for each year in our data. Presumably these students were unconstrained,
or at least less constrained, by the admissions process at the institution. As shown in Table 8,
our results remain economically and statistically significant when focusing on this sub-population.
Based upon this border discontinuity for the high ability sample, we conclude that our baseline
border discontinuity cannot be explained solely by a sharp change in student ability when crossing
the state border.
Second, we next include all students but restrict our sample to less selective institutions, those
with median test scores below the corresponding median across all institutions in our sample. At
these non-selective institutions, admissions processes are less salient, and thresholds should thus
23 See

also Groen and White (2004)

21

be less binding for non-residents. As shown in Table 9, however, our results for these less selective
institutions are similar to those in the baseline specification. This again suggests that our baseline
results are not driven by differences in admissions criteria for residents and non-residents.
Third, as detailed in Section 7.5 below, we use information on student applications and admissions to construct choice sets. Then, conditional on being accepted, we find that students are
more likely to attend in-state institutions and especially so when there is a large difference between
resident and non-resident tuition. This is also suggests that our baseline results are not driven by
admissions advantages for residents.
A second alternative explanation involves endogenous sorting around state borders. That is,
students (or parents) with a strong preference for a specific institution may choose to live inside
the state border in order to access in-state tuition. For two reasons, we feel that this is unlikely
to explain our large estimated border discontinuities. First, students apply for college admissions
during their senior year of high school, and accessing in-state tuition requires one year of residency
prior to enrolling at the university. Thus, in order to access in-state tuition for the first year of college, parents would need to change their residence in advance of the college applications process.
Second, we see neither any bunching of students just inside of the state border nor a corresponding
drop in students just outside of the state border, a pattern that would naturally be expected under
endogenous sorting.

7.4

Variation in Tuition Policies

To further explore the role of tuition, we next present results exploiting variation in tuition policies.
In this case, we measure the change in enrollment associated with the decrease in tuition when
crossing from the out-of-state side to the in-state side of the border. Following that, we also present
results from the hybrid discontinuity design, in which we combine the border discontinuity design
and the tuition discontinuity design. Finally, we compare discontinuities along borders with and
without reciprocity agreements, which, as described in Section 4, reduce the gap between resident
and non-resident tuition.
These tuition discontinuity design results are presented in Table 10, in which tuition is measured as tuition and fees (in thousands of 2011 dollars). As described above, tuition equals the
non-resident rate for the out-of-state side of the border and the resident rate for the in-state side of
the border. As shown in column 1, an increase in tuition of $1,000 is associated with an decrease
of roughly 6 students. Thus, achieving the baseline border discontinuity of 60 students in column
1 of Table 3 requires a tuition gap of roughly $10,000. As shown in column 2, which uses the
percent of enrollment as the dependent variable, an increase in tuition of $1,000 is associated with
an decrease of 8 percentage points, when compared to the total border population. Finally, column

22

3 documents that an increase in tuition of $1,000 is associated with an decrease in enrollment of
roughly 19 percent.
We next present results in Table 11 from our hybrid discontinuity design, in which we control
for both the simple border discontinuity and the tuition discontinuity. This specification compares
enrollment discontinuities along borders with large tuition gaps to borders with smaller tuition
gaps. As shown, the coefficient on the simple in-state indicator remains positive, suggesting that
there is a discontinuity even in the absence of a gap between non-resident and resident tuition.
After controlling for the in-state indicator, the coefficient on tuition does fall in magnitude, relative
to those in Table 10. Nonetheless, the coefficient remains negative and statistically significant
in all three specifications. Thus, while the hybrid design does suggest a somewhat smaller role
for tuition, when compared to the tuition discontinuity design, the coefficients on tuition remain
negative and statistically significant.
Finally, we return to our border discontinuity design but compare reciprocity borders to nonreciprocity borders. Reciprocity borders are those in which the two states participate in the same
exchange, defined as one of the four regional exchanges described in Section 4.2. Likewise, nonreciprocity borders are defined as those in which the two states do not participate in the same
exchange, even if one or both do participate in an exchange. We hypothesize that, due to tuition
discounts, border discontinuities should be smaller along reciprocity borders. In order to classify
borders, we compiled a list of state entry years for each exchange from the exchange websites
and state government publications and then categorized every border, in every year, as reciprocity
or non-reciprocity.24 As shown in Table 12, discontinuities are indeed smaller along reciprocity
borders, when compared to non-reciprocity borders, although this difference is only statistically
significant in the first column.

7.5

Analysis of Admissions and Choice Sets

As a complement to our analysis of HERI data, we next analyze data from the Educational Longitudinal Study (ELS 2002-2006), as described above. Unlike our baseline HERI survey, these ELS
data have information on student applications and acceptances. We use these data to first analyze
the role of residency status in admissions decisions. Then, using these measures of admissions to
create choice sets, we can identify the role of tuition in student choices via revealed preference
(Avery et al. (2013)). As described above, these analyses shed further light on the admissions
margin in our baseline enrollment discontinuities.
We begin by analyzing whether admissions standards differ between residents and non-residents.
24 The

exchange websites are http://msep.mhec.org (MSEP), http://www.nebhe.org/programs-overview/rsp-tuitionbreak/overview/ (NEBHE), http://www.sreb.org (SREB), and http://www.wiche.edu/wue (WUE). Also helpful was
Abbott’s history of the WUE Abbott (2004).

23

In particular, Table 13 provides the results from our analysis of institution acceptance decisions.
In this analysis, we treat student-application pairs as the unit of observation and then estimate
a linear probability model for whether or not the student is accepted at a given institution. Key
independent variables include an in-state indicator and SAT and GPA scores. In addition, all specifications include institution fixed effects, which control for selectivity.25 Column 1 provides an
analysis of public institutions. As shown, SAT and GPA scores are, not surprisingly, positively
related to admissions decisions. Conditional on these measures, we find that in-state applicants
are 4 percentage points more likely to be admitted to public institutions, when compared to out-ofstate applicants, and these differences are statistically significant at conventional levels. Column 2
includes student fixed effects, and identification in this case comes from students who applied to
both in-state and out-of-state institutions. As shown, the results are even stronger in this case, with
admissions rates for residents 7 percent points higher than admissions rates for non-residents.
Next, using the set of schools to which students were admitted, we construct student choice
sets and then estimate alternative-specific conditional logit models of student enrollment decisions.
These models include institution fixed effects, and identification thus comes from institutions that
are both chosen by at least one accepted student and not chosen by at least one accepted student.26
Note that these data do not include enough student respondents to conduct a border discontinuity
design. Instead, we control for the distance, in thousands of kilometers, between the student, based
upon the zip code of the permanent residence, and the institution. Analogously to our border discontinuity design, column 1 of Table 14 reports results from a specification including an indicator
for in-state institutions and a quadratic measure of distance. As shown, conditional on distance,
students are more likely to attend in-state institutions than out-of-state institutions, and this difference is statistically significant. Analogously to our tuition discontinuity design, column 2 reports
results from a specification including tuition, in thousands of dollars and adjusted for whether the
student is in-state or out-of-state. As shown, conditional on distance, students are more likely to
attend institutions with tuition discounts for residents. Finally, in analogue to our hybrid discontinuity design, column 3 reports results from a specification controlling for both an in-state indicator
and tuition. As shown, the coefficient on in-state falls and becomes statistically insignificant, and
the coefficient on tuition is relatively stable and remains statistically significant at conventional
levels. In all three specifications, it is clear that distance enters non-linearly, with distance becoming a positive factor in student decisions at roughly 2,500 kilometers. Given this limitation of the
quadratic specification, we next estimate specifications controlling for the natural log of distance,
25 We

restrict attention to students reporting both GPA and SAT/ACT scores, and the sample of institutions consists
of four-year institutions with at least 10 appearances in student application sets.
26 We restrict attention to students reporting a choice set of at least two and attending a single institution. The sample
of institutions consists of four-year institutions and, due to computational considerations, at least 10 appearances in
student choice sets.

24

which guarantees a monotonic relationship. As shown in column 4-6, the results are similar in
this alternative specification, with students more likely to attend in-state institutions and especially
those with large discounts for residents. To summarize, this analysis of choice sets using a separate
data set corroborates our baseline results, with students more likely to choose in-state institutions
from their choice sets and especially so when large discounts are offered to residents.

7.6

Private Institutions

Returning to the HERI data, we next consider private institutions, where tuition does not discriminate between residents and non-residents. Figures 5 and 6 present border discontinuity results,
again using a bandwidth of 20km. As shown, we still find a discontinuity for private institutions,
with enrollment increasing from roughly 0.5 students on average per bin on the out-of-state side of
the border to roughly 1.5 students on the in-state side of the border. While this increase of 1 student is less than the increase of roughly 5 students for public institutions (Figure 3), these are not
directly comparable given that private institutions tend to be smaller than public institutions. To
address this issue, Figure 6 presents results based upon enrollment as a percent of the total border
enrollment at a given institution. As shown, the fraction of students attending a given institution
increases by roughly 4 percentage points, from 3 percent to 7 percent. This is smaller than the
jump, as documented in Figure 4, of roughly 9 percentage points for public institutions. Table
15 presents regression versions of these figures, in which we estimate border discontinuity regressions for private universities. As shown in columns 1, we find an increase of roughly 9 students
when crossing the border. This represents a roughly 50 percentage point increase in enrollment,
as shown in column 2. Finally, in column 3, we find an increase in enrollment of 74 percent when
crossing the border. These are again smaller than the corresponding regression results for public
institutions.
This finding of border discontinuities for private institutions is surprising given that these institutions do not distinguish between residents and non-residents for tuition purposes. In the Appendix, we explore two potential explanations for this border discontinuity for private institutions.
First, in parallel to Section 7.1 and using NPSAS payments data, we show that residents pay less
on net than non-residents even at private institutions. This difference is largely due to higher state
aid for residents and is consistent with several state aid programs that provide grants to state residents attending private institutions within the state. Second, in parallel to Section 7.5 and using
ELS data on self-reported student acceptance decisions, we show that in-state applicants are more
likely to be accepted by private institutions. Thus, the border discontinuity for private institutions
may reflect both financial differences and differences in admissions standards between residents
and non-residents. Finally, we note that the financial and admissions advantages for residents are

25

smaller at private institutions than at public institutions.
To summarize, we find evidence of border discontinuities for private institutions. These are
smaller than the border discontinuities for public institutions and can be explained by both financial
and admissions advantages for residents.

8

Welfare Consequences

We next use our parameter estimates from the tuition and hybrid discontinuity designs as inputs
into measures of welfare changes associated with reducing the tuition gap between non-residents
and residents. Recall from the theoretical model that the change in welfare associated with a one
dollar decrease in non-resident tuition (∆n = −1) in the symmetric case can be written as:
P

−(1 − P) − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
P − ∂∂Pr (n − r)

!
+ (1 − P)

Note further that ∂∂Pr = −ρP(1 − P). Plugging this in and re-arranging, we have that the welfare
change is given by:


−(1 − P) + ρ(n − r)P(1 − P)
P
+ (1 − P)
P + ρ(n − r)P(1 − P)
Thus, the parameter ρ is a sufficient statistic for the change in resident tuition given a change in
non-resident tuition, and this is itself a sufficient statistic for the change in welfare.
To measure these key parameters, we use the estimate of the parameter ρ from both the tuition
design in Table 10 and the hybrid designs in Table 11. Also, we assume an in-state fraction of 75
percent, which is similar to the national fraction of students attending in-state institutions. Finally,
the researcher must also specify a tuition gap, and we use a gap of $6,416, as reported using data
on net payments for residents and non-residents at public institutions in Table 2.
As shown in the second panel of Table 16, there is a mechanical benefit for non-residents,
whose welfare rises by 25 cents, reflecting the fraction attending out-of-state institutions, when
reducing non-resident tuition by one dollar. In the absence of a behavioral responses, resident
tuition must rise by 33 cents, leading to a welfare reduction for residents equal to 25 cents (third
panel). Thus, in the absence of a behavioral response, there is no aggregate change in welfare. With
a behavioral response, by contrast, resident tuition needs to be increased by only 3 cents (column
1), leading to a welfare decline for residents equal to 2 cents, as shown in the bottom panel. Thus,
aggregate welfare rises by 23 cents. Note that this large increase in welfare is driven by the fact
that resident tuition needs to increased only slightly following a reduction in non-resident tuition.
This is in turn driven by the large behavioral response, an increase in out-of-state enrollment and

26

a reduction in in-state enrollment, and the associated financial windfall received by institutions.
Given that the estimated tuition discontinuity may include factors other than tuition, we next use
a more conservative estimate of -0.0610 from the hybrid discontinuity design (column 3 of Table
11). As shown, the welfare gain is somewhat smaller, equal to 9 cents in aggregate, as resident
tuition must increase by 21 cents in this case.

9

Conclusion

We view this paper as a first step in the development of measures of welfare losses associated with
higher non-resident tuition. Future work could extend this in several directions. First, while reducing the tuition gap may improve efficiency, it may be detrimental from an equity perspective. This
would be the case, for example, if low-income students tend to attend in-state institutions due to the
low tuition and higher income students tend to disproportionately attend out-of-state institutions.
In this case, when reducing the gap between non-resident and resident tuition, high income students would experience a reduction in tuition, at the expense of low-income students. Thus, there
may be a standard trade-off between equity and efficiency when setting tuition for residents and
non-residents. Second, our welfare estimates are local in nature, and we thus cannot calculate the
welfare consequences of large policy changes, such as interventions designed to completely eliminate differences between resident and non-resident tuition. Consideration of these larger policy
changes would require estimates of the full set of structural parameters (Chetty (2008)).
To summarize, we show that, in the context of a simple discrete choice model, state governments inefficiently distinguish between residents and non-residents when setting tuition policy.
The welfare gain from reducing the tuition gap can be estimated as a sufficient statistic measuring
the responsiveness of out-of-state attendance to out-of-state tuition. We estimate this sufficient
statistic using a border discontinuity design. Both graphical and regression analysis document a
substantial enrollment discontinuity. We also find evidence of discontinuities as tuition decreases
when crossing the border, and these results are robust to a hybrid discontinuity design, in which
we compares discontinuities along borders with large and small declines in tuition for residents,
relative to non-residents. We also find smaller enrollment discontinuities along reciprocity borders.
These results are corroborated using a separate dataset that includes information on student choice
sets. Finally, back-of-the envelope calculations suggest substantial welfare gains from reducing
the tuition gap.

27

References
Abbott, F. C. (2004). A history of the western interstate commission for higher
education: The first forty years. Western Interstate Commission for Higher
Education.
Abraham, K. G. and M. A. Clark (2006). Financial aid and students college decisions
evidence from the district of columbia tuition assistance grant program. Journal of
Human Resources 41(3), 578–610.
Avery, C. and C. M. Hoxby (2004). Do and should financial aid packages affect
students’ college choices? In College choices: The economics of where to go,
when to go, and how to pay for it, pp. 239–302. University of Chicago Press.
Avery, C. N., M. E. Glickman, C. M. Hoxby, and A. Metrick (2013). A revealed
preference ranking of us colleges and universities. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128(1), 425–467.
Besley, T. and S. Coate (2003). Centralized versus decentralized provision of local
public goods: a political economy approach. Journal of public economics 87(12),
2611–2637.
Black, S. E. (1999). Do better schools matter? parental valuation of elementary
education. Quarterly journal of economics, 577–599.
Blanchard, O. J., L. F. Katz, R. E. Hall, and B. Eichengreen (1992). Regional
evolutions. Brookings papers on economic activity 1992(1), 1–75.
Bound, J., J. Groen, G. Kezdi, and S. Turner (2004). Trade in university training:
cross-state variation in the production and stock of college-educated labor. Journal
of Econometrics 121(1), 143–173.
Chetty, R. (2008). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between
structural and reduced-form methods.
Chetty, R. et al. (2008). Moral hazard versus liquidity and optimal unemployment
insurance. Journal of Political Economy 116(2), 173–234.

28

Cohodes, S. R. and J. S. Goodman (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college
completion: Massachusetts’ adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6(4), 251–285.
DePasquale, C. and K. Stange (2015). Labor supply effects of occupational
regulation: Evidence from the nurse licensure compact.
Dwenger, N., J. Storck, and K. Wrohlich (2012). Do tuition fees affect the mobility
of university applicants? evidence from a natural experiment. Economics of
Education Review 31(1), 155–167.
Dynarski, S. M. (2003). Does aid matter? measuring the effect of student aid on
college attendance and completion. American Economic Review 93(1), 279–288.
Epple, D., R. Romano, S. Sarpça, and H. Sieg (2013). The us market for higher
education: A general equilibrium analysis of state and private colleges and public
funding policies.
Finkelstein, A., N. Hendren, and E. F. Luttmer (2015). The value of medicaid:
Interpreting results from the oregon health insurance experiment. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Groat, H. T. (1964). Internal migration patterns of a population subgroup college
students, 1887-1958. American Journal of Sociology, 383–394.
Groen, J. A. and M. J. White (2004). In-state versus out-of-state students: the
divergence of interest between public universities and state governments. Journal
of Public Economics 88(9), 1793–1814.
Hoxby, C. M. and G. B. Bulman (2016). The effects of the tax deduction for
postsecondary tuition: Implications for structuring tax-based aid. Economics of
Education Review 51, 23–60.
Inman, R. P. and D. L. Rubinfeld (1997). Rethinking federalism. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 43–64.
Kane, T. J. (2007). Evaluating the impact of the dc tuition assistance grant program.
Journal of Human resources 42(3), 555–582.
Kennan, J. (2015). Spatial variation in higher education financing and the supply of
college graduates.
29

Knight, B. (2013). State gun policy and cross-state externalities: evidence from crime
gun tracing. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4), 200–229.
Mechtenberg, L. and R. Strausz (2008). The bologna process: How student mobility
affects multi-cultural skills and educational quality. International Tax and Public
Finance 15(2), 109–130.
Moretti, E. (2012). The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Morgan, J. N. (1983). Tuition policy and the interstate migration of college students.
Research in Higher Education 19(2), 183–195.
Noorbakhsh, A. and D. Culp (2002). The demand for higher education:
Pennsylvania’s nonresident tuition experience. Economics of Education
Review 21(3), 277–286.
Oates, W. E. (1972). Fiscal federalism.
Oates, W. E. (1999). An essay on fiscal federalism. Journal of economic literature,
1120–1149.
Palley, D. B. (1976). Resolving the nonresident student problem: Two federal
proposals. The Journal of Higher Education, 1–31.
Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. Review of
Economic Studies 68, 205–229.

30

r
r(n)

m

slope=-(1-P)/P

n
m

m+1/ρ

Figure 1: Resident and Non-Resident Tuition

31

V
VW +VE
VE

VW

m

n*

Figure 2: Welfare and Non-Resident Tuition

32

nW

0

2

Count students
4
6

8

Public: # students by distance bin from border

-19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
Y-variable is annual enrollment from each university, averaged across public universities.
This average is done for all years 1997-2011, in distance bin (km).
Sample size is n=130102.

Figure 3: Discontinuity in Enrollment: Public Institutions

0

.02

Percentage from each bin
.04
.06
.08

.1

Public: % enrollment by distance bin from border

-19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
Y-variable is percentage of a university's annual border enrollment from bin,
averaged across public universities, all years 1997-2011, within a distance bin (km).
Borders with fewer than 20 distance bins scaled by bin count. Sample size: n=109779.

Figure 4: Discontinuity in Percentage Enrollment: Public Institutions
33

0

.5

Count students
1
1.5

2

Private: # students by distance bin from border

-19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
Y-variable is annual enrollment from each university, averaged across private universities.
This average is done for all years 1997-2011, in distance bin (km).
Sample size is n=405759.

Figure 5: Discontinuity in Enrollment: Private Institutions

0

.02

Percentage from each bin
.04
.06
.08

.1

Private: % enrollment by distance bin from border

-19 -17 -15 -13 -11 -9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19
Y-variable is percentage of a university's annual border enrollment from bin,
averaged across private universities, all years 1997-2011, within a distance bin (km).
Borders with fewer than 20 distance bins scaled by bin count. Sample size: n=317146.

Figure 6: Discontinuity in Percentage Enrollment: Private Institutions
34

Table 1: Tuition Differences in HERI sample: Public Institutions
year
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
average

out-of-state
13.536
13.880
13.679
13.398
13.520
14.109
14.688
15.292
16.101
16.252
16.447
16.940
17.406
18.040
19.379
15.511

in-state
5.324
5.361
5.190
5.194
5.336
5.643
6.023
6.517
6.771
6.859
6.956
6.938
7.320
7.608
8.338
6.358

gap
8.252
8.519
8.487
8.205
8.184
8.466
8.647
8.776
9.330
9.392
9.492
10.002
10.086
10.432
11.042
9.154

All dollar values are in thousands of 2011 dollars.
Measures are based upon annual posted tuition and fees for full-time students.

Table 2: Student payments in NPSAS data: public
(1)
tuition/
fees paid
sticker
price
in-state
LHS
mean
N
R2

(2)
tuition/
fees paid
0.761***
(0.016)

-7.174***
(0.231)
6.263

6.271

(3)
tuition/ fees
paid
0.699***
(0.029)
-0.771***
(0.268)
6.271

56,110
0.612

55,700
0.647

55,700
0.648

(4)
net tuition/
fees paid

(5)
net tuition/
fees paid
0.701***
(0.022)

-6.416***
(0.285)
1.963

1.967

(6)
net tuition/
fees paid
0.704***
(0.038)
0.039
(0.353)
1.967

56,110
0.315

55,700
0.333

55,700
0.333

All specifications include, institution-by-year, state-of-residence-by-year, and cohort fixed effects.
Net tuition and fees paid is net of all grants received by the student.
All dollar values are in thousands of 2011 dollars.
Sticker price represents the price of tuition and fees, adjusted for whether a student is in or out of state.
The sample consists of full-time students attending four-year public institutions.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

35

Table 3: 20k border-sides specification, public institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
59.9542***
(5.8517)
17312
0.445

(2)
enroll(%)
0.8119***
(0.0077)
13862
0.895

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.7361***
(0.0517)
17312
0.760

Regressions run at border-side level for 20k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border-side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border-side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 4: 10k border-sides specification, public institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
32.9971***
(3.1806)
16550
0.444

(2)
enroll(%)
0.7964***
(0.0085)
12094
0.873

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.4545***
(0.0498)
16550
0.734

Regressions run at border-side level for 10k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border-side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border-side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 5: 30k border-side specification, public institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
78.6061***
(6.9741)
17482
0.460

(2)
enroll(%)
0.8222***
(0.0074)
14616
0.907

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.9129***
(0.0531)
17482
0.770

Regressions run at border-side level for 30k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border-side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border-side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

36

Table 6: 20k distance-bin specification, public institutions

in-state
distance
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
8.2553***
(0.5536)
-0.0350
(0.0222)
130102
0.381

(2)
enroll(%)
0.0751***
(0.0021)
0.0004***
(0.0001)
109779
0.409

(3)
ln(enroll)
0.8603***
(0.0273)
0.0032***
(0.0011)
130102
0.619

Regressions run at distance-bin level for 20k range.
All specifications include university-year FE and distance band-year FE.
Sample is public universities, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
Standard errors clustered at university-bin level
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 7: 20k border-side, non-border public institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
46.7364***
(5.3967)
16092
0.462

(2)
enroll(%)
0.8135***
(0.0083)
12536
0.892

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.6519***
(0.0501)
16092
0.779

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
Sample also drops universities within 30k of border.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

37

Table 8: 20k border-side specification, public, above median students

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
20.6244***
(2.2066)
17312
0.443

(2)
enroll(%)
0.7919***
(0.0091)
12016
0.867

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.2816***
(0.0447)
17312
0.721

Regressions run at border-side level for 20k range.
Sample is limited to students above median test score in univ-year,
public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border-side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border-side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 9: 20k border-side specification, less-selective public institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
41.1921***
(6.2068)
9336
0.483

(2)
enroll(%)
0.8388***
(0.0091)
6974
0.930

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.4875***
(0.0736)
9336
0.739

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is less-selective public universities, 1997-2011, excl. 2yr colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 10: 20k border-side tuition specification, public institutions

tuition
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
-6.2595***
(0.5735)
17152
0.438

(2)
enroll(%)
-0.0813***
(0.0016)
13745
0.805

(3)
ln(enroll)
-0.1856***
(0.0055)
17152
0.745

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

38

Table 11: 20k border-side hybrid specification, public institutions

in-state
tuition
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
49.7362***
(9.3996)
-1.3432*
(0.7595)
17152
0.447

(2)
enroll(%)
0.7483***
(0.0203)
-0.0083***
(0.0022)
13745
0.901

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.2608***
(0.1004)
-0.0610***
(0.0098)
17152
0.765

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 12: 20k border-side, public, tuition reciprocity agreements

in-state
in-state x exchange
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
69.0345***
(8.8296)
-22.0051**
(10.8870)
17140
0.445

(2)
enroll(%)
0.8197***
(0.0085)
-0.0187
(0.0162)
13594
0.893

(3)
ln(enroll)
1.7558***
(0.0734)
-0.0478
(0.0989)
17140
0.758

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is public universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

39

Table 13: Analysis of Institution Acceptance Decisions
(1)
accept
0.0436***
(0.0146)
0.0006***
(0.0000)
0.2065***
(0.0108)
public
11,510
0.1672
no

in-state
sat
gpa
cases
N
R2
student FE

(2)
accept
0.0698***
(0.0161)

public
11,510
0.8380
yes

Linear probability models of student-reported acceptance decisions with institution
fixed effects
Sample of students consists of those reporting SAT and GPA scores
Includes four-year institutions with at least 10 appearances in student application sets
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 14: Analysis of Choice Set Data

in-state

(1)
enroll
0.3763***
(0.1048)

tuition
distance
distance
squared
log
distance
cases
students

-0.5226***
(0.1482)
0.1092***
(0.0363)

8,300
2,690

(2)
enroll

-0.0360***
(0.0121)
-0.4961***
(0.1340)
0.0957***
(0.0333)

8,300
2,690

(3)
enroll
0.1972
(0.1380)
-0.0326**
(0.0164)
-0.5234***
(0.1486)
0.1088***
(0.0364)

8,300
2,690

(4)
enroll
0.2446**
(0.1058)

-0.1731***
(0.0305)
8,300
2,690

(5)
enroll

-0.0410***
(0.0124)

(6)
enroll
0.0189
(0.1413)
-0.0396**
(0.0165)

-0.1801***
(0.0277)
8,300
2,690

-0.1784***
(0.0307)
8,300
2,690

All specifications represent alternative-specific conditional logit models estimated via maximum likelihood
The sample of students consists of those reporting a choice set of at least two and attending a single institution
Includes four-year public and private institutions with at least 10 appearances in student choice sets
Tuition represents the sticker price of tuition and fees, adjusted for whether a student is in or out of state
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

40

Table 15: 20k border-side specification, private institutions

in-state
Observations
R2

(1)
enroll
9.4527***
(0.8903)
50940
0.349

(2)
enroll(%)
0.5099***
(0.0072)
37316
0.582

(3)
ln(enroll)
0.7375***
(0.0256)
50940
0.649

Regressions run at border_side level for 20k range.
Sample is private universities only, 1997-2011, excluding two-year colleges.
All specifications include univ-year and border_side-year FE.
Standard errors clustered at university-border_side level.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 16: Welfare calculations
inputs
(1)
tuition gap
$6,416
estimated tuition discontinuity
-0.1856
border discontinuity [implied in (3) and (4)] 1.1908
in-state fraction
0.75

(2)
$6,416
-0.0610
0.3914
0.75

effects on non-residents
change in tuition
welfare change for non-residents

-$1.00
$0.25

-$1.00
$0.25

without behavioral response
change in resident tuition
welfare change for residents
combined welfare change

$0.33
-$0.25
$0.00

$0.33
-$0.25
$0.00

with behavioral response
change in resident tuition
welfare change for residents
combined welfare change

$0.03
-$0.02
$0.23

$0.21
-$0.16
$0.09

41

A

Appendix (For Online Publication)

Derivation of

∂ rW
∂n

and

∂ rE
∂n

We derive expressions for the change in resident tuition given a uniform increase in non-resident
tuition. Note that, for state W , the budget constraint fW rW + (1 − fW )nW = m can be re-written as:
PW (rW , nE )[rW − m] + [1 − PE (rE , nW )][nW − m] = 0
Then, considering a change in nE , we have that:


∂ PW ∂ rW ∂ PW
+
∂ rW ∂ nE ∂ nE


[rW − m] + PW

∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
−
[nW − m] = 0
∂ nE ∂ rE ∂ nE

Similarly, considering a change in nW , we have that:


∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ nW





∂ rW
∂ PE ∂ rE
∂ PE
[rW − m] + PW
[nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
−
+
∂ nW
∂ rE ∂ nW ∂ nW

Now, direct effects are given by ∂∂ PrEE = −ρPE (1−PE ) and cross-effects are given by ∂∂nPWE = ρPE (1−
PE ). Thus, ∂∂ PrEE = − ∂∂nPWE , and, plugging this into the expressions above, we have:





∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
(
− 1) [rW − m] + PW
−
[nW − m] = 0
∂ rW ∂ nE
∂ nE ∂ rE ∂ nE

∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ nW





∂ rW
∂ PE ∂ rE
[rW − m] + PW
−
(
− 1) [nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
∂ nW
∂ rE ∂ nW

Adding these two conditions together, we have:



∂ PW ∂ rW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ rW
∂ PE ∂ rE ∂ rE
(
+
− 1) [rW −m]+PW (
+
)−
(
+
−1)[nW −m]+(1−PE ) = 0
∂ rW ∂ nE ∂ nW
∂ nE ∂ nW
∂ rE ∂ nW ∂ nE

Letting

∂ rW
∂n



=

∂ rW
∂ nE

+ ∂∂ nrWW and

∂ rE
∂n

=

∂ rE
∂ nE

+ ∂∂nrWE , we have


∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
(
− 1) [rW − m] + PW
−
(
− 1)[nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
∂ rW ∂ n
∂n
∂ rE ∂ n

Now, by symmetry, for the case of state E, we have:



∂ PE ∂ rE
∂ rE ∂ PW ∂ rW
(
− 1) [rE − m] + PE
−
(
− 1)[nE − m] + (1 − PW ) = 0
∂ rE ∂ n
∂n
∂ rW ∂ n

42

In the symmetric case, these simplify to:



∂r
∂P ∂r
( − 1) [r − n] + P + (1 − P) = 0
∂r ∂n
∂n

Solving, we have that:
∂ r −(1 − P) − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
=
∂n
P − ∂∂Pr (n − r)

Proof of Proposition 1
Using some results from the prior Appendix, we have that:





∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
(
− 1) [rW − m] + PW
−
[nW − m] = 0
∂ rW ∂ nE
∂ nE ∂ rE ∂ nE

∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ nW





∂ rW
∂ PE ∂ rE
[rW − m] + PW
−
(
− 1) [nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
∂ nW
∂ rE ∂ nW

When rW = nW = m, these simplify to:
∂ rW
=0
∂ nE
∂ rW
−(1 − PE )
=
∂ nW
PW
For the case of the budget of state E, we have that, by symmetry:
∂ rE
=0
∂ nW
∂ rE
−(1 − PW )
=
∂ nE
PE
Recall the original formula for the change in welfare:


∂ rW
∂ rE
∂ rE
∂ rW
0.5 {−PW
− (1 − PE ) − PE
}∆nW + {−PE
− (1 − PW ) − PW
}∆nE
∂ nW
∂ nW
∂ nE
∂ nE
Plugging in the above expressions, we have that there is no welfare gain when considering changes
in non-resident tuition when rW = nW = m and rE = nE = m. Thus, non-discriminatory policies
are optimal.

43

Proof of Proposition 2
In the symmetric case, we have that ∂∂ Pn = ρP(1 − P) and thus n − m = 1/ρP. Further, using the
budget constraint, one can show that P = (n − m)/(n − r). Combining these, we have that:
r = n − ρ(n − m)2
Further, note that P = exp(−ρr)/[exp(−ρr) + exp(−ρn − ρδ )], which can be re-written as r =
n + δ + (1/ρ)ln[P/(1 − P)]. Next, note that n − m = (1/ρP) and thus P/(1 − P) = ρ(n − m) − 1.
Combining these two expressions, we have that:
r = n + δ + (1/ρ)ln[ρ(n − m) − 1]
The first expression for r is quadratic in n, with a peak at n = m + (0.5/ρ), at which point r =
m + (0.25/ρ). Beyond this peak, the expression in decreasing in n. The second expression for
r equals negative infinity when n = m + (0.5/ρ) and is strictly increasing in n. Moreover, when
n = m + (2/ρ), r = m + (2/ρ) + δ . This is greater than m + (0.25/ρ), and hence there is a single
crossing between n = m + (0.5/ρ) and n = m + (2/ρ). At this single crossing, we have that
r < m < n.
To show the comparative static, combining the two expressions above, note that n can be implicitly defined by:
−ρ 2 (n − m)2 = ρδ + ln[ρ(n − m) − 1]
Considering a change in ρ,we have that:
∂n

(n − m) + ρ ∂ ρ
∂n
=δ+
−2ρ(n − m) − 2ρ (n − m)
∂ρ
ρ(n − m) − 1
2

2

Re-arranging, we have that
(−2ρ(n − m)2 − δ )[ρ(n − m) − 1] − 2ρ 2 (n − m)

∂n
∂n
[ρ(n − m) − 1] = (n − m) + ρ
∂ρ
∂ρ

Finally, solving, we have,
∂ n (−2ρ(n − m)2 − δ )[ρ(n − m) − 1] − (n − m)
=
∂ρ
ρ + 2ρ 2 (n − m)[ρ(n − m) − 1]
Thus, since ρ(n − m) − 1 > 0 and n > m, we have that the numerator is negative and the denominator is positive. Thus, ∂∂ ρn < 0.

44

Theoretical Extension: Fixed Costs
We next extend the theoretical model to include fixed costs. In particular, continue to assume that
educating a student requires a constant expenditure, or marginal cost, equal to m, but that institutions also incur a fixed cost equal to F. Then, college W faces the following budget constraint:
PW rW + (1 − PE )nW = (PW + 1 − PE )m + F
Then, re-deriving
re-written as:

∂ rW
∂n

and

∂ rE
∂n

in the first appendix, we have that the budget constraint can be

PW (rW , nE )[rW − m] + [1 − PE (rE , nW )][nW − m] = F
Then, considering a changes in nE and nW we have that the key conditions are unchanged:




∂ PW ∂ rW ∂ PW
+
∂ rW ∂ nE ∂ nE

∂ PW ∂ rW
∂ rW ∂ nW




[rW − m] + PW

∂ rW ∂ PE ∂ rE
−
[nW − m] = 0
∂ nE ∂ rE ∂ nE



∂ rW
∂ PE ∂ rE
∂ PE
[rW − m] + PW
−
+
[nW − m] + (1 − PE ) = 0
∂ nW
∂ rE ∂ nW ∂ nW

Thus, the key conclusions from the welfare analysis remain unchanged.
We next consider tuition policies set under decentralization with fixed costs. In the symmetric
case, Nash equilibrium out-of-state tuition continues to be characterized by:
n = m+

(1 − P)
∂ P/∂ n

Using institutional budget constraint under symmetry [Pr + (1 − P)n = m + F] and using the fact
that ∂ P/∂ n = ρP(1 − P), this can be re-written as:
P(n − r) = −F +

1
ρP

Thus, non-resident tuition continues to be higher than resident tuition so long as fixed costs are
sufficiently small (i.e., F < (1/ρP)).

Theoretical Extension: More Than Two States
We next extend the model from two states to S states, indexed by s. Let Ps (t) denote the likelihood
that a student from state s attends institution t. Then, in-state attendance probabilities are given by:

45

Ps (s) =

exp(αρqs − ρrs )
exp(αρqs − ρrs ) + ∑t6=s exp(αρqt − ρnt − ρδ )

Likewise, attendance at an out-of-state institution t 6= s occurs with the following probability:

Ps (t) =

exp(αρqt − ρrt − δ )
exp(αρqt − ρrt − δ ) + exp(αρqs − ρrs ) + ∑r6=s,r6=t exp(αρqr − ρnr − ρδ )

Then, the change in welfare given a uniform increase in non-resident tuition equals:
#
∂ rs
− (1 − Ps (t))
(1/S)∆n ∑ −Ps (s)
∂ n t6∑
s
=s
"

Under symmetry, this reduces to:


∂r
∆n −P − (1 − P)
∂n
where P represents the likelihood of in-state attendance and 1 − P represents the likelihood of
out-of-state attendance, aggregated over all out-of-state institutions. Moreover, it remains the case
that:
∂ r −(1 − P) − ∂∂Pr (n − r)
=
∂n
P − ∂ P (n − r)
∂r

Thus, the welfare calculations are unchanged with more than two states, under the interpretation
that 1 − P is the out-of-state attendance probability, aggregated over all possible out-of-state institutions.
Turning to decentralization, we have that state s again chooses non-resident tuition to minimize
resident tuition. That is, ∂ rs /∂ ns = 0. The institution budget constraint for college s in this case is
given by:
Ps (s)(rs − m) + ∑ Pt (s)(ns − m) = 0
t6=s

Taking the derivative with respect to non-resident tuition (ns ), we have that:
∂ Ps ∂ rs
∂ rs
∂ Pt (s)
[rs − m] + Ps
+ ∑ Pt (s) + ∑
[ns − m] = 0
∂ rs ∂ ns
∂ ns t6=s
∂
n
s
t6=s
Since

∂ rs
∂ ns

= 0 in equilibrium and using the fact that

∂ Pt (s)
∂ ns

= −ρPt (s)[1 − Pt (s)], we have that:

∑ Pt (s) = ∑ ρPt (s)[1 − Pt (s)][ns − m]

t6=s

t6=s

46

In the symmetric case, we have that Pt (s) = (1 − P)/(S − 1) for t 6= s, where P is the probability of
in-state attendance. Then, this can be written as:
(1 − P) =

ρ(1 − P)(S + P − 2)(n − m)
S−1

Solving for non-resident tuition, we have that:
n = m+

1 S−1
ρ (S + P − 2)

Since P ≤ 1, we have that n ≥ m + 1/ρ, and, moreover, non-resident tuition converges to m + 1/ρ
as the number of states grows large.
To further investigate how tuition policies change with the number of states, we next calibrate
the model to match current tuition and in-state attendance probabilities. To do so, we first invert
the above non-resident pricing rule to solve for ρ as follows:
ρ=

S−1
1
n − m (S + P − 2)

We use in-state attendance probabilities of P = 0.75. Tuition is taken from the overall averages in
Table 1, yielding n =15.511 and r = 6.358. This implies that m = 8.646. Finally, using S = 50, we
have that ρ = 0.1464. With this estimate of ρ, we then choose δ to match P = 0.75. This yields
δ = 24.947.
With these parameters in hand, we can then estimate how pricing changes given a change in
the number of states. As shown in Table 17, increasing the number of states beyond 50 does yield
a reduction in non-resident tuition, falling from 15.512 to 15.503 for 90 states. This decrease is
quite small however, and, as noted above, non-resident tuition is bounded from below by m + 1/ρ,
which equals 15.477. Thus, there is little scope in the model for reducing non-resident tuition via
an increase in the number of states. In addition, while non-resident tuition does fall as the number
of states increases, the gap between non-resident and resident tuition actually rises. This reflects the
fact that the choice set also increases for students, yielding an increase in non-resident attendance,
allowing universities to reduce in-state tuition. Likewise, as the number states decreases below 50,
non-resident tuition increases but so does resident tuition, leading to a reduction in the gap between
non-resident and resident tuition.

47

Table 17: Competition and Tuition Policies
number
of states
(S)

out-of-state
tuition (n)

in-state
tuition (r)

in-state
attendance
(P)

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90

15.533
15.525
15.520
15.515
15.512
15.509
15.507
15.505
15.503

8.097
7.588
7.132
6.728
6.362
6.027
5.718
5.431
5.163

0.926
0.867
0.819
0.782
0.750
0.724
0.701
0.681
0.663

Student Payments: Private Institutions
In parallel to Section 7.1, we present in Table 18 results on student payments to private institutions
using NPSAS data. As shown, residents pay a bit less, around $260, in tuition payments than nonresidents. This difference, however, is small when compared to the sample average of over $20,000
in tuition payments. The gap is larger for net payments, with residents paying roughly $2,800 less
than residents. This implies that residents receive around $2,500 more in grants than non-residents
at private universities. To further explore the source of this difference, we next decompose total
grants into their four components: federal grants, state grants, institution grants, and other grants.
As shown, the bulk of the difference is explained by state grants. This finding is consistent with
several state aid programs that generate financial differences between residents and non-residents
at private institutions. For example, the Cal Grant Program is a state-funded program that provides
aid to California residents attending California institutions, both public and private.27 Likewise,
the Hope scholarship in Georgia is available to state residents attending either public or private
institutions in the state of Georgia. Finally, we note that these differences in payments between
residents and non-residents are smaller than those documented for public institutions.
27 For

further details, see http://www.csac.ca.gov/doc.asp?id=568 (accessed October 16, 2015).

48

Table 18: Student payments in NPSAS data: private

in-state
LHS
mean
R2

(1)
tuition/
fees paid
-0.259**
(0.113)
21.435

(2)
net tuition/
fees paid
-2.847***
(0.213)
9.63

(3)
federal
grants
0.634***
(0.041)
1.636

(4)
state grants

(6)
other grants

1.761***
(0.039)
1.195

(5)
institution
grants
-0.086
(0.142)
7.721

0.587

0.318

0.164

0.283

0.356

0.110

0.278***
(0.063)
1.253

All specifications include institution-by-year, state-of-residence-by-year, and cohort FE.
Net tuition and fees paid is net of all grants received by the student.
All dollar values are in thousands of 2011 dollars.
The sample consists of 32,130 full-time students attending four-year private institutions.
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Analysis of Private Institution Acceptance Decisions
In parallel to Section 7.4, Table 19 presents results on private institution acceptance decisions using
ELS data. As shown, private institutions are also more likely to admit residents, when compared
to non-residents. The difference is only statistically significant, however, when including applicant
fixed effects. In addition, the magnitude of any differences is smaller than the corresponding
differences for public institutions.
Table 19: Analysis of Private Institution Acceptance Decisions

in-state
sat
gpa
R2
student FE

(1)
accept
0.0206
(0.0174)
0.0007***
(0.0001)
0.1457***
(0.0169)
0.2445
no

(2)
accept
0.0396**
(0.0198)

0.8206
yes

Linear probability models of acceptance decisions with institution FE
Sample consists of 5,960 students reporting SAT and GPA scores
Four-year institutions with at least 10 appearances in student application sets
* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

49

