                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   INEQUALITY IN HUMAN CAPITAL AND ENDOGENOUS CREDIT CONSTRAINTS

                                           Rong Hai
                                        James J. Heckman

                                       Working Paper 22999
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22999


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016


We thank Dean Corbae, Mariacristina De Nardi, Lance Lochner, Steve Stern, and participants at
the Human Capital and Inequality Conference held at Chicago on December 17th, 2015, for
helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. We also thank Joseph Altonji,
Peter Arcidiacono, Panle Jia Barwick, Jeremy Fox, Jorge García, Limor Golan, Lars Hansen,
John Kennan, Rasmus Lentz, Maurizio Mazzocco, Aloysius Siow, Ronni Pavan, John Rust,
Bertel Schjerning, Christopher Taber, and participants at the Cowles Conference in Structural
Microeconomics and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics (SITE) Summer Workshop
for helpful comments. We also thank two anonymous referees. Yu Kyung Koh provided very
helpful comments on this paper. This research was supported in part by: the Pritzker Children's
Initiative; the Buffett Early Childhood Fund; NIH grants NICHD R37HD065072, NICHD
R01HD054702, and NIA R24AG048081; an anonymous funder; Successful Pathways from
School to Work, an initiative of the University of Chicago's Committee on Education and funded
by the Hymen Milgrom Supporting Organization; the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity
Global Working Group, an initiative of the Center for the Economics of Human Development and
funded by the Institute for New Economic Thinking; and the American Bar Foundation. The
views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
those of the funders or the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Rong Hai and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Inequality in Human Capital and Endogenous Credit Constraints
Rong Hai and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 22999
December 2016
JEL No. I2,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the determinants of inequality in human capital with an emphasis on the
role of the credit constraints. We develop and estimate a model in which individuals face
uninsured human capital risks and invest in education, acquire work experience, accumulate
assets and smooth consumption. Agents can borrow from the private lending market and from
government student loan programs. The private market credit limit is explicitly derived by
extending the natural borrowing limit of Aiyagari (1994) to incorporate endogenous labor supply,
human capital accumulation, psychic costs of working, and age. We quantify the effects of
cognitive ability, noncognitive ability, parental education, and parental wealth on educational
attainment, wages, and consumption. We conduct counterfactual experiments with respect to
tuition subsidies and enhanced student loan limits and evaluate their effects on educational
attainment and inequality. We compare the performance of our model with an influential ad hoc
model in the literature with education-specific fixed loan limits. We find evidence of substantial
life cycle credit constraints that affect human capital accumulation and inequality. The
constrained fall into two groups: those who are permanently poor over their lifetimes and a group
of well-endowed individuals with rising high levels of acquired skills who are constrained early
in their life cycles. Equalizing cognitive and noncognitive ability has dramatic effects on
inequality. Equalizing parental backgrounds has much weaker effects. Tuition costs have weak
effects on inequality.


Rong Hai
Department of Economics
University of Miami
314P Jenkins
Coral Gables, FL 33146
rhai@bus.miami.edu

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22999
    Inequality in Human Capital and Endogenous Credit Constraints
                                       Rong Haia,∗, James J. Heckmanb
    a
     Department of Economics, University of Miami, 314P Jenkins Building, Coral Gables, FL, 33146, USA
b
    Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 East 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA; phone:
                                     773-702-0634; fax: 773-702-8490




Abstract
This paper investigates the determinants of inequality in human capital with an emphasis on
the role of the credit constraints. We develop and estimate a model in which individuals face
uninsured human capital risks and invest in education, acquire work experience, accumulate
assets and smooth consumption. Agents can borrow from the private lending market and
from government student loan programs. The private market credit limit is explicitly derived
by extending the natural borrowing limit of Aiyagari (1994) to incorporate endogenous labor
supply, human capital accumulation, psychic costs of working, and age. We quantify the
effects of cognitive ability, noncognitive ability, parental education, and parental wealth on
educational attainment, wages, and consumption. We conduct counterfactual experiments
with respect to tuition subsidies and enhanced student loan limits and evaluate their effects
on educational attainment and inequality. We compare the performance of our model with
an influential ad hoc model in the literature with education-specific fixed loan limits. We find
evidence of substantial life cycle credit constraints that affect human capital accumulation
and inequality. The constrained fall into two groups: those who are permanently poor over
their lifetimes and a group of well-endowed individuals with rising high levels of acquired
skills who are constrained early in their life cycles. Equalizing cognitive and noncognitive
ability has dramatic effects on inequality. Equalizing parental backgrounds has much weaker
effects. Tuition costs have weak effects on inequality.
Keywords: Human Capital, Credit Constraints, Natural Borrowing Limit, Education,
Wealth
JEL codes: I2, J2


1           Introduction

            This paper develops and estimates a dynamic model of schooling and work experience in
which agents are subject to uninsured human capital risks and face restrictions on their bor-
rowing possibilities. We analyze unsecured borrowing limits with endogenous labor supply
and human capital accumulation. We estimate the structural parameters of preferences and

        ∗
            Corresponding author
            Email addresses: rhai@bus.miami.edu (Rong Hai), jjh@uchicago.edu (James J. Heckman)


Preprint submitted to Review of Economic Dynamics                                      December 28, 2016
the technology of human capital production. They completely characterize the borrowing
limits for heterogeneous agents. Accounting for borrowing limits in an environment with no
asymmetries in information between lenders and borrowers where agents make consumption,
human capital, and labor supply decisions has important consequences for understanding ed-
ucational choices and human capital investment.
   There is a growing body of evidence supporting the empirical importance of credit con-
straints in affecting educational attainment. As noted in Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2015),
the early literature found little evidence for them. The recent literature – based on more
recent data – shows much stronger evidence for credit constraints, a phenomenon first noted
in Belley and Lochner (2007), and documented in later studies (Bailey and Dynarski, 2011,
Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012, and Johnson, 2013).
   Previous empirical research on this topic fixes lending limits at ad hoc values, or else
introduces additional “free parameters” to model credit limits. In our analysis, agents can
borrow up to model-determined limits derived from an analysis of private lending with a
natural limit combined with access to government student loan programs. No ad hoc or free
parameters are introduced.
   Ours is the first analysis that extends the natural borrowing limit of Aiyagari to simul-
taneously encompass endogenous labor supply, consumption, human capital accumulation,
and savings in physical capital. Our model predicts that borrowing limits are lower for
individuals who have lower levels of human capital and higher psychic costs of working.
The predicted credit limits vary with age, first increasing, and then decreasing. Following
Aiyagari (1994), we assume that lenders can fully enforce contracts and collect on resources
available to individuals. Borrowers must repay as long as they have resources. However,
different from Aiyagari (1994), agents in our model have the option of not working. Lenders
cannot force borrowers to work and human capital productivity shocks are uninsurable. The
lending/enforcement protocol is that lenders can enforce full repayment subject to the restric-
tion that borrowers must be provided a minimum consumption level that satisfies individual



                                              2
rationality constraints for working.
    We use our estimated model to analyze the cross-sectional characteristics and the age
profiles of the borrowing constrained population. We find that credit-constrained agents fall
roughly into two groups: (a) those with poor initial endowments and family background
who acquire little human capital, have low wage levels, and little life cycle wage growth, and
(b) those who are able and from good family backgrounds who have more education, less
work experience, high wage levels, and substantial life cycle wage growth. The first group of
agents is constrained throughout their life cycles. The second group is constrained in their
late 20s and early 30s, although they have high levels of life cycle wealth and human capital
and rapid wage growth. They cannot fully smooth consumption in the early stages of their
life cycles.
    There is a corresponding two-humped profile of constrained agents with respect to en-
dowments and abilities at the early stages of labor market entry. As income is harvested
over the life cycle, the second hump (associated with the second, more affluent group) dis-
appears. The first group with poor initial conditions remains constrained over its lifetime.
This group of individuals has low labor market earnings, little savings, and small borrowing
limits. Persons in this group have high discount rates and thus are less patient. They want
consumption upfront but cannot access it due to their low borrowing limits.
    Our paper extends the existing literature in other dimensions by analyzing how cognitive
and noncognitive ability affects choices through (i) psychic costs of working and schooling;
(ii) the technology of human capital production; and (iii) discount factors. Following Cunha
and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010), we allow our measures of abilities to be
fallible. We introduce heterogeneity in parental transfers which is not investigated in the
existing literature.
    We use our estimated model to understand the sources of inequality in education, wages,
and consumption over the life cycle. We consider how parental characteristics and transfers,
as well as credit markets, affect choices and outcomes. We find strong effects of adolescent



                                              3
endowments of cognitive and noncognitive ability on human capital development. Tuition
costs and family transfers to children also play important roles in explaining differences in
human capital investments.
    We conduct counterfactual policy experiments using our estimated model. We examine
the impact of equalizing initial endowments on inequality in consumption, wages, and human
capital. We also examine the consequences of reducing tuition and increasing student loan
limits on college attendance and graduation.
    We compare our model with a recent model in the literature that fixes loan limits by
education level in an ad hoc fashion (Abbott et al., 2016). Using their specification, estimated
subjective discount rates are smaller than in our model with endogenous credit limits. The
goodness of fit is somewhat worse. Comparing counterfactual outcomes, the model with
fixed credit limits by education predicts a higher elasticity of educational response to tuition
than our model with the fully endogenous borrowing limit. The ad hoc model also predicts
a much larger effect of increasing student loans on college enrollment and 4-year college
completion.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief overview of the
literature on human capital accumulation and credit constraints and places our paper in the
context of this literature. Section 3 presents our model. Section 4 describes the data and
conducts basic regression analyses that summarize the empirical regularities in the data.
Section 5 presents our empirical strategy for estimating the model. Section 6 discusses our
estimates. Section 7 conducts counterfactual simulations. Section 8 compares estimates of
our model with estimates from an ad hoc model of credit constraints. Section 9 concludes.


2   This Paper in Context: A Brief Review of the Literature on the Specification
    of Credit Constraints

    This paper contributes to the literature on schooling and credit constraints (see Lochner
and Monge-Naranjo, 2012, 2015 and Heckman and Mosso, 2014 for overviews). The evidence
of the importance of credit constraints and their effect on schooling decisions has evolved.

                                               4
Cameron and Taber (2004) reject the null hypothesis of binding credit constraints in NLSY79
data. Using NLSY79 and NLSY79 Children (CNLSY79), Carneiro and Heckman (2002) find
that the role of family income in determining college enrollment decisions is very small once
ability is accounted for. Linking information between children and parents (CNLSY79 and
NSLY79), Caucutt and Lochner (2012) find strong evidence of credit constraints among
young and highly educated parents with steeply rising wage profiles.
       Table 1 presents a concise overview of the structural literature on credit constraints
and schooling. Using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) data,
Keane and Wolpin (2001) estimate a structural life cycle model and show that borrowing
constraints exist. However, they have no quantitative impact on schooling decisions.1 More
recent studies suggest that borrowing constraints play a substantial role in college enrollment
decisions in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) cohorts (see Belley
and Lochner, 2007, Bailey and Dynarski, 2011, and Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2012).
       Abbott et al. (2016) compare partial and general equilibrium effects of alternative fi-
nancial aid policies intended to promote college participation in an overlapping generations
framework. They impose ad hoc education-specific borrowing limits. They find evidence that
student loan programs affect schooling. They report that in the presence of their assumed
credit market imperfections, the current configuration of federal loans and grant programs
has substantial value in terms of both output and welfare, but further expansions of these
programs would only marginally improve aggregate outcomes. Blundell et al. (2016) esti-
mate a dynamic model of employment, educational choices, and savings for women in the
UK, assuming an exogenous borrowing limit that is either zero or the amount of the student
loan borrowed. They do not discuss the empirical consequences of relaxing this constraint.

   1
    Keane and Wolpin (2001) assume parental transfers to be a function of parents’ schooling, the current
school attendance status of the youth, and a number of the youth’s assets. However, they do not actually
observe parental transfers in their data.




                                                   5
                          Table 1: Specifications of Leading Structural Models of Educational Choice and Credit Constraints in the Literature


                                             Human Capital       Labor      Government   Private Loan Limit                       CRRA Risk Aversion    Parental Transfers             Data
                                             Investment          Supply     Student
                                                                            Loans

         Keane and Wolpin (2001)             Education   and     Yes        None         Borrowing limits not observed. They      Estimate γ = 0.4826   Parental transfer is a func-   NLSY79
                                             work experience                             are proxied by a function of age and                           tion of parental education     (1979-
                                                                                         human capital; the parameters of the                           and individuals choices        1992).
                                                                                         borrowing limit are estimated.

         Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2011)    Education   and     None       Yes          Endogenous credit limit based on         Set γ = 2             None                           NLSY79
                                             work experience                             borrowers’ cost of default (includ-                                                           (1979-
                                                                                         ing temporary exclusion from credit                                                           2006)
                                                                                         market and wage garnishments), due
                                                                                         to private lenders’ limited ability to
                                                                                         punish default; parameters on the
                                                                                         cost of default are calibrated outside
                                                                                         the model

         Johnson (2013)                      Education   and     Yes        Yes          Borrowing limits not observed. They      Set γ = 2             Parental transfer is a func-   NLSY97
                                             work experience                             are proxied by a function of age and                           tion of parental income        (1997 to
                                                                                         human capital; the parameters of the                           and child choices              2007)
                                                                                         borrowing limit proxy equation are
                                                                                         estimated.




6
         Abbott et al. (2016)                Education           Yes        Yes          Among working-age married house-         Set γ = 2             Parental transfers explic-     Multiple
                                                                                         holds, borrowing limit equals to                               itly modeled                   data, in-
                                                                                         $75,000 if the most educated spouse                                                           cluding
                                                                                         is a college graduate, $25,000 if the                                                         NLSY79,
                                                                                         most educated spouse is a high school                                                         NLSY97
                                                                                         graduate, and $15,000 if both spouses
                                                                                         are high school dropouts; No borrow-
                                                                                         ing before age 21. Borrowing limits
                                                                                         based on self-reported limits on unse-
                                                                                         cured credit by family type from SCF.

         Blundell et al. (2016)              Education   and     Yes        Yes          No borrowing permitted except for        Set γ = 1.56          Parental   income    and       BHPS
                                             work experience                             student loans                                                  background factors affect      (1991 to
                                                                                                                                                        youth’s psychic cost of        2008)
                                                                                                                                                        schooling

         This paper                          Education   and     Yes        Yes          Model-determined natural borrowing       Set γ = 2             Parental transfer is a func-   NLSY97
                                             work experience                             limit based on education and labor                             tion of parental education     (1997-
                                                                                         supply decisions, due to borrowers’                            and net worth, and indi-       2013)
                                                                                         limited repayment ability in the pres-                         viduals choices; parental
                                                                                         ence of uninsurable wage risk; no                              education affects youth’s
                                                                                         new auxiliary parameters for borrow-                           psychic cost of schooling
                                                                                         ing limit is added in estimation, un-
                                                                                         like many previous papers


    NLSY: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. BHPS: British Household Panel Survey.
3     Model: Specification, Solution Concepts, Initial Conditions, and Measure-
      ment System

      This section presents our model specification, solution concepts, treatment of initial con-
ditions, and associated measurement system. We start by specifying our model.

3.1     Choice Set

      At each age t ∈ {t0 , . . . , T } an individual makes decisions under uncertainty about:
(i) consumption ct and savings st+1 , (ii) whether to go to school de,t ∈ {0, 1}, and (iii)
employment dk,t ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}, where dk,t = 0, dk,t = 0.5 and dk,t = 1 indicate not working,
working part-time, and working full-time, respectively.2 An individual cannot go to school
and work full-time at the same time, i.e. de,t + dk,t < 2. However, individuals can work part-
time while in school. Let h(dk,t ) denote the annual hours of work associated with employment
choices dk,t . Thus, h(0) = 0 < h(0.5) < h(1). The cost of schooling includes monetary costs
(tuition and fees), psychic costs, and foregone earnings.

3.2     State Variables and Information Set

      At each age t, an individual is characterized by a vector of predetermined state variables
that shape preferences, production technology, and outcomes:


                                    Ωt := (t, θ, et , kt , st , de,t−1 , ep , sp )                         (1)


where θ is a vector that summarizes individual components of unobserved (by the economist)
heterogeneity (unobserved cognitive ability and noncognitive ability), et is the individual’s
years of schooling at t, kt is accumulated years of work experience at t, st is net worth
determined at the end of period t − 1, de,t−1 is the schooling status in the previous period,
ep is parental educational level, and sp is parental net worth.3

    2
      In the data, majority of the population completed their educational choices before age 27, thus we assume
the schooling choice de,t = 1 is not available after age 27.
    3
      Individuals’ unobserved heterogeneity θ and parental education and wealth (ep , sp ) are measured at the
initial period in our model, which is age 17.

                                                          7
      There are three sources of uncertainty in the model: productivity shocks to human
capital w,t , preference shocks to schooling e,t , and shocks to parental transfers p,t . (They
are introduced below in the context of the specific equations where they appear.) The
information set includes all of the predetermined state variables and realized idiosyncratic
(serially uncorrelated) shocks at age t, t := (e,t , w,t , p,t ). It can be written as Ωt :=
{Ωt , t }.

3.3    Preferences

      An individual has well-defined preferences over consumption ct and choices on schooling
and working (de,t , dk,t ):


                 U (ct , de,t , dk,t ; Ωt ) = uc (ct ; Ωt ) + ue (Ωt ) · de,t + uk (dk,t , de,t , Ωt ).   (2)


The function uc (ct ; Ωt ) describes utility over consumption. The function ue (Ωt ) charac-
terizes the psychic costs and the preference shock associated with schooling (de,t = 1).
uk (dk,t , de,t , Ωt ) captures the psychic benefits/costs associated with the labor supply decision
dk,t ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}. We allow the psychic benefits/costs of part-time working to be different
depending on whether the agent is enrolled in school de,t ∈ {0, 1}. Agents discount future
returns using a subjective discount factor exp(−ρ(θ)), where ρ(θ) > 0 is the subjective
discount rate that depends on unobserved ability θ.

3.4    Human Capital Production and Wage Equations

      Human capital at age t (measured in labor efficiency units), ψt ∈ R++ , is characterized
by the following equation:
                                             ψt = F ψ (et , kt , θ, w,t )                                (3)

where w,t ≥ w is an idiosyncratic shock to the human capital stock at age t. Equation (3)
incorporates two types of human capital: education and work experience, both of which are
consequences of investment decisions which we model. Equation (3) allows for productivity
in the labor market to depend on cognitive and noncognitive skills (θ).

                                                           8
       An individual’s hourly wage offer depends on his human capital, whether he works part-
time or full-time, and whether the individual is enrolled in school:


                                           wt = ψt · F w (dk,t , de,t )                            (4)


where F w (dk,t , de,t ) is the market price per unit human capital. We allow the rental price
of human capital to be different between part-time jobs and full-time jobs. The part-time
wage may differ depending on whether the individual is enrolled in school (see Johnson,
2013). We normalize the market price of human capital for a full-time job to be unity (i.e.,
F w (1, 0) = 1). Thus, an individual’s full-time wage offer equals to his human capital level:
wt = ψt = F ψ (et , kt , θ, w,t ) if dk,t = 1.
       After leaving school, the accumulated years of work experience evolves via:


                       kt+1 = kt + 1(dk,t > 0) − δk kt 1(dk,t = 0) := F k (kt , dk,t )             (5)


where δk is the depreciation rate of work experience in each period when the individual does
not work. Education level at t + 1, measured by years of schooling, evolves according to the
following relationship:
                                                  et+1 = et + de,t .                               (6)

3.5     Financial Market Frictions and Endogenous Credit Constraints

       To finance education and consumption, individuals can borrow at a fixed interest rate
rb . Individuals can also accumulate physical assets at riskless rate rl .4 To capture an
important feature of imperfect capital markets, we allow the lending rate to be smaller than
the borrowing rate, i.e., rl < rb .5
       The smallest amount of net worth st+1 that an agent can hold at the end of period t

   4
    We abstract from portfolio choices.
   5
    We only need to keep track of an agent’s net worth. There is no need to separately keep track of an
agent’s debts and assets.



                                                          9
is captured by a (potentially negative) lower bound S t+1 ∈ R− , which is determined by
both the private loan market borrowing limit and the maximum credit from the government
student loan programs as follows:


                                                     g              s
                    st+1 ≥ S t+1 := − max{de,t · L (et + de,t ), Lt (et+1 , kt+1 , θ)}             (7)


           g
where L (et + de,t ) ∈ R+ is the maximum government student loan credit for schooling level
                                                                               s
(et + de,t ) if the individuals choose to enroll in school (de,t = 1), and Lt (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) ∈ R+ is
                                                                                         s
the natural borrowing limit of an individual in the private debt market. Lt (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) is
determined by the maximum loan that the individual can pay back with probability one at
                                             s
the end of his decision period T , i.e., LT = 0. We discuss the formulation of the endogenous
                              s
natural borrowing limit Lt (·) in Section 3.8 below.
      After leaving school, the borrowing limits S t+1 are enforced in the following ways.6 Con-
sider two different situations. First, if an agent’s current debt level does not exceed his private
                                                     s
debt limit during previous period (i.e., st ≥ −Lt−1 (et , kt , θ)), which could happen if the agent
did not borrow more than his private debt limit when in school or the agent (voluntarily)
paid down his previous student debt, his lower bound on net worth at the end of period t
                                                                                   s
is given by his private market natural borrowing limit (i.e. S t+1 = −Lt (et+1 , kt+1 , θ)). By
construction, there will be no default in the model under such a situation.
      Second, suppose that an agent’s current debt level exceeds his private debt limit during
                                       s
the previous period (i.e., st < −Lt−1 (et , kt , θ)). This can only happen if the agent borrows
from student loan programs. Since he is not forced to repay the debt, we reset the asset
lower bound S t+1 equal to the agent’s current debt level (i.e. S t+1 = st < 0) for t ≤ T − 1.
This is designed to capture the fact that students are not forced to repay their student
loans immediately. Student loans, in general, cannot be discharged through bankruptcy.7
Therefore, the model assumes that student debt will remain with the borrower until it is

  6
      See Johnson (2013).
  7
      See Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2015) for evidence supporting this assumption.


                                                   10
repaid. At the end of period T , the agent must pay back his student loans up to his available
resources. Any remaining unpaid student loans which the agent does not have resources to
pay, are forgiven.8 While in principle agents can plan to carry student debt through the end
of life and then default, doing so reduces their ability to borrow further over the lifetime to
smooth consumption.9

3.6     Budget Constraint and Transfer Functions

       To finance a youth’s college tuition and fees, parents may provide financial transfers
trp,t ≥ 0. Parental financial transfers are generated by a stochastic function that depends
on (i) parents’ wealth terciles (sp ) and parents’ education (ep ); (ii) decisions about schooling
and employment (de,t , dk,t ); (iii) youth’s cognitive ability and noncognitive ability (θ) and
current education (et ) and age t. This is captured by:


                                 trp,t = trp (ep , sp , de,t , dk,t , θ, et , t, p,t )                   (8)


where p,t is an idiosyncratic shock to parental transfers. Examples of parental monetary
transfers include college financial gifts if the youth chooses to attend college. The parental
transfer rule is determined outside our model. It captures paternalism and tied transfers on
the part of the parents, which is consistent with the findings of previous research (see, e.g.,
Keane and Wolpin, 2001 and Johnson, 2013).
       Our parental transfer function allows for more heterogeneity in family transfers than
those used in Keane and Wolpin (2001) and Johnson (2013). In our parental transfer function
specification, even among the students who make the same schooling-working decisions, there
is heterogeneity in parental transfers due to differences in (1) parents’ net worth and parents’
education, which affect total available resources to the youth, (2) the youth’s own cognitive

   8
      In the case of involuntary default at the end of period T , the agent will consume a minimum sustainable
consumption level cT = cmin > 0 and ST +1 = 0. We will discuss cmin in the next section (Section 3.6).
    9
      Under the estimated model parameter values, our simulation shows that there is no default at the end
of last period T among the simulated individuals.



                                                          11
ability and noncognitive ability, which affect the psychic and labor market monetary returns
of education, and (3) the shocks to the transfer function (ep,t ).10
       Defining r(st ) := rl 1(st > 0) + rb 1(st < 0), the budget constraint for an individual who
chooses to attend college (i.e., de,t · 1(et + de,t ≥ 13) = 1) is:


          ct + (tc(et + de,t ) − gr(et + de,t , sp )) + st+1 = (1 + r(st )) · st + wt · h(dk,t ) + trp,t    (9)

                                                          ct ≥ rc(et + de,t )                              (10)


where tc(et + de,t ) is the amount of college tuition and fees, gr(et + de,t , sp ) is the amount of
grants and scholarships which depend on schooling level and parental wealth, and rc(et +de,t )
denotes the cost of college room and board. We require that the consumption expenditure
for those who choose to go to college must be no less than the cost of college room and
board.
       The budget constraint for an individual who is not currently enrolled in college (i.e.,
de,t · 1(et + de,t ≥ 13) = 0) is:


                      ct + st+1 = (1 + r(st )) · st + wt · h(dk,t ) + trp,t + trc,t + trg,t                (11)

                              ct ≥ trc,t                                                                   (12)

                              ct ≥ cmin                                                                    (13)


where trc,t ≥ 0 is the direct consumption subsidy from the parents to their dependent child in
the forms of shared housing and meals.11 ct ≥ trc,t requires that trc,t only be a consumption
subsidy. It cannot be used by the youth to finance his college expenses or pay back his debt.
trg,t ≥ 0 is the amount of government transfers, which consist of unemployment benefits and
means-tested transfers that guarantee a minimum consumption floor cmin . Treating cmin as

  10
     Park (2016) finds that the source of parental transfer heterogeneity depends on factors that affect the
total resources available to youth, such as parental wealth and altruism, and on factors that affect the
monetary or psychic returns to education.
  11
     It is only received when the child is age 17 and is not attending college.


                                                       12
a subsistence level of consumption, we require ct ≥ cmin .

3.7     Model Solution

       The value function Vt (·) for t = t0 , . . . , T is characterized by the following Bellman
equation:


 Vt (Ωt ) =       max            {U (ct , de,t , dk,t ; Ωt ) + exp(−ρ(θ))E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , et+1 , st+1 , kt+1 , de,t )}
              de,t ,dk,t ,st+1



subject to restrictions imposed by wage functions and human capital accumulation functions
(Equations (3)-(6)), borrowing constraints (Equation (7)), and state-contingent budget con-
straints (Equation (9)-(13)).
       The model is solved through numerical backward recursion of the Bellman equation
assuming a terminal value function when the agent reaches age T + 1. Ideally, we would
like to choose a very large age for T + 1. However, we also seek to avoid the computational
burden of having to solve the model over long horizons. The initial age for our model is
t0 = 17. We set the terminal age to be T + 1 = 51 so that individuals decisions during their
20s are not sensitive to functional form assumptions about the terminal value function, and
at the same time, the computational burden is also manageable.12

3.8     Natural Borrowing Limit

       At age t, the smallest possible full-time wage earnings an individual receives is
F ψ (et , kt , θ, w ) · h(1), where w is the worst possible productivity shock and h(1) is full-time
hours of work. The individual receives no wage income if he does not work.
       To illustrate our approach, consider an extreme case where individuals supply their labor
inelastically from period t onwards, i.e, dk,τ = 1 for all τ ≥ t. (This period comes after
education decisions are made.) The natural borrowing limit in the private loan market in

  12
    In comparison with previous studies, Keane and Wolpin (2001) approximate a terminal value function
at age 31. Johnson (2013) approximates the terminal value function at age 40.




                                                               13
period t − 1 in this extreme case is:

                                       s
                 s                   Lt (e, kt + 1, θ) + max{0, F ψ (e, kt , θ, w ) · h(1) − cmin }
                Lt−1 (e, kt , θ)   =                                                                 .
                                                              1 + rb

       When employment decisions are endogenous, the formulation of the natural borrowing
                                                                                       s
limit requires further thought. Let the credit limit at time t be Lt for an individual who
does not work at t. The natural borrowing limit at period t − 1 is (suppressing arguments)
 s          s
Lt−1 = Lt /(1 + rb ). This can be interpreted as saying that individuals borrow new loans at
           s                                     s                                                       s
time t, Lt , to pay back debt (1+rb )Lt−1 . At age t the individual carries debt st+1 = −Lt ≤ 0
and consumes government transfers cut = trg,t ≥ cmin . Let Ctev be the compensation that
makes an individual indifferent between working and not working. We implicitly define Ctev
as the solution to the following indifference relationship:


uc (Ctev ; Ωt ) + uk (dk,t = 1, Ωt )                                                                         (14)
                                                           s
 + exp(−ρ(θ))E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , dk,t = 1), θ), kt+1 = F k (kt , dk,t = 1))

 = uc (cut ; Ωt ) + uk (dk,t = 0, Ωt )
                                                           s
 + exp(−ρ(θ))E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , dk,t = 0), θ), kt+1 = F k (kt , dk,t = 0)).


We require that the consumption compensation has to be at least equal to the subsistence
level. Thus, if Ctev < cmin , we set Ctev = cmin .13 As seen in Equation (14), Ctev depends on
the individual’s psychic cost of working, and the future productivity gains of increased work
experience, government transfers (including unemployment benefits), and the sustainable
consumption level. In particular, the minimum consumption compensation Ctev is high if
(i) the individual’s psychic cost of working (−uk (dk,t = 1, Ωt ) + uk (dk,t = 0, Ωt )) is high,
                                                                                   s
(ii) the returns to work experience (E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , dk,t = 1), kt+1 =
                                                                s
F k (kt , dk,t = 1))−E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , dk,t = 0), kt+1 = F k (kt , dk,t = 0)))

  13
    In this case, given normality of goods, the first expression in (14) is bigger than the second expression
and the agent always works.


                                                           14
is low, and (iii) the government welfare subsidy (cut = trg,t ) is high.
      Equation (14) can be interpreted as an individual rationality constraint of working. The
individual chooses to work only if his consumption level under working is at least Ctev .
Under the most unfavorable possible income shocks, if wage earnings are higher than the
consumption equivalence value, i.e., F ψ (e, kt , θ, w )·h(1) ≥ Ctev , the individual works dk,t = 1
and the maximum amount of debt that he can pay back at age t is
F ψ (e, kt , θ, w ) · h(1) − Ctev . This is the surplus of employment in terms of consumption value
under the most unfavorable productivity shock. Using this notation, when an individual can
choose between full-time working and not working, the individual’s natural borrowing limit
is:

                                s
          s                  L (e, kt+1 , θ) + max{0, F ψ (e, kt , θ, w ) · h(1) − Ctev (e, kt , θ)}
         Lt−1 (e, kt , θ)   = t                                                                             (15)
                                                           1 + rb
         kt+1 = F k (kt , dk,t ),    dk,t = 1(F ψ (e, kt , θ, w ) · h(1) − Ctev (e, kt , θ) ≥ 0).          (16)


      It is straightforward to extend the previous derivation to take into account the part-time
employment choices (or any discrete employment choices). Specifically, we define the em-
ployment specific consumption compensation Ctev (dk,t ; e, kt , θ) associated with employment
status dk,t as follows:


       uc (Ctev (dk,t ; e, kt , θ); Ωt ) + uk (dk,t , Ωt )                                                  (17)
                                                                  s
         + exp(−ρ(θ))E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , dk,t ), θ), kt+1 = F k (kt , dk,t ))

         = uc (cut ; Ωt ) + uk (0, Ωt )
                                                                  s
         + exp(−ρ(θ))E(Vt+1 (Ωt+1 )|Ωt , e, st+1 = −Lt (e, F k (kt , 0), θ), kt+1 = F k (kt , 0)).


Note that when dk,t = 0, Ctev (dk,t = 0; e, kt , θ) = cut > 0 satisfying Equation (17) automati-
cally.




                                                             15
       Thus, the endogenous borrowing limit as defined in this paper is:

                        s
 s                   Lt (e, kt+1 , θ) + max{0, [F ψ (e, kt , θ, w )F w (d˜k,t , 0) · h(d˜k,t ) − Ctev (d˜k,t ; e, kt , θ)]}
Lt−1 (e, kt , θ)   =
                                                                 1 + rb
                                                                                                                    (18)

d˜k,t = arg maxdk,t ∈{0,0.5,1} 1(dk,t > 0) F ψ (e, kt , θ, w )F w (dk,t , 0) · h(dk,t ) − Ctev (dk,t ; e, kt , θ)
                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                    (19)

kt+1 = F k (kt , d˜k,t ).                                                                                           (20)

                                                                                                             
Equations (18) and (20) imply that if F ψ (e, kt , θ, w )F w (dk,t , 0) · h(dk,t ) − Ctev (dk,t ; e, kt , θ) <
                                                             s
                                 s
0 for dk,t > 0, then d˜k,t = 0, Lt−1 (e, kt , θ) =         Lt (e,kt+1 ,θ)
                                                               1+rb
                                                                          ,   and kt+1 = F k (kt , 0).
       At terminal age T , LT (·) = 0, we calculate CTev (·) using Equation (17). We then calculate
the natural borrowing limit LT −1 (·) at T −1 based on Equations (18) to (20). Using Equations
(17)-(20), we calculate the natural borrowing limit recursively at any age.
       The natural borrowing limit derived in our model implies that at a given age, an in-
dividual’s borrowing limit is lower if (i) the individual has a low level of human capital,
(ii) the individual’s psychic cost of working is higher, (iii) the returns to work experience
are lower, and (iv) the government welfare subsidy for not working is higher. An agent’s
human capital affects his borrowing limit by affecting his future earning capacity {Ftψ (·)}t .
The individual’s psychic cost of working, the future productivity gains of increased work
experience, and government welfare policy affect borrowing limits by affecting the minimum
consumption compensation level Ctev .

3.9      Discussion of the Natural Borrowing Limit

       The concept of the natural borrowing limit was first proposed in Aiyagari (1994).14 He
defines the natural borrowing limit as the maximum amount an individual can repay with
certainty. The underlying regime that would generate this constraint is one in which lenders

  14
    Huggett (1993) develops a model with incomplete-insurance where agents faces a borrowing constraint
of one year’s income.


                                                            16
can fully enforce contracts and collect on all resources available to the individual.15
      Our notion of the natural borrowing limit extends Aiyagari’s borrowing limit by consid-
ering endogenous labor supply and human capital investment. Following Aiyagari (1994), we
assume that lenders can fully enforce contracts and can collect from all resources available to
the individual. Borrowers must repay as long as they have resources. However, different from
Aiyagari, who assumes that earnings are exogenous, in our model labor supply is endoge-
nous and lenders cannot force borrowers to work. Since borrowers always have the choice
not to work and collect welfare covering their minimum consumption requirement, lenders
can never drive borrower’s utility below that value or they will collect nothing. Hence, the
lending regime with endogenous labor supply is that lenders can enforce full repayment sub-
ject to the restriction that borrowers must be provided a minimum consumption level (Ctev
defined by Equation (17)) that satisfies the borrower’s individual rationality constraint of
working.
      Our formulation of the borrowing limit, that takes into account individual decisions about
labor supply and human capital accumulation, is related to studies that assume imperfectly
enforceable contracts (see Marcet and Marimon (1992), Kehoe and Levine (1993), Albu-
querque and Hopenhayn (2004), and Cooley et al. (2004), Cagetti and De Nardi (2006)).
Imperfect enforceability of contracts means that the creditors are not able to force the debtors
to fully repay their debts as promised and that the debtors fully repay only if it is in their own
interest to do so. Since both parties are aware of this feature and act rationally, the lender
will lend to a given borrower only an amount (possibly zero) that will be in the debtor’s
interest to repay as promised.
      Our natural borrowing limit does not depend on parental transfers. In our model, parental
financial transfers trp,t are governed by a stochastic transfer rule. The lowest possible value
of parental financial transfers (regardless of the youth’s choices) is zero, which consequently
implies that the youths cannot credibly promise to pay back positive loans using (possibly

 15
      It is one motive for precautionary saving (see Zeldes, 1989).



                                                       17
zero) parental transfers with certainty. Parental consumption transfer trc,t is in the form
of shared housing and meals provided by their parents. Youth cannot “cash” such con-
sumption subsidy to pay back their debt. Regarding government transfers, we assume that
private lenders cannot touch government transfers including tuition subsidies and grants.
Hence the formation of the natural borrowing limit does not take into account government
transfers. However, both parental and governmental transfers affect labor supply decisions
and accumulated work experience, and hence indirectly affect the natural borrowing limit.
       We implicitly assume that borrowers can costlessly signal their private information to
lenders so that there is no asymmetric information in the lending market. Examples of such
signals include past history of wage earnings, employment, criminal background, test scores
on cognitive ability, and FICO scores, etc. Any restrictions that reduce an individual’s ability
to signal his own type will result in asymmetric information in the lending market and may
reduce the amount of the borrowing limits for the most able individuals.16
       Our analysis differs from Navarro and Zhou (2016), who estimate a model with a ver-
                                                                                                        s
sion of an Aiyagari borrowing constraint.17 They assume, in our notation, that Lt (e) =
YTM+1IN (e)/(1 + rb )T +1−t , where YTM+1IN (e) > 0 is the social security income after retirement
that depends on education. They assume that agents always work a minimum number of
hours. They do not account for individual rationality constraints of working in their for-
mulation of borrowing limits. The decision to work does not affect private debt limits.
They do not allow for post-schooling human capital accumulation nor do they account for

  16
      Our extension of the Aiyagari credit constraint does not capture the full array of credit market possibili-
ties facing agents. They may go bankrupt with varying penalties ranging from full market exclusion (Alvarez
and Jermann, 2001) to a range of other possible penalties (Chatterjee et al., 2007). Lenders can monitor
and adjust period-by-period loans based on employment and medical histories, and other events realized by
agents (see Chatterjee et al., 2007 and Jermann and Quadrini, 2012). A variety of financial arrangements
are available to lenders and borrowers (see Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010). Lenders can monitor borrowers and
demand collateral or some form of enforceable partial repayment conditions. The assumption that the only
binding constraint facing agents is that they must repay debt in the terminal period (up to some limit) is
surely an extreme simplification of a richer set of period-by-period market and default opportunities. More-
over, it assumes some implicit mechanism through which agents comply with a no-terminal-default rule. We
thank Dean Corbae, Jorge Garcı́a, and Lars Hansen for stimulating conversations on these issues.
   17
      Terminal assets must be no less than a particular lower bound.




                                                       18
access to student loans, heterogeneity in parental transfers, and heterogeneity in parental
characteristics.
   In contrast, our formulation of the borrowing limit extends Aiyagari’s borrowing limit into
the realm of imperfectly enforceable contracts where agents’ decision to work, the psychic
cost of working, unobserved ability, and endogenous human capital accumulation (both in
terms of education and work experience) directly affect the private debt limit.
   Our analysis differs from the approaches of Keane and Wolpin (2001) and Johnson (2013)
by not introducing additional free parameters from outside the model to proxy unmeasured
credit constraints. Ours is a far more stringent approach to estimation. Finally, unlike other
approaches in the literature, we do not specify ad hoc fixed credit limits (see, for example,
Abbott et al., 2016) or calibrate the model to fit asset distributions. Table 1 summarizes
how the literature models credit constraints and our distinct approach to modeling them.

3.10   Optimal Decisions

   The envelope condition is:

                                ∂Vt
                                    = λb,t (1 + r(st )),   if st 6= 0,                      (21)
                                ∂st

where r(st ) = rl 1(st > 0) + rb 1(st < 0) and λb,t is the Lagrange multiplier associated with
the budget constraint.
   The first-order conditions with respect to ct > 0 and st+1 6= 0, t < T are:

                                              ∂uc (ct ; Ωt )
                                                             = λb,t                         (22)
                                                  ∂c
                                                 t
                                          ∂EVt+1
                             exp(−ρ(θ))             + λs,t = λb,t                           (23)
                                           ∂st+1

where λs,t is the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier of the borrowing constraint. If λs,t > 0, the bor-
rowing constraint binds, i.e., st+1 = S t+1 . If λs,t = 0, the borrowing constraint does not bind
and the individual is able to smooth consumption between ages t and t + 1.


                                                 19
       Individuals value education and work experience not only because they improve produc-
tivity and earnings, but because they increase the natural borrowing limit and thus provide
insurance values for consumption against adverse wage shocks. The first order conditions
are consistent with agent rationality associated with the employment choices.

3.11      Initial Conditions and Our Measurement System

       We complete the specification of our model by defining initial conditions and a set of
measurement equations that relate proxied cognitive and noncognitive endowments to a set
of observed measures. Individuals start life as autonomous agents at age 17 (t0 = 17). The
age 17 information set, Ω17 , is:


                               Ω17 := (17, θc , θn , k17 , e17 , s17 , de,16 , ep , sp ).


The initial condition at age 17 that can be determined from sample information are:18


                                  observed
                                Ω17          := (17, k17 , e17 , s17 , de,16 , ep , sp ).


We proxy θ but do not directly observe it.
       The joint distribution of unobserved ability at initial age 17, conditional on parental
background at 17 (X17 ) is given by:

                                                             
                                                            2
                          θc        µc (ep , sp )   σc σc,n 
                           X17 ∼ N                ,          
                          θn            µn (ep , sp )     σc,n σn2


where µj (ep , sp ) = µj + µj,e,1 1(ep = 12) + µj,e,2 1(ep > 12 & ep < 16) + µj,e,3 1(ep ≥ 16) +
µj,s,1 1(sp = 2nd Tercile) + µj,s,2 1(sp = 3rd Tercile), for j = c, n. Thus we allow the initial
distribution to differ by parents’ wealth and education to capture early parental investment

  18
    Education, lagged school attendance, parental education, and parental wealth (e17 , de,16 , ep , sp ) are ob-
served in our sample. We also set the accumulated years of working experience and net worth at age 17 to
be zero (k17 = 0, s17 = 0).


                                                          20
due to parents’ financial resources, knowledge, or preferences.
    We lack direct measurements of cognitive and noncognitive endowments. Instead, we
observe a set of measurement equations for θ. Specifically, we assume that at age 17 there
are two sets of dedicated measurement equations for (θc , θn ) given by Equations (24) and
(25), respectively


                ∗
               Zc,j = µz,c,j + αz,c,j θc + z,c,j ,                   j ∈ {1, . . . , Jc }   (24)
                ∗
               Zn,j = µz,n,j + αz,n,j θn + z,n,j ,                   j ∈ {1, . . . , Jn }   (25)


where individual control variables, including parental education, parental wealth, and the in-
dividual’s age in 1997 are omitted from the measurement equations. The measurement errors
z,c,j and z,n,j are assumed to be independently distributed within and across each block of
measurements. The distribution of (θc , θn ) is assumed to be jointly normal. To incorporate
both continuous and binary measurements, we assume that the following relationship holds
for each measurement at every point of time:
                              
                               Z∗
                              
                                            if Zi,j is continuous
                                 i,j
                     Zi,j   =                                     ,      i ∈ {c, n}          (26)
                                     ∗
                               1(Zi,j
                                      > 0) if Zi,j is binary.


4   Data and Preliminary Regression Analysis

    We estimate the model using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997
(NLSY97). The NLSY97 is a nationally representative sample of approximately 9,000 youths
born during the years 1980 through 1984. Over the sample period 1997 to 2013, the NLSY97
provides extensive information every year on the respondents’ schooling, employment, earn-
ings, and monetary transfers from parents and government. It also provides individual
information on cognitive skills, earlier-life adverse behaviors, and parental education and
wealth.
    We restrict our sample to white males, so our estimates of inequality are not affected by


                                                      21
issues of race or gender. We use the unweighted data.19 Our final sample contains 2,102
individuals, with 25,639 individual-year observations. Table A1 in the Web Appendix reports
the number of observations dropped in each step of our sample selection.

4.1     Variable Description

Measures of Cognitive Ability and Noncognitive Ability

       We use the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) scores as measures of
cognitive ability.20 Specifically, we consider the scores from Mathematical Knowledge (MK),
Arithmetic Reasoning (AR), Word Knowledge (WK), and Paragraph Comprehension (PC).
These four scores have been used by NLSY staff to create the Armed Forces Qualification
Test (AFQT) score, which is commonly used in the literature as a measure of IQ or cognitive
ability. ASVAB scores are only asked in the year 1999.
       Our measures of noncognitive ability include three variables that indicate respondents’
adverse behaviors at very early ages. Specifically, we use violent behavior in 1997 (have ever
attacked anyone with the intention of hurting or fighting), theft behavior in 1997 (have ever
stolen something worth $50 or more), and any sexual intercourse before age 15. Individuals
with high noncognitive ability are less likely to display adverse behaviors. (See Heckman
and Kautz, 2014 and Kautz and Zanoni, 2015 for discussions of these measures and their
validity.)

Education and Labor Market Outcomes

       Education is measured by the highest grade completed. We manually recode this variable
by cross-checking the highest grade completed with data on enrollment and the highest degree
received, in order to correct for missing data, data coding errors, and GEDs. In particular, a
high school dropout with a GED is recoded to his highest grade of school actually completed.

  19
    See Johnson (2013) for the same procedure.
  20
    The CAT-ASVAB is an automated computerized test developed by the United States Military which
measures overall aptitude. The test is composed of 12 subsections and has been well-researched for its ability
to accurately capture the aptitude of test-takers.



                                                     22
       The NLSY97 records the number of hours worked in each week, the number of weeks
worked in a year, and total income earned in a year. We define full-time working to be
working no less than 30 hours a week, and part-time working to be working less than 30
hours a week but more than or equal to 10 hours a week. Among workers aged 23 and above,
the average full-time employment annual hours of work is 2,314 and the median is 2,184,
and the average part-time annual hours of work is 998 and the median is 1,040. Frequency
distributions of weeks and hours worked are provided in the Web Appendix Figure A1. For
employed workers, the hourly wage rate is the ratio between total earned income and total
actual hours worked (in 2004 dollars).
       The NLSY97 collects detailed information on assets and debts of respondents at ages
20, 25, and 30. We define net worth as all assets (including housing assets and all financial
assets) minus all debt (including mortgages and all other debts).21

Parental Education, Net Worth, and Transfers

       The NLSY97 asks each respondent about their parents’ schooling and net worth informa-
tion only in round 1 (1997). We define parents’ education as the average years of schooling
of father and mother if both the father’s and mother’s schooling are available.22 For single-
parent families where only one parent’s schooling level is available, we define the parents’
schooling only using the single parent’s schooling level. Parents’ net worth is defined as all
assets (including housing assets and all financial assets) minus all debt (including mortgages
and all other debts). Parental transfer data is constructed as total monetary transfers re-
ceived from parents in each year, including allowance, non-allowance income, college financial

  21
     In our sample, the bottom 1% of net worth is -$42,028 and the bottom 5% is -$6,604. The net worth is
skewed to the right, the median net worth is $8,504, the top 10% of the net worth is $80,630, and the top
5% is $146,364. We bottom-code the net worth to be -$75,000 and top-code the net worth to be $100,000.
In Johnson (2013), asset values are top coded at $45,000 and bottom coded at -$35,000 for NLSY97 males
aged 18 to 26.
  22
     We top-code parents years of schooling to be 16 years (4-year college graduate) and bottom code parents
schooling to be 8 years (high school dropouts).




                                                    23
aid gift, and inheritance.23

4.2    Summary Statistics

                                     Table 2: Key Variables over Age


                                                      Age 17      Age 20       Age 25       Age 30
        In School                                       0.87        0.37         0.10        0.01
        Full-Time Working                               0.04        0.44         0.73        0.78
        Part-Time Working                               0.49        0.30         0.12        0.06
        Part-Time Working While in School               0.46       0.24         0.07         0.03
        Education                                      10.34       12.25       13.43        13.78
        Years Worked                                    0.00       0.77          3.92        8.05
        Net Worth                                       0.00     13467.81     20569.12     34826.70
        Full-Time Hourly Wage                           6.10       9.55         14.71       18.25
        Part-Time Hourly Wage                           6.16       8.46        15.28        15.77
        Receive Parental Transfers                      0.37       0.46         0.18         0.06
        Total Parental Transfers                      428.53     1766.64       315.89       83.51


                  Table 3: Measures of Cognitive and Noncognitive Ability (Year 1997)


                                              mean                      sd   min       max    N
        ASVAB: Arithmetic Reasoning (1997)    -0.08                    0.95 -3.14      2.37 1,786
        ASVAB: Mathematics Knowledge (1997)    0.06                    0.98 -2.80      2.68 1,781
        ASVAB: Paragraph Comprehension (1997) -0.16                    0.93 -2.36      1.83 1,784
        ASVAB: Word Knowledge (1997)          -0.28                    0.89 -3.15      2.35 1,785
        Noncognitive: Violent Behavior (1997)  0.22                    0.42 0.00       1.00 2,097
        Noncognitive: Had Sex Before Age 15    0.18                    0.38 0.00       1.00 2,100
        Noncognitive: Theft Behavior (1997)   0.10                     0.30 0.00       1.00 2,098

  23
    College financial aid gift includes any financial aid respondents received from relatives and friends that
are not expected to be paid back for each college and term attended in each school year.




                                                     24
                                                 Figure 1: Parental Monetary Transfers By Parental Characteristics

                      2,000




                                                                                                                         2,000
   Parental Transfers
             1,500




                                                                                                               Parental Transfers
                                                                                                                          1,500
    1,000




                                                                                                               1,000
                500




                                                                                                                         500
                0




                              Parents' Net Worth T1     Parents' Net Worth T2    Parents' Net Worth T3




                                                                                                                         0
                                          Parents' educ < 12 yrs                Parents' educ = 12 yrs
                                                                                                                                    17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24    25   26   27   28   29   30   31
                                          Parents' educ 13 to 15 yrs            Parents' educ >= 16 yrs
                                                                                                                                                                       Age




  (a) By Parents’ Net Worth Terciles & Education                                                                                                   (b) By Youth’s Age


Source: NLSY97. Parental transfer is the total monetary transfers received from parents in
each year, including allowance, non-allowance income, college financial aid gift, and
inheritance.


      Table 2 reports the statistics of key variables by age.24 At age 17, 87% of the youth are
enrolled in school, and the fraction of the youth in school decreases to 10% at age 25. The
fraction of the youth who work full time steadily increases from 44% at age 20 to 78% at
age 30; the fraction of part-time employment decreases from 30% at age 20 to 6% at age
30. Average years of schooling increase from 10.3 at age 17 to 13.8 at age 30. The average
net worth increases from $13,468 at age 20 to $34,827 at age 30. Average hourly wages
(both part-time job and full-time job) increase between age 17 and age 30. Average full-time
hourly wage rate is $18 at age 30. All the variables are measured in 2004 dollars. Table A3
reports average years of work experience, wages, and net worth for 4 education groups at
age 25. Measures of cognitive and noncognitive skills at age 17 are presented in Table 3.

 24
      The summary statistics for the entire sample over year 1997 to 2011 is reported in Table A2.




                                                                                                          25
                                        Figure 2: Relationships Between Early Endowments and Environments and College Choices
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                   .9




                                                                                                                                                                                    .9
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
    College Attendance Rate




                                                                                                                                                     College Attendance Rate
                                   .7




                                                                                                                                                                                    .7
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                                                    .3
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                          ASVAB Quartile 1            ASVAB Quartile 2         ASVAB Quartile 3             ASVAB Quartile 4                                             ASVAB Quartile 1          ASVAB Quartile 2        ASVAB Quartile 3              ASVAB Quartile 4


                                                             Parents' Schooling < 12 yrs                  Parents' Schooling = 12 yrs                                                                       Parents' Net Worth Tercile 1             Parents' Net Worth Tercile 2

                                                             Parents' Schooling 13 to 15 yrs              Parents' Schooling >= 16 yrs                                                                      Parents' Net Worth Tercile 3




        (a) College Attendance by Parental Education                                                                                                (b) College Attendance by Parental Net Worth
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                   .9




                                                                                                                                                                                    .9
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                                    .8
    4-Yr College Graduation Rate




                                                                                                                                                     4-Yr College Graduation Rate
                                   .7




                                                                                                                                                                                    .7
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                                                    .3
                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                          ASVAB Quartile 1            ASVAB Quartile 2         ASVAB Quartile 3             ASVAB Quartile 4                                             ASVAB Quartile 1          ASVAB Quartile 2        ASVAB Quartile 3              ASVAB Quartile 4


                                                             Parents' Schooling < 12 yrs                  Parents' Schooling = 12 yrs                                                                       Parents' Net Worth Tercile 1             Parents' Net Worth Tercile 2

                                                             Parents' Schooling 13 to 15 yrs              Parents' Schooling >= 16 yrs                                                                      Parents' Net Worth Tercile 3




   (c) 4-Year College Grad. by Parental Education                                                                                                   (d) 4-Year College Grad. by Parental Net Worth


Source: NLSY97 white males. 4-Year college graduate rate is calculate as the fraction of
individual whose years of schooling are more than or equal to 16 at age 25.


      The distribution of parental transfers is skewed.25 The amount of parental transfers
to children is either positive or zero. On average, 29% of the youths receive zero monetary
transfers from their parents. Among those who receive positive parental transfers, the average
amount of transfers received is $3,116, and the median amount is $907. As shown in Figure
1, on average, the amount of parental transfers depends crucially on parental education and
net worth and varies over the youth’s life cycle.

   25
      Conditional on parental transfers being positive, the top 1 percentile of the parental transfers amount
is $24,639. We top-code the maximum amount of positive parental transfers to be $30,000 per year.

                                                                                                                                               26
     There is a positive impact of parental education and wealth on educational decisions.
As seen in Figure 2, even after controlling for measures of the youths’ own cognitive ability,
there is still a strong positive correlation between parents’ education and net worth and
an individual’s college attendance and 4-year college completion. Table 4 reports the OLS
regression results of years of schooling at age 30 on ASVAB, the number of early adverse be-
haviors, parental education, and parental net worth. After controlling for the ASVAB score,
individuals’ years of schooling are still positively correlated with both parental education
and parental net worth. Furthermore, college attendance decisions are negatively correlated
with the number of early adverse behaviors, which suggests a positive correlation between
years of schooling and noncognitive ability.26
    Table 4: OLS Regression of Adult Educational Outcomes on Early Endowment and Family Influence

                                                          Education
                        ASVAB                           1.03∗∗∗ (0.03)
                        Num of Adverse Behaviors       -0.60∗∗∗ (0.04)
                        Parents’ Education              0.27∗∗∗ (0.02)
                        Parents’ Net Worth 2nd Tercile 0.67∗∗∗ (0.07)
                        Parents’ Net Worth 3rd Tercile 1.12∗∗∗ (0.07)
                        Age                             0.09∗∗∗ (0.02)
                        R2                               0.46
                        Observations                     5354

                         Standard errors in parentheses.
                         Source: NLSY97 white males aged 25 to 30.
                         ∗
                           p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



5    Empirical Strategy

     The precise specifications used to estimate our model are reported in Section 5.1.27 In
Section 5.2, we discuss calibration of parameters that are identified using externally supplied
data. After that, we turn to consider model identification (Section 5.3) and estimation
(Section 5.4).

  26
     Table A4 reports the OLS estimation results for logarithm of hourly wages among individuals who always
work after leaving school upon completing the highest degree.
  27
     Web Appendix Section A.2 gives the parameterization of the parental transfer function.

                                                    27
5.1     Model Parameterization

       We use the following additively separable current flow utility function:

                                               (ct /est,e )1−γ − 1
                U (ct , de,t , dk,t ; Ωt ) =                       + ue (Ωt )de,t + uk (dk,t , de,t , Ωt )   (27)
                                                     1−γ

where est,e is the equivalence scales of family size,28 ue (Ωt ) and uk (dk,t , de,t , Ωt ) are flow
utility (or disutility if negative) associated with individual choices of schooling and working,
respectively:


  ue (Ωt ) = φe,0 1(de,t + et ≤ 12) + (φe,1 + φe,a 1(t > 22)) · 1(de,t + et > 12 & de,t + et ≤ 16)

        + φe,2 1(de,t + et > 16) + αe,c θc + αe,n θn + φe,p 1(ep ≥ 16) − φe,e (1 − de,t−1 ) + σe e,t (28)

  uk (dk,t , de,t , Ωt ) = [φk,e · 1(dk,t = 0.5 & de,t = 1) + φk,0 · 1(dk,t = 0.5 & de,t = 0)

        + (φk,1 + φk,2 (age − 17)) · 1(dk,t = 1)] · (1 + αk,c θc + αk,n θn )                                 (29)


where the schooling preference shock e,t is i.i.d. standard normal distributed.
       We allow for the psychic costs of schooling to depend on an individual’s cognitive and
noncognitive abilities. φe,0 , φe,1 , and φe,2 characterizes the level of psychic costs for attend-
ing high school, college, and graduate school, respectively. φe,a is the psychic cost of late
enrollment in college, and φe,e is the psychic cost of re-entering school. We also introduce
preference heterogeneity in schooling depending on parental education level ep to allow for
the direct impact of parental education on schooling (φe,p ). We allow for preference shocks
to the utility of schooling (e,t ).
       Parameters φk,e , φk,0 , and φk,1 govern the level of psychic costs of part-time working
while in school, part-time working while not in school, and full-time working, respectively.

  28
     Household equivalence scales measure the change in consumption expenditures needed to keep the welfare
of a family constant when its size varies. We calculate the equivalence scales of different household sizes
following Fernández-Villaverde and Krueger (2007). For example, this scale implies that a household of two
needs 1.34 times the consumption expenditure of a single household. We do not model endogenous changes
in family size. Instead we allow family size to vary exogenously depending on education level e and age t.
The average family size for each education group at every age is obtained from CPS data 1997 to 2012.


                                                             28
We allow the preference of full-time working to vary with age (φk,2 ). We also allow the
psychic costs of working to depend on an individual’s cognitive and noncognitive abilities.
   Following Gourinchas and Parker (2002) and De Nardi (2004), we assume that the ter-
minal value function at age T + 1 takes the following functional form:

                                                    (sT +1 /esT,e )1−γ − 1
                              VT +1 (ΩT +1 ) = φs                          ,                (30)
                                                            1−γ

where φs characterizes the influence of net worth at age T + 1. Equation (30) approximates
an individual’s value function at age T + 1. It does not imply that individuals die at age
T + 1 or that other state variables in ΩT +1 do not matter. It just implies that the marginal
effects of other state variables (such as accumulation of education and experience) on the
individual’s value function at age T +1 are small. As noted in Section 3.7, we set the terminal
age to be T + 1 = 51.
   We allow the subjective discount rate ρ(θc , θn ) to depend on cognitive ability and noncog-
nitive ability:
                                  ρ(θc , θn ) = ρ0 (1 − ρc θc − ρn θn )                     (31)

An individual’s wage function and human capital function are characterized by:


          log wt = log ψt + 1(dk,t = 0.5)(βw,0 + βw,1 de,t )                                (32)

            where

          log ψt =βψ,0 + βψ,k kt + βψ,kk kt2 /100 + βψ,e,0 (et − 12)

                    + βw,e,1 1(et = 12) + βw,e,2 1(et > 12 & et < 16) + βw,e,3 1(et ≥ 16)

                    + (αψ,c,0 θc + αψ,n,0 θn ) · 1(et < 12)

                    + (αψ,c,1 θc + αψ,n,1 θn ) · 1(et ≥ 12 & et < 16)

                    + (αψ,c,2 θc + αψ,n,2 θn ) · 1(et ≥ 16) + w,t − E(w,t )


where w,t is the education specific idiosyncratic productivity shock. We allow the density


                                                    29
function of w,t to differ depending on whether the individual has a four-year college degree
or not.
       Without loss of generality, we normalize the lowest possible value of w,t to be 0: w = 0.
We assume that the productivity shock w,t ≥ w = 0 is drawn from a gamma distribution
Gamma(a, b) with the following density function:

                                                  1
                                   p(w,t ) =          (w,t )a−1 e−(w,t )/b .                          (33)
                                                Γ(a)ba

Therefore, E(w,t ) = ab and V ar(w,t ) = ab2 . The gamma distribution allows us to flexibly
model both the shape and the scale of the productivity shock distribution which are governed
by the parameters a and b, respectively.29

5.2      External Calibration

       For parameters that can be identified outside the structural model, such as the mone-
tary cost of schooling and government transfers, we rely on external data sources. Table 5
summarizes all the parameters that are externally specified in our structural model. We now
discuss these choices in detail.
       We calculate the cost of college tuition and fees and grants and scholarships from the
following two sources: (i) Total direct expenditures (including tuition and fees) of higher
education level et are calculated as the average expenditures per student using data from
The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS); (ii) The average amount of
the grant for each education level associated with every parental net worth tercile using the
NLSY97 sample. We also obtain the average cost of college room and board from IPEDS
for two-year college and 4-year college, respectively.
       We set the borrowing interest rate equal to 5 percent annually. We set the lending
interest rate rl to be 1 percent annually, which is the average real interest rate on 1-year

  29
    Chatterjee et al. (2007) assume that the distribution function of w,t is characterized by a one-parameter
                                                φw
                                           z−
distribution function: P rob(w ≤ z) = w −w        , where φw controls the shape of the shock distribution
                                               w
and w is the upper bound of the shock. Our specification is more flexible.

                                                       30
                     Table 5: Parameters Calibrated Outside the Structural Model


      Description           Parameter                               Value                     Source


                            tc(e = 13, 14)                          $5,073    IPEDS data on average tuition and fees
College Tuition & Fees
                            tc(e ≥ 15)                             $10,653    1999-2006.
                            gr(e = 13, 14, sp = T 1)                $2,581
                            gr(e = 13, 14, sp = T 2)                $2,287
                                                                              NLSY97 data on average grants and
College Grants and          gr(e = 13, 14, sp = T 3)                $2,476
                                                                              scholarship by years of schooling and
Scholarship                 gr(e ≥ 15, sp = T 1)                    $3,604
                                                                              parental wealth terciles.
                            gr(e ≥ 15, sp = T 2)                    $2,569
                            gr(e ≥ 15, sp = T 3)                    $2,607
College Room and Board      rc(e = 13, 14)                          $4,539    Johnson (2013) room and board for 2-year
                            rc(e ≥ 15)                              $6,532    college and 4-year college
                            ¯lg (e = 13)                            $2,625
GSL Borrowing Annual        ¯lg (e = 14)                            $3,500
                            ¯lg (e = 15, 16)                                  Annual Stafford Loan Limits 1993 to 2007
Limit                                                               $5,500
                            ¯lg (e > 16)                           $10,500
                                g
GSL Borrowing Aggregate L (e ≥ 13 & e ≤ 16)                         $23,000   Undergraduate
                         g
Limit                   L (e ≥ 16)                                 $138,500   Graduate + Undergraduate
Borrowing Interest Rate     rb                                       5%       Federal Student Aid
Lending Interest Rate       rl                                       1%       Average real interest rate on 1-year
                                                                              U.S. government bonds from 2001 to
                                                                              2007
Parental Transfer           trp (ep , sp , de,t , dk,t , et , t)    Table     NLSY97 sample
Function                                                             A5
Parents Consumption         trc,t = χ · 1(t < 18)                   $7,800    Kaplan (2012) & Johnson (2013)
Subsidy
Part-time Annual Hours      h(0.5)                                  1,040     20 hours per week, 52 weeks
Full-time Annual Hours      h(1)                                    2,080     40 hours per week, 52 weeks
                            bg (e ≤ 12)                            $540 × 3
Unemployment Benefit        bg (e ≥ 13 & e ≤ 16)                   $600 × 3   NLSY97 UI benefits
                            bg (e > 16)                            $740 × 3
Minimum Consumption         cmin                                    $2,800    NLSY sample average means-tested
Floor                                                                         transfers among recipients
Risk Aversion Coefficient   γ                                        2.0      Lochner and Monge-Naranjo (2012)
                                                                              and Johnson (2013)
Terminal Value function     φs                                       25.0     PSID 1999-2011: Median(s51 /c50 )=5

IPEDS = Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System. Average tuition and fees are weighted by full-
time enrollment and are deflated in 2004 dollars. Because expenditures are higher at four-year institutions
than at two-year institutions, there is a noticeable jump in cost between two and three years of college.
Within our sample period, the aggregate subsidized Stafford Loan Limits is $23,000 for undergraduate and
$138,500 for graduate and undergraduate in total. The Interest rate ranges from 3.34 to 8.25% for Stafford
Loans over the time period 1997 to 2011. Parental consumption subsidy is given by trc,t = χ · 1(t < 18),
where χ is the value of direct consumption subsidy provided by the parents such as shared housing and meals
when the youth attends high school.

                                                              31
U.S. government bonds from 2001 to 2007. Note that the interest rate spread on borrowing
and lending (4%) is quite large and already embodies an important market friction.
       We estimate the logarithm of parental monetary transfers, log(trp,t +1) using our NLSY97
sample (see Section A.2 in the Web Appendix for parameterization); the parameter estimates
are reported in Web Appendix Table A5. In the sample, 94% of youth who are attending
high school live with their parents.30 Following Kaplan (2012) and Johnson (2013), we set
the consumption subsidy provided by parents for those who are living with their parents and
not attending school, χ, to be $650 monthly ($7,800 annually)31 ; χ includes both the direct
and indirect costs of housing as well as shared meals.
       We set the hours of work to be 20 hours per week for part-time jobs and 40 hours per
week for full-time jobs (see Keane and Wolpin (2001)), therefore the annual hours of work
is 1,040 hours for part-time job and 2,080 hours for full-time job.32 We set the monthly
unemployment benefits to be $540 for unemployed workers without a college degree, $600
for some college or 4-year college workers, and $740 for workers with a graduate degree.33 We
assume that unemployed workers can receive unemployment benefits for 3 months. In our
sample, the average amount of means-tested transfers (including food stamps, AFDC and
WIC) among recipients is about $2,800 annually. Thus, we set the government means-tested
minimum consumption floor cmin to be $2,800.
       We set the relative risk aversion parameter to be γ = 2.0 following Lochner and Monge-
Naranjo (2011) and Johnson (2013). A majority of existing microstudies on consumption
and savings estimate the value of γ to be between one and three.34

  30
     The ratio is 42% for those who are not attending high school.
  31
     Our model abstracts away from multiple child households.
  32
     In our sample, among workers aged 23 and above, the median annual working hours of a part-time
worker is 1,040 and the median annual working hours of a full-time employed worker is 2,184.
  33
     Conditional on receiving unemployment benefits, the mean monthly unemployment insurance benefits
are $800 for workers with at most a high school degree, $900 for workers with some college or 4-year college,
and $1,100 for workers with a graduate degree. In the model, we assume individuals who are not working or in
school receive unemployment benefits, which are substantially more generous than the actual unemployment
benefits; we thus reduce the predicted unemployment benefits amount by one-third following Kaplan (2012).
  34
     See Browning et al. (1999) for a summary of the early literature.




                                                     32
       To calibrate the parameter in the terminal value function, we note that the first-order
optimal condition at age T can be written as cT −γ = φs sT +1 −γ . From the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics (PSID) 1999 to 2011 the median value of sTcT+1 is 5.0 among households
                                                        γ
                                                   sT +1
                           35
whose head aged T + 1 = 51, therefore we set φs = cT        = (5.0)γ = 25.0.

5.3      Identification

       This section discusses identification of key features of the model.

5.3.1     Factor Model and Measurement System

       The identification of factor models requires normalizations that set the location and scale
of the factors (see Anderson and Rubin (1956)). For each factor (θc , θn ), we normalize its
unconditional mean to be zero, i.e., Eep ,sp (θc ), E(θc ) = E(θn ) = 0, and standard deviation
to be one, i.e., σc = σn = 1. We allow intercepts in all measurement equations.

5.3.2     Dynamic Model and Structural Parameters

       This section provides an overview of identification of the structural model. The parame-
ters that remain to be identified are: 15 parameters characterizing individual preferences over
schooling and working, 20 parameters characterizing the human capital production function
(including the density function of productivity shocks) and wage function, and 3 parameters
regarding discount factors.
       The parameters on the subjective discount rate can in principle be identified by using
consumption data formed from the asset data. To illustrate, consider the Euler equation
under a CRRA utility specification for those who are far away from borrowing constraints
(abstracting from uncertainty):36


                            γ · (log ct+1 − log ct ) = −ρ(θc , θn ) + log(1 + r),

  35
      To be consistent with our net worth measure in the data section, we also measure net worth as all assets
(including housing assets and all financial assets) minus all debts (including mortgages and all other debts)
in PSID.
   36
      For illustrative purposes, here we assume uc (ct ; Ωt ) = c1−γ
                                                                 t   /1 − γ and r is the borrowing/lending interest
rate.

                                                        33
using the fact that γ is set externally.37 The identification of the parameters of the subjective
discount rate function ρ relies on variations in consumption growth and thus savings. The
level of average net worth identifies the constant term of the subjective discount rate, ρ0 .38
       Identification of the rest of the model can be justified using the analysis of Heckman and
Navarro (2007) and Heckman et al. (2016). Under large support conditions and conditional
independence assumptions, we can determine an unconstrained set of agents with access
to full insurance (Arrow-Debreu insurance) who always work and are not subject to credit
constraints. With γ in hand (by assumption) and the discount factors known (by the previous
analysis), we can monetize the consumption value of future income flows and can follow the
two cited papers in using earnings data to identify psychic costs of education. Using the
parameters so determined, we can use the full data set to estimate psychic costs of work and
the parameters of the labor supply function. We identify the human capital accumulation
equations by conditioning on θ estimated from the preceding analysis (see e.g., Heckman
et al., 2013).

5.4      Estimation Method

       We use a two-step estimation procedure. In the first step, we estimate the parameters
of the measurement system and the joint distribution of cognitive ability and noncognitive
ability at age 17, using simulated maximum likelihood:

                                             Z
                                   max Πi              f (Zi ; Xi , θc , θn )dF (θc , θn ).
                                              θc ,θn



The initial conditions for cognitive ability and noncognitive ability in the second step are
obtained by simulation using the parameter estimates from the first step.
       In the second step, we use the method of simulated moments to estimate parameters of in-
dividual preferences (15 parameters), human capital production function and wage equation

  37
       Potentially, if r varies we can identify γ.
  38
       Alternatively, if we fix ρ externally, we can identify γ.



                                                             34
(20 parameters), and discount factors (3 parameters).39 In total, we estimate 38 parameters
in the second step using a total number of moments of 222. Table 6 lists targeted moments,
which includes choices probabilities and outcome variables over age and by education cate-
gories as well as conditional moments between outcome variables and measures of cognitive
and noncognitive abilities. We use diagonal moments of the data following Altonji and Segal
(1996). The weighting matrix is the inverse of the diagonal matrix of the variance-covariance
matrix of the data moments.


6     Estimation Results

      This section discusses our estimates. Sections 6.1 and 6.2 discuss the parameter esti-
mates and the goodness of model fit respectively. Section 6.3 presents the estimated natural
borrowing limits. Section 6.4 presents the fraction of youths who are estimated to be credit
constrained by age, by endowment, and by human capital levels. Section 6.5 discusses the
sorting patterns into education based on unobserved cognitive ability and noncognitive abil-
ity. Section 6.6 discuss the inequality in human capital, education, and consumption in the
estimated model (baseline case).

6.1     Parameter Estimates

6.1.1    Measurement System Parameters

      The distribution of (θc , θn ) is reported in Web Appendix Table A6. The parameter esti-
mates of the measurement equations are reported in Table A7. The two initial endowments
are positively correlated with each other.40 The correlation between cognitive ability and
noncognitive ability is 0.280.41

  39
     The choice variables in the model include not only discrete controls such as schooling and working
decisions but also continuous controls such as asset level. As a result, we use Simulated Method of Moments
(SMM) to estimate the model.
  40
     The variance of each factor is normalized to one for identification.
  41
     Heckman et al. (2016) report an estimate of .40 for a related model.




                                                    35
                          Table 6: Targeted Moments for SMM Estimation

Targeted Moments                                                                           # Moments
Choice probabilities, state variables, and outcome variables over the life-
cycle
Probabilities of schooling for each age 17 to 30                                           14
Probabilities of working part-time for each age 17 to 30                                   14
Probabilities of working full-time for each age 17 to 30                                   14
Average hourly full-time wage for each age 18 to 30                                        13
Average hourly part-time wage for each age 18 to 30                                        13
Average net worth at ages 20, 25, and 30                                                   3
Average negative net worth at ages 20, 25, and 30                                          3
Average years of schooling at age 30                                                       2
Average years of work experience at age 30                                                 2
Probability of enrolling in college at age 21                                              1
Probability of graduating from 4-year college at age 25                                    1
Average years of work experience if working full time at age 30                            1
Probability of working part-time while in school at ages 18 to 22                          1
Average log wage rate when working in school at ages 18 to 22                              1
Probabilities of high school, some college, and 4-year college at ages 25 and 30           3×2
Probabilities of years of school more than 16 years at age 30                              1
Variance of log earnings at age 30                                                         1
Variance of log hourly wage at age 30                                                      1
Variance of log years of schooling at age 30                                               1
Variance of log experience at age 30                                                       1
Covariance terms from auxiliary models (Indirect Inference)
Regression coefficients of log hourly wage on work experience, work experience             17
squared, years of schooling, HSG, SCL , CLG, cognitive ability × HSD, noncognitive
ability × HSD, cognitive ability × HSG, noncognitive ability × HSG, cognitive ability
× SCL, noncognitive ability × SCL, cognitive ability × CLG, noncognitive ability ×
CLG, previously not working, constant; and standard deviation of regression residual
Regression coefficients of school enrollment on previous period’s enrollment status,       6
age, age=17, parents’ education, cognitive ability, noncognitive ability
Regression coefficients of full-time working on years of schooling, cognitive ability,     3
noncognitive ability
Regression coefficients of log net worth on cognitive ability, noncognitive ability, and   6
log wage, age ≥ 20, age ≥ 25, constant
Conditional moments for each of the 4 education categories
Average net worth by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                              4   ×   2
Average negative net worth by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                     4   ×   2
Average log hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                        4   ×   2
Standard deviation of log hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30          4   ×   2
Median log hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                         4   ×   2
Bottom 5 percentile of log hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30         4   ×   2
Top 5 percentile of log hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30            4   ×   2
Average hourly full-time wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                  4   ×   2
Average hourly wage by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30                            4   ×   2
Average years of work experience by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30               4   ×   2
Probability of working part-time by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30               4   ×   2
Probability of working full-time by 4 education categories at ages 25 and 30               4   ×   2




                                                  36
6.1.2   Structural Model Parameters

   Web Appendix Table A8 reports preference parameter estimates for the schooling utility
functions (Panel A) and work utility function (Panel B). The psychic benefit of schooling
is higher for individuals with higher cognitive and noncognitive abilities. Individuals whose
parents have higher levels of education also have higher flow utility from schooling. The
parameter estimates suggest that the psychic cost of working part-time while in school (φk,e =
−0.0773) is higher than the psychic cost of part-time working while not in school (φk,0 =
−0.0332). In our estimation, we do not impose any restrictions on the relative magnitudes
of these two parameters. Forcing the psychic cost of working part-time while in school to
be the same as the psychic cost of part-time working while not in school overpredicts the
fraction of working students in school.
   Parameter estimates of the discount rate function are reported in Table A9. Figure 3
plots the density of estimated discount factors in the benchmark model. Appendix Figure
A4 plots the density of estimated discount factor for high ability and low ability, separately.
As expected, individuals with higher levels of cognitive ability and/or noncognitive ability
have considerably lower rates of time preference.
                                      60
                                      40
                     kdensity delta
                                      20
                                      0




                                           .95   .96        .97          .98   .99
                                                       Discount Factor



                  Figure 3: Density of Estimated Discount Factors: exp(−ρ(θc , θn ))




                                                         37
6.1.3     Labor Market Skill Production and Wages

       Table A10 in the Web Appendix reports parameter estimates for the human capital pro-
duction function and the wage equation. A one standard deviation increase in cognitive
ability increases an individual’s human capital level as well as offered wages by
(αψ,c,2 = 0.1433) log points among 4-year college graduate workers. The effects of noncogni-
tive ability on human capital levels and wages are small and not statistically different from
zero.

6.2     Model Goodness of Fit

       In this section, we report the goodness of model fit on selected target moments (Table
6 gives the complete set of targeted moments). Our model closely fits the lifecycle patterns
of school enrollment (Figure 4(a)) and employment (see Figures 4(b) and 4(c)). Figure
4(d) shows that our estimated model fits the observed accepted wage patterns over time.
Figures 4(e) and 4(f) plot our model fits of average net worth and average negative net worth
(st 1(st < 0)) at ages 20, 25, and 30.42
       As shown in Figure 5, our model can replicate the patterns of number of years worked
for each of the four education categories at age 30. Our model can also replicate the average
wages for each education category at age 30.

  42
    Figures A5 in the Web Appendix plots the model fit on years of schooling over age, over parent’s
education categories, and over parents’ net worth terciles. The fit is generally good.




                                                38
       1




                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
       .8




                                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Work Part Time
                                                                                                                              Work Full Time
         .6




                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
  In School
 .4




                                                                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
       .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                  17    18        19        20     21   22              23       24        25        26    27                                                        17    18        19    20   21   22    23 24         25      26   27    28        29    30                                   17    18        19    20   21   22    23 24    25   26   27    28        29    30
                                                        Age                                                                                                                                                 Age                                                                                                                         Age

                                            95% CI                                   NLSY Data                                                                                                  95% CI                            NLSY Data                                                                                 95% CI                    NLSY Data
                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                        Fitted Model                                                                                                                Fitted Model




                              (a) In School                                                                                                                           (b) Working Full-time                                                                                                      (c) Working Part-time



                                                                                                                              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
       28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
       24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2000
           20
 Wage Rate




                                                                                                                                        Net Worth
       16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4000
  12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6000
       8
       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -8000
       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                  18   19    20        21     22   23   24 25                   26    27        28    29   30                                                         20        21        22    23    24    25        26         27    28        29        30                                     20        21        22    23    24    25     26    27    28        29        30
                                                        Age                                                                                                                                                 Age                                                                                                                         Age

                                            95% CI                                   NLSY Data                                                                                                  95% CI                            NLSY Data                                                                                 95% CI                    NLSY Data
                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                        Fitted Model                                                                                                                Fitted Model




                (d) Hourly Wages over Age                                                                                                                             (e) Net Worth by Age                                                                                      (f) Negative Net Worth by Age

                                                                                                                     Figure 4: Model Fit over the Lifecycle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24
                                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                            Yrs of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wage Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                < 12 yrs        12 yrs     13 to 15 yrs                                   >=16 yrs                                                          < 12 yrs                12 yrs     13 to 15 yrs            >=16 yrs
                                                                                                            Schooling Categories (Age 25)                                                                                                                       Schooling Categories (Age 30)

                                                                                                            95% CI                                                  NLSY Data                                                                                    95% CI                          NLSY Data
                                                                                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                         Fitted Model




                                                                      (a) Yrs Worked by Education                                                                                                                 (b) Hourly Wages by Education

                                                                                                                           Figure 5: Model Fit by Education



                Tables A11 and A12 in the Web Appendix report model fits for the covariance terms
from auxiliary models for enrollment and employment, respectively. Table A13 in the Web
Appendix reports model fits of the auxiliary model for log hourly wage. Table A14 in the
Web Appendix shows the model fits of the auxiliary model for log net worth. Our model
generally fits the data well.



                                                                                                                                                                                                       39
6.3     Natural Borrowing Limit L̄st

       Figure 6(a) plots both the average amount of natural borrowing limit for all individuals
from age 17 to age 50. The mean natural borrowing limit at first increases as an individual
accumulates schooling and work experience, and then gradually decreases as individuals age
and remaining lifetime earnings declines.43 Such a pattern is in sharp contrast with that
of a life cycle model without human capital accumulation in the absence of life cycle wage
growth in which the natural borrowing limit decreases monotonically with age.
       Next, we explore the relationship between an individual’s natural borrowing limit in the
private lending market L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) and his human capital ψt = F ψ (et , kt , θ, t ) at age
t. Figure 6(b) plots the model implied average natural borrowing limit over log human
capital levels at age 30. The average natural borrowing limit is relatively flat with respect
to an individual’s human capital level when the human capital level is low. For agents with
a very low human capital level, natural borrowing limits are zero. This is because, in the
presence of the worst possible labor market shock, agents with very low human capital would
just choose to not work and live off welfare. When the human capital level is higher, the
natural borrowing limit increases with the human capital level. Similarly, conditional on
age, the natural borrowing limit generally increases with education, cognitive ability, and
noncognitive ability (see Web Appendix Figure A15).
       We plot the evolution of natural borrowing limits with age for individuals with different
cognitive and noncognitive abilities in Figure 7. The natural borrowing limits generally
increases with age during the period age 17 to 30. However, the growth rate of the natural
borrowing limit is much higher for individuals with higher initial ability endowments.

6.4     Borrowing Constrained Youths

       An important contribution of our model is the estimation of life cycle credit constraints
governing behavior. Using our model, we can calculate the fraction of individuals who are

  43
    The decline to zero at age 50 is an artifact of our assumed horizon of 51 years. The figure is qualitatively
correct for later terminal ages but shifts the hump rightward.


                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                   Local polynomial smooth




                                                                                                                                          20000
                 8000




                                                                                                                                      10000 15000
   Mean Natural Borrowing Limit




                                                                                                                             Natural Borrowing Limit
           4000        6000




                                                                                                                             5000
  2000




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                1                        2                   3                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Human Capital (Age 30)
                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                         95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                        20           25           30           35       40            45          50
                                                                         Age                                                                             kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .23, pwidth = .34




(a) Natural Borrowing Limit over Ages 17 to 50 (b) Natural Borrowing Limit vs Human Capital at
                                               Age 30

                                                               Figure 6: Mean of Natural Borrowing Limit L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ)
                                                                                                                                          20000
                20000




                                                                                                                                                 15000
                    15000
    Natural Borrowing Limit




                                                                                                                               Natural Borrowing Limit
                                                                                                                                       10000
          10000




                                                                                                                             5000
  5000          0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                  17   18     19    20    21     22 23 24 25 26                  27   28     29    30                                    17    18     19     20      21 22 23 24 25 26                          27   28     29    30
                                                               Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                                            Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                            Quartile 1           Quartile 2         Quartile 3             Quartile 4                                               Quartile 1             Quartile 2              Quartile 3             Quartile 4



(a) Natural Borrowing Limit vs Cognitive Ability (b) Natural Borrowing Limit vs Noncog. Ability

                                        Figure 7: Evolution of Average Natural Borrowing Limit by Ability Endowments




                                                                                                                        41
borrowing-constrained by evaluating the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier associated with an indi-
vidual’s optimal savings decision. In particular, using the first order conditions from an
individual’s optimization problem (Equations (22) and (23)), we can calculate the Kuhn-
Tucker multiplier associated with individuals’ next period asset decisions as follows:

                                                                                              
                                             ∂uc (ct ; Ωt )                           ∂EVt+1
                    λs,t (ct , st+1 ; Ωt ) =                − exp(−ρ(θc , θn ))                    .          (34)
                                                 ∂ct                                   ∂st+1

We define an individual as borrowing constrained at period t if λs,t > 0 and st+1 ≤
−L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ). Figures 8, 9, and 10 graph—at ages 21, 30, and 40, respectively—the
model predicted fraction constrained as functions of various arguments. Appendix Fig-
ures A7, A8, and A9 graph the multipliers (λs,t ) in the model simulated data as a function
of the same arguments. Figures 8(b), 9(b), and 10(b) report fraction constrained by levels of
cognitive ability. Figures 8(d), 9(d), and 10(d) report fraction constrained by the logarithm
of human capital stocks.
       At age 21, these graphs exhibit a weak bimodality that sharpens somewhat by age 30.
Two groups of people are constrained. Many agents with low ability and low human capital
endowments have relatively flat life cycle wage growth. There are also some with high
ability and high human capital endowments with high wage growth who, in their 20s and
early 30s, cannot fully access their future income because of borrowing restrictions. By age
40 (Figure 10), when life cycle earnings growth is more fully realized, the second (already
smaller) hump disappears. The first hump remains throughout the life cycle. The first group
of individuals has low labor market earnings, low savings, and a tight borrowing limits. They
also have high discount rates. These individuals want consumption upfront (even with flat
income profiles) but cannot access it due to their low borrowing limit.44

  44
    Consider a special case where there is no income growth (y1 = y2 ) and there is no borrowing constraint.
The Euler equation for optimal consumption choices indicates that the optimal consumption in periods 1
and 2, c∗1 and c∗2 , respectively, obey: γ(log c∗2 − log c∗1 ) = −ρ(θc , θn ) + log(1 + r). Therefore, the following
must be true when there is no borrowing constraint: −ρ(θc , θn ) + log(1 + r) < 0 ⇒ c∗2 < c∗1 . Thus, when
the discount rate is relatively high (i.e., the agent is less patient), the agent will try to consume more today
and consume less tomorrow even if there is no income growth between these two periods (y1 = y2 ). As a


                                                        42
        There is evidence of bimodality in constraints with respect to cognitive and non-cognitive
ability in the late 20s and early 30s. The patterns with respect to net worth show a sharp
cliff. Beyond a certain level, agents are not constrained.

                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                Local polynomial smooth
                 1




                                                                                                                                       1
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                         .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
       Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                             Borrowing Constrained
                 0




                                                                                                                                       0
                         -50000                        0                50000                      100000     150000                                  -4                     -2                  0                       2     4
                                                                   Net Worth (Age 21)                                                                                                 Cognitive Ability (Age 21)

                                                                95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                                                                95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 826.85, pwidth = 1240.28                                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .43, pwidth = .64



                                          (a) Fraction Constrained vs st                                                                                        (b) Fraction Constrained vs θc

                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                Local polynomial smooth
                 1




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                         .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
       Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                             Borrowing Constrained
                                                                                                                                       0
                 0




                                -3                -2             -1                0                      1     2                                     0                      1                 2                         3     4
                                                             Noncognitive Ability (Age 21)                                                                                          Log Human Capital (Age 21)

                                                                95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                                                                95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .35, pwidth = .53                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .12, pwidth = .18



                                          (c) Fraction Constrained vs θn                                                 (d) Fraction Constrained vs log F ψ (et , kt , θ, w,t )

                                     Figure 8: Borrowing Constrained Youths (st+1 ≤ −L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) & λs,t > 0) at Age 21


        Figure 11 shows the life cycle pattern of the proportion borrowing constrained. The
U shape is a consequence of initial borrowing constraints and the approach of the terminal
horizon.45 The constrained in college are 20% more likely to work than other college students.

result, the agent will borrow today to consume more today, and pay back the debt in the next period using
y2 and consume less the next period.
  These forces are at work when the agent cannot borrow or cannot borrow enough to reach the optimal
consumption level (c∗1 , c∗2 ). Low ability individuals with low income growth are borrowing constrained because
they are impatient and their borrowing limit is low.
  45
     The age 50 horizon artificially accelerates the borrowing constraint into middle age.


                                                                                                                    43
                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                      Local polynomial smooth




                                                                                                                                           1
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                           .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
      Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                               Borrowing Constrained
                     -100000                       0              100000       200000                300000     400000                     0                -4                     -2                  0                       2         4
                                                                   Net Worth (Age 30)                                                                                                       Cognitive Ability (Age 30)

                                                                 95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                                                                     95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1157.96, pwidth = 1736.94                                                   kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .24, pwidth = .36



                                           (a) Fraction Constrained vs st                                                                                              (b) Fraction Constrained vs θc

                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                      Local polynomial smooth
                1




                                                                                                                           0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                                  Borrowing Constrained
                0




                                 -3                -2             -1                0                       1     2                                                1                         2                   3                   4
                                                              Noncognitive Ability (Age 30)                                                                                               Log Human Capital (Age 30)

                                                                 95% CI                    lpoly smooth                                                                                     95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .23, pwidth = .34                                                           kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .17, pwidth = .26



                                           (c) Fraction Constrained vs θn                                                  (d) Fraction Constrained vs log F ψ (et , kt , θ, w,t )

                                      Figure 9: Borrowing Constrained Youths (st+1 ≤ −L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) & λs,t > 0) at Age 30




                                                                                                                      44
                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                                                 Local polynomial smooth
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
 Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                                                              Borrowing Constrained
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                     -100000                       0              100000       200000                                            300000       400000                                   -4                     -2                  0                       2     4
                                                                   Net Worth (Age 40)                                                                                                                                  Cognitive Ability (Age 40)

                                                                 95% CI                                               lpoly smooth                                                                                     95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = 1418.7, pwidth = 2128.05                                                                               kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .61, pwidth = .92



                                           (a) Fraction Constrained vs st                                                                                                                        (b) Fraction Constrained vs θc

                                                           Local polynomial smooth                                                                                                                                 Local polynomial smooth
                1




                                                                                                                                                                        1
.1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
    Borrowing Constrained




                                                                                                                                                              Borrowing Constrained
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                0




                                 -3                -2             -1                0                                                1          2                                       1                      2                3                         4     5
                                                              Noncognitive Ability (Age 40)                                                                                                                          Log Human Capital (Age 40)

                                                                 95% CI                                               lpoly smooth                                                                                     95% CI                    lpoly smooth
                                 kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .59, pwidth = .88                                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, degree = 0, bandwidth = .19, pwidth = .28



                                           (c) Fraction Constrained vs θn                                                                                 (d) Fraction Constrained vs log F ψ (et , kt , θ, w,t )

                                   Figure 10: Borrowing Constrained Youths (st+1 ≤ −L̄st (et+1 , kt+1 , θ) & λs,t > 0) at Age 40
                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                     Fraction Borrowing Constrained
                                                                                       .1          .20         .3




                                                                                                                            20           25     30       35                                 40          45            50
                                                                                                                                                       Age



                                                                                       Figure 11: % Borrowing Constrained by Age




                                                                                                                                                     45
6.5     Sorting into Education by Ability

       Simulating our model, we illustrate the magnitude of sorting into education at age 30
based on unobserved abilities. Figure 12 is the density plot of the two unobservabled factors
by education groups in the simulated data.
       As seen in Figure 12, people sort into education based on cognitive and noncognitive
ability. On average, individuals who obtain higher education are more likely to have greater
cognitive ability and noncognitive ability. However, there is also substantial overlap in both
cognitive ability and noncognitive ability levels across different schooling levels, suggesting
that sorting based on abilities is not the only factor shaping individual educational outcomes.
             .5




                                                                                        .6
             .4




                                                                                        .4
                 .3
          Density




                                                                              Density
        .2




                                                                                        .2
             .1
             0




                                                                                        0




                      −4    −2               0               2       4                       −3   −2       −1             0             1   2
                                      Cognitive Ability                                                   Noncognitive Ability

                                 < 12 yrs                 12 yrs                                       < 12 yrs                  12 yrs
                                 13 to 15 yrs             >=16 yrs                                     13 to 15 yrs              >=16 yrs




                           Figure 12: Density of Initial Factors Conditional on Age-30 Education




6.6     Inequality in Education, Wages, and Consumption

       Both employment decisions and borrowing constraints have important consequences for
wage and consumption inequality.46 The first row of Table 7 shows the age-30 inequality in
education, wages, and consumption in our benchmark model. Cross-sectional inequality is
measured by the variance of logs. Wage inequality is higher than education inequality because
of the existence of uninsured human capital risk, and large variation in individuals’ work
experience, cognitive ability, and noncognitive ability. Consumption inequality is lower than

  46
    The model simulated consumption should be interpreted as all consumption expenditure including rental
equivalent consumption values for homeowners and rents for non-homeowners.



                                                                         46
wage earning inequality because individuals use savings to smooth consumption fluctuations.
We discuss the other rows of this table in the next section when we discuss counterfactuals.
                   Table 7: Inequality in Education, Wages, and Consumption (Age 30)



                                          Inequality (Var of log)            Changes in Inequality (%)
                                      Educ        Wage              C      Educ         Wage          C

 Benchmark                            0.0395      0.3313       0.1002      N.A.         N.A.        N.A.


                                                           Counterfactual Experiments
 Equalizing Cognitive Ability         0.0255      0.2924       0.0714      -35.53       -11.75     -28.73
 Equalizing Noncognitive Ability      0.0222      0.3012       0.0775      -43.88       -9.08      -22.69
 Equalizing Parental Factors          0.0363      0.3292       0.0963      -8.14        -0.64       -3.92



Note: Inequality in education (Educ), wage, and consumption (C) are measured using variance of log years
of schooling, log hourly wage rates, and log consumption at age 30, respectively. Changes in inequality is
calculated as the percentage changes in inequality compared to the benchmark model. When equalizing
cognitive ability, we set every individual’s cognitive ability equal to the population mean, i.e., zero.
Similarly, we set every individual’s noncognitive ability equal to zero when equalizing noncognitive ability.
When equalizing parental factors, we set parents’ education equal to 12 years of schooling and parent’s net
worth to be in the second tercile. Once cognitive ability, noncognitive ability, and parental factors are all
equalized, the variance remains are: Var(log (Educ)) = 0.0055, Var(log (Wage)) = 0.2623, and Var(log (C))
= 0.0432.



7     Counterfactual Exercises

      In this section of the paper, we use our model to examine the impacts of changing credit
constraints, tuition, and initial endowments on inequality. We start by analyzing the impact
of equalizing endowments.

7.1    Equalizing Initial Endowments

      We address the following question: To what extent do differences in cognitive ability,
noncognitive ability, and parental environments account for the observed cross-section in-
equality in years of schooling, earnings, and consumption at age 30? To address this question,
we perform three counterfactual experiments that equalize initial heterogeneity in (i) cogni-
tive ability, (ii) noncognitive ability, and (iii) parental background factors (including both

                                                     47
schooling and net worth). Equalization is achieved by placing all observations at the means
of the selected variable, keeping other variables at sample values.
    As shown in Table 7, equalizing cognitive ability reduces age-30 inequality in education by
36%. Equalizing noncognitive ability reduces age-30 education inequality by 44%. Finally,
equalizing parental factors (including parent’s education and net worth) reduces inequality
by 8%. Equalizing cognitive endowments reduces wage inequality by 12% and consumption
inequality by 29%. Equalizing noncognitive endowments reduces wage inequality by 9%
and consumption inequality by 23%. Equalizing parental factors has little impact on wage
inequality, and it reduces consumption inequality by 4%.
    We also investigate the effects of cognitive ability, noncognitive ability and parental fac-
tors on the youths’ age-17 present discounted lifetime utility inequality. Equalizing cognitive
ability reduces age-17 present discounted lifetime utility inequality by 24%. Equalizing
noncognitive ability reduces age-17 present discounted lifetime utility inequality by 91%.
Equalizing parental factors (including parent’s education and net worth) reduces age-17
present discounted lifetime utility inequality by 2%. The age-17 present discounted life-
time utility inequality equal to zero once cognitive ability, noncognitive ability, and parental
factors are all equalized.

    Table 8: Years of Schooling and College Attendance and Graduation under Different Experiments


                                          Years of          College       4-Year College     % Students
                                        Schooling at     Attendance at    Graduation at      who Work
                                           Age 30         Age 21 (%)        Age 25 (%)       Part-Time
 Benchmark                                  13.76            47.25            27.76            63.45

 Counterfactual Experiments                              Changes Relative to Benchmark
 (1) Subsidizing College Tuition            0.18             6.22             3.55              -5.72
 (2) Increasing Student Loan Limits         0.04             3.95             1.09               1.28



Note: Education is measured by the average years of schooling at age 30. College attendance is measured
as the percentage of individuals whose years of education is more than or equal to 13 at age 21. The rate of
4-year college graduation is measured as the percentage of individuals whose years of schooling is more
than or equal to 16 at age 25. The fraction of students who work part-time while in school are calculated
over age 18 to 22.




                                                    48
7.2     Subsidizing College Tuition

       We next consider the impact of subsidizing tuition on schooling choices. We give each
agent a college tuition subsidy of $1,500 per year, which amounts to 29% of average college
tuition cost and fees minus grants and scholarship.47 As shown in Table 8, compared to
the benchmark model, the college attendance rate at age 21 increases by 6.22 percentage
points (13.17%). The implied elasticity of college going with respect to tuition is −0.45,
which is within the range of estimates reported in the literature.48 This tuition subsidy
policy also leads to 3.55 percentage point increase in the 4-year college graduation rate at
age 25. The college tuition subsidy reduces students’ incentive to work while in school. In
particular, under this policy, the fraction of students who work part-time at school decreases
by 6 percentage points.
       Figure 13 plots the college attendance and the 4-year college graduation rates for the
benchmark and tuition subsidy policy over the full distribution of cognitive ability and
noncognitive ability. Our college tuition subsidy increases college attendance at age 21 among
the individuals whose cognitive ability is within the second and third quartiles. The rate of
4-year college graduation increases much more among high ability individuals compared to
that among low ability individuals.

7.3     Increasing Student Loan Limits

       We next consider the impact of increasing student loan limits. In this counterfactual
experiment, we increase the borrowing limit from the student program by $1,500 for each
academic year, which amounts to a 29% reduction of average college tuition costs and fees
minus grants and scholarship. As shown in Table 8, compared to the benchmark model, the
college attendance rate at age 21 increases by 4.0 percentage points and the 4-year college
graduation rate at age 25 barely increases. Under the student loan enhancement policy,

  47
     In the simulation, we do not allow the amount of student loan that an individual can borrow if he decides
to attend college to be directly affected by such college tuition subsidy.
  48
     See, e.g., Cameron and Heckman (2001) and Heckman and Cameron (1999).



                                                     49
                   1




                                                                                                                1
                   .9




                                                                                                                .9
                   .8




                                                                                                                .8
       .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                    .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
       College Attendance




                                                                                                    College Attendance
                   .2




                                                                                                                .2
                   .1




                                                                                                                .1
                   0




                                                                                                                0
                                 Quartile 1   Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                              Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                   Fitted Model              CF: Subsidizing College Tuition                                    Fitted Model               CF: Subsidizing College Tuition



  (a) College Attendance & Cognitive Ability (Age (b) College Attendance & Noncognitive Ability
  21)                                             (Age 21)
                   1




                                                                                                                1
                   .9




                                                                                                                .9
         .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                      .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
       4-Yr College Graduation




                                                                                                    4-Yr College Graduation
                   .2




                                                                                                                .2
                   .1




                                                                                                                .1
                   0




                                                                                                                0




                                 Quartile 1   Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                              Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                   Fitted Model              CF: Subsidizing College Tuition                                    Fitted Model               CF: Subsidizing College Tuition



      (c) 4-Year College & Cognitive Ability (Age 25) (d) 4-Year College & Noncognitive Ability (Age
                                                      25)

                                                             Figure 13: Effects of College Tuition Subsidy


the fraction of students who work part-time in school increases in response to the increased
student debt limits. However such increases are small (1 percentage point).
      Figure 14 plots the college attendance and the 4-year college graduation rates for the
benchmark and enhanced student loan limit policy over the full distribution of cognitive
ability and noncognitive ability. The differences are small.49 There appears to be a limited
role for policies enhancing student access to credit for promoting college attendance and
graduation.

 49
      These results are comparable to those reported in Johnson (2013).




                                                                                               50
                  1




                                                                                                                  1
                  .9




                                                                                                                  .9
                  .8




                                                                                                                  .8
      .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                      .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
      College Attendance




                                                                                                      College Attendance
                  .2




                                                                                                                  .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                  .1
                  0




                                                                                                                  0
                                Quartile 1      Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                                Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                 Fitted Model                CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit                                   Fitted Model               CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit



    (a) College Attendance & Cognitive Ability (Age (b) College Attendance & Noncognitive Ability
    21)                                             (Age 21)
                  1




                                                                                                                  1
                  .9




                                                                                                                  .9
        .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                        .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
      4-Yr College Graduation




                                                                                                      4-Yr College Graduation
                  .2




                                                                                                                  .2
                  .1




                                                                                                                  .1
                  0




                                                                                                                  0




                                Quartile 1      Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                                Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                 Fitted Model                CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit                                   Fitted Model               CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit



    (c) 4-Year College & Cognitive Ability (Age 25) (d) 4-Year College & Noncognitive Ability (Age
                                                    25)

                                                       Figure 14: Effects of Increasing Student Loan Limits


8    Comparison with an Alternative Model with Fixed Credit Limits by Educa-
     tion

    In this section, we estimate a version of our model where borrowing limits are fixed to
sample means by education levels. We use the specific constraints analyzed in a recent paper
by Abbott et al. (2016). We compare the results obtained under their ad hoc constraint used
in that paper and those obtained under our model.
    Our model provides a micro-foundation for the underlying borrowing environment, whereas
models with ad hoc lending limits do not. The principle advantage of ad hoc models is their
computational tractability. It is interesting to compare the quantitative differences in terms


                                                                                                 51
of parameter estimates, model fits, model predictions, and counterfactual implications.
       We follow Abbott et al. (2016) and consider the following specification of credit limits:50


                                         
                                           $75, 000 if e ≥ 16
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                              L̄st (e) =   $25, 000 if e < 16 & e ≥ 12                                (35)
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                          $15, 000 if e < 12
                                         


if t ≥ 22 and L̄st (e) = 0 if t < 22. They justify these limits using averages of self-reported
credit limits in the survey of consumer finances.
       We apply the same estimation procedure (see Section 5) to estimate this alternative
model and estimate the same set of structural parameters. Our model with endogenous debt
limit is a far more stringent approach to estimation than models with ad hoc credit limits.

8.1      Estimation Results

       The last two columns of Web Appendix Table A8 report preference parameter estimates
for the schooling utility functions (Panel A) and work utility function (Panel B) in the
alternative model. Similar to our model with endogenous credit constraints, we find that he
psychic benefit of schooling is higher for individuals with higher cognitive and noncognitive
abilities, and is higher if their parents have higher education. We also find that the psychic
cost of working part-time while in school (φk,e = −0.0603) is higher than the psychic cost
of part-time working while not in school (φk,0 = −0.0338). These estimates are similar in
magnitude to those estimated for our model with endogenous credit constraints.
       One of the biggest differences in the estimated parameter values between our model and
the alternative model lies in the estimated parameter values for the subjective discount rate.
In particular, in the alternative model, the estimated discount factor is much higher, which

  50
    In Abbott et al. (2016), among working-age married households, borrowing limit equals to $75,000 if the
most educated spouse is a college graduate, $25,000 if the most educated spouse is a high school graduate,
and $15,000 if both spouses are high school dropouts; No borrowing before age 21. Borrowing limits based
on self-reported limits on unsecured credit by family type from SCF.


                                                    52
implies that individuals are more patient (see Table A9 to compare parameter estimates).
Figure 15 plots the distribution of estimated discount factors. Appendix Figure 4(c) plots
the density of estimated discount factor for high cognitive ability and low cognitive abil-
ity. Appendix Figure 4(d) plots the density of estimated discount factor for high cognitive
noncognitive ability and low noncognitive ability. As in our model, those with higher cogni-
tive and/or noncognitive skills have lower rates of time preference.
                               80    60
                      kdensity delta
                         40    20
                               0




                                          .965   .97   .975           .98   .985   .99
                                                         Discount Factor



 Figure 15: Density of Estimated Discount Factors (Fixed Credit Limits by Education): exp(−ρ(θc , θn ))


   This has important implications for the estimated levels of human and physical capital
accumulation. The overall fit of this model to the data is worse than our model. The
minimized SMM objective function in this model is 76% larger than in our model with
endogenous credit constraints. The fit of the model to the data is worse for many components
of life cycle behavior than our model (for example, compare Figures 16 and 17 with Figures 4
and 5, and appendix Table A14). Sorting patterns into education by ability are similar (see
Figure 18).




                                                           53
       1




                                                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
       .8




                                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Work Part Time
                                                                                                                              Work Full Time
         .6




                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
  In School
 .4




                                                                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
       .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                  17    18        19        20     21   22              23       24        25        26    27                                                        17    18        19    20   21   22    23 24         25      26   27    28        29    30                                   17    18        19    20   21   22    23 24    25   26   27    28        29    30
                                                        Age                                                                                                                                                 Age                                                                                                                         Age

                                            95% CI                                   NLSY Data                                                                                                  95% CI                            NLSY Data                                                                                 95% CI                    NLSY Data
                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                        Fitted Model                                                                                                                Fitted Model




                              (a) In School                                                                                                                           (b) Working Full-time                                                                                                      (c) Working Part-time



                                                                                                                              10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000
       28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
       24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2000
           20
 Wage Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4000
                                                                                                                                        Net Worth
  12   16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -6000
       8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -8000
       4
       0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                  18   19    20        21     22   23   24 25                   26    27        28    29   30                                                         20        21        22    23    24    25        26         27    28        29        30                                     20        21        22    23    24    25     26    27    28        29        30
                                                        Age                                                                                                                                                 Age                                                                                                                         Age

                                            95% CI                                   NLSY Data                                                                                                  95% CI                            NLSY Data                                                                                 95% CI                    NLSY Data
                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                        Fitted Model                                                                                                                Fitted Model




                (d) Hourly Wages over Age                                                                                                                             (e) Net Worth by Age                                                                                      (f) Negative Net Worth by Age

                                                                      Figure 16: Goodness of Fit over the Lifecycle (Alternative Model)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        24
                                                                    6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                            Yrs of Experience




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wage Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                < 12 yrs        12 yrs     13 to 15 yrs                                   >=16 yrs                                                          < 12 yrs                12 yrs     13 to 15 yrs            >=16 yrs
                                                                                                            Schooling Categories (Age 25)                                                                                                                       Schooling Categories (Age 30)

                                                                                                            95% CI                                                  NLSY Data                                                                                    95% CI                          NLSY Data
                                                                                                            Fitted Model                                                                                                                                         Fitted Model




                                                                      (a) Yrs Worked by Education                                                                                                                 (b) Hourly Wages by Education

                                                                                Figure 17: Goodness of Fit by Education (Alternative Model)


                Similar to our analysis of the model with endogenous credit constraints, we also report
the evolution of credit limit for the Abbott et al. model. In the ad hoc model, the credit limit
does not change with age or work experience after the agent completes the highest degree
(see Web Appendix Figure A10(a)). Conditional on age, the credit limit is bounded below
at $15,000 and increases with human capital, which is due to the fact on average higher
educated individuals have higher human capital level (Web Appendix Figure A10(b)). At
age 30, the borrowing limit increases with education, cognitive ability, and noncognitive

                                                                                                                                                                                                       54
                                                                                                                 .6
           .5
           .4




                                                                                                                 .4
             .3
        Density




                                                                                                       Density
           .2




                                                                                                                 .2
           .1
           0




                                                                                                                 0
                  −4   −2               0                                        2            4                       −3        −2        −1             0             1   2
                                 Cognitive Ability                                                                                       Noncognitive Ability

                            < 12 yrs                                         12 yrs                                                   < 12 yrs                  12 yrs
                            13 to 15 yrs                                     >=16 yrs                                                 13 to 15 yrs              >=16 yrs




            Figure 18: Density of Initial Factors Conditional on Age-30 Education (Alternative Model)


ability; but there is no heterogeneity in credit limits within each education category (see
Web Appendix Figure A15).
      The estimated patterns of constraints by age and individual characteristics are different
across the two models. The age 21 patterns are roughly similar, but the hump is more
noticeable in the ad hoc model. The weak bimodality at age 30 found in our model is not
present in the ad hoc model, and the proportion of agents constrained is much lower. The
fraction of borrowing constrained population continues to decrease and reaches zero after
age 45 (Figure 19).51
                                                           .4
                                           Fraction Borrowing Constrained
                                             .1          .20         .3




                                                                            20          25   30      35                    40    45     50
                                                                                                   Age



                       Figure 19: % Borrowing Constrained by Age for Alternative Model



 51
      After college is completed, the private debt limit in the ad hoc model is set at a very large number.




                                                                                                  55
8.2     Counterfactual Experiments

      Differences are sharp between the two models when we consider the same set of policy
experiments conducted for our model with endogenous credit constraints. We consider the
implications of changing endowments, tuition and credit limits in the ad hoc model for the
same set of policies considered in the discussion of the endogenous credit constrained model.
We start by equalizing initial endowments.

8.2.1    Equalizing Initial Endowments

      As shown in Table 9, equalizing cognitive ability reduces age-30 inequality in education by
36% (about the same as in the model with endogenous constraints). Equalizing noncognitive
ability reduces age-30 education inequality by 38% – less than in our model (44%). Finally,
equalizing parental factors (including parent’s education and net worth) reduces inequality
by 6% (compared to 8% for our model). These equalizing effects are generally smaller than
in the model with endogenous credit constraints.
      Equalizing cognitive endowments reduces wage inequality by 12% (about the same as in
the model with endogenous constraints) and consumption inequality by 40% (compared to
29% for our model). Equalizing noncognitive endowments reduces wage inequality by 9%
(vs 9%) and consumption inequality by 33% (vs 23%). Equalizing parental factors has little
impact on wage inequality, and reduces consumption inequality by 5% (compared to 4% for
our model).




                                                56
Table 9: Inequality in Education, Wages, and Consumption at Age 30 (Fixed Credit Limits by Education)



                                          Inequality (Var of log)               Changes in Inequality (%)
                                       Educ           Wages          C         Educ         Wages          C

 Benchmark                            0.0398          0.3825       0.1168      N.A.         N.A.          N.A.


                                                               Counterfactual Experiments
 Equalizing Cognitive Ability         0.0253          0.3360       0.0704      -36.37       -12.17       -39.75
 Equalizing Noncognitive Ability      0.0248          0.3471       0.0784      -37.76       -9.27        -32.89
 Equalizing Parental Factors          0.0375          0.3782       0.1112      -5.75        -1.14         -4.83



Note: Inequality in Education (Educ), wages, and consumption (C) are measured using variance of log
years of schooling, log hourly wage rates, and log consumption at age 30, respectively. Changes in
inequality is calculated as the percentage changes in inequality compared to the benchmark model. When
equalizing cognitive ability, we set every individual’s cognitive ability equal to the population mean, i.e.,
zero. Similarly, we set every individual’s noncognitive ability equal to zero when equalizing noncognitive
ability. When equalizing parental factors, we set parents’ education equal to 12 years of schooling and
parent’s net worth to be in the second tercile.


Table 10: Years of Schooling and College Attendance and Graduation under Different Experiments (Fixed
Credit Limits by Education)


                                           Years of               College      4-Year College        % Students
                                         Schooling at          Attendance at   Graduation at         who Work
                                            Age 30              Age 21 (%)       Age 25 (%)          Part-Time
 Benchmark                                   13.52                 48.44           34.53               64.83

 Counterfactual Experiments                                    Changes Relative to Benchmark
 (1) Subsidizing College Tuition               0.29                7.63             5.78               -5.11
 (2) Increasing Student Loan Limits            0.12                4.60             2.34                0.60



Note: Education is measured by the average years of schooling at age 30. College attendance is measured
as the percentage of individuals whose years of education is more than or equal to 13 at age 21. The rate of
4-year college graduation is measured as the percentage of individuals whose years of schooling is more
than or equal to 16 at age 25. The fraction of students who work part-time while in school are calculated
over age 18 to 22.



8.2.2   Subsidizing College Tuition

    This section reports the effects of a tuition subsidy on schooling choices. We give each
agent a college tuition subsidy of $1,500 per year, which amounts to 29% of average college

                                                        57
tuition cost and fees minus grants and scholarship.52 As shown in Table 10, compared to the
benchmark model, the college attendance rate at age 21 increases by 7.63 percentage points
(15.76%). The implied elasticity of college going with respect to tuition is −0.54, which is
much higher than the elasticity obtained in the model with endogenous credit limits. Such
a tuition subsidy policy also leads to 5.78 percentage points increase in the 4-year college
graduation rate at age 25. The fraction of students age 18 to 22 who work part-time at
school decreases by 5.1 percentage points.
                    1




                                                                                                                 1
                    .9




                                                                                                                 .9
                    .8




                                                                                                                 .8
        .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                     .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
        College Attendance




                                                                                                     College Attendance
                    .2




                                                                                                                 .2
                    .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                    0




                                                                                                                 0




                                  Quartile 1   Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                               Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                    Fitted Model              CF: Subsidizing College Tuition                                    Fitted Model               CF: Subsidizing College Tuition



   (a) College Attendance & Cognitive Ability (Age (b) College Attendance & Noncognitive Ability
   21)                                             (Age 21)
                    1




                                                                                                                 1
                    .9




                                                                                                                 .9
          .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                       .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
        4-Yr College Graduation




                                                                                                     4-Yr College Graduation
                    .2




                                                                                                                 .2
                    .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                    0




                                                                                                                 0




                                  Quartile 1   Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                               Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                    Fitted Model              CF: Subsidizing College Tuition                                    Fitted Model               CF: Subsidizing College Tuition



       (c) 4-Year College & Cognitive Ability (Age 25) (d) 4-Year College & Noncognitive Ability (Age
                                                       25)

Figure 20: Effects of College Tuition Subsidy on Attendance and Graduation (Fixed Credit Limits by
Education)


  52
    In the simulation, we do not allow the amount of student loan that an individual can borrow if he decides
to attend college to be directly affected by such college tuition subsidy.




                                                                                                58
       Figure 20 plots the college attendance and the 4-year college graduation rates for the
benchmark and reduced tuition policy over the full distribution of cognitive ability and
noncognitive ability. The college tuition subsidy increases the college attendance at age 21
for all quartiles of cognitive ability, including those located at the lowest cognitive ability
quartile.
       In summary, the model with education-specific fixed credit limits predicts a higher elas-
ticity of response to tuition than the model with an endogenous borrowing limit. Ad hoc
credit limits of the sort used by Abbott et al. (2016) overstate somewhat the effectiveness
of a tuition-reduction policy. This finding is intuitive because restricting borrowing limits
to be the same within each education group over-predicts the amount of debt a low-ability
individual can borrow from private debt market and thus over-predicts the net benefits of
college education for low ability students. In our model, even after conditioning on educa-
tion, our model predicts that the amount of debt an individual can borrow is lower if the
individual has lower human capital (either due to low abilities or low work experience) and
if the individual has a higher psychic cost of working.

8.2.3      Increasing Student Loan Limits

       In this counterfactual experiment, we increase the borrowing limit from the student
program by $1,500 for each academic year (the same as in the analysis of our model). As
shown in Table 10, such policy experiments lead to a 4.60 percentage point increase in the
college attendance rate at age 21 and 2.34 percentage points increase in the 4-year college
graduation rate at age 25. The fraction of students age 18 to 22 who work part-time while
in school increases by 0.6 percentage points. Figure 21 plots the college attendance and the
4-year college graduation rates for the benchmark and enhanced student loan limit policy
over the full distribution of cognitive ability and noncognitive ability. The differences are
small.53 These results are comparable to those obtained from the model with endogenous

  53
       These results are comparable to those reported in Johnson (2013).




                                                      59
credit constraints.

                 1




                                                                                                                 1
                 .9




                                                                                                                 .9
                 .8




                                                                                                                 .8
     .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                     .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
     College Attendance




                                                                                                     College Attendance
                 .2




                                                                                                                 .2
                 .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                 0




                                                                                                                 0
                               Quartile 1      Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                               Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                Fitted Model                CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit                                   Fitted Model               CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit



  (a) College Attendance & Cognitive Ability (Age (b) College Attendance & Noncognitive Ability
  21)                                             (Age 21)
                 1




                                                                                                                 1
                 .9




                                                                                                                 .9
       .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8




                                                                                                       .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
     4-Yr College Graduation




                                                                                                     4-Yr College Graduation
                 .2




                                                                                                                 .2
                 .1




                                                                                                                 .1
                 0




                                                                                                                 0




                               Quartile 1      Quartile 2      Quartile 3    Quartile 4                                        Quartile 1    Quartile 2     Quartile 3       Quartile 4
                                               Cognitive Ability Quartiles                                                                  Noncognitive Ability Quartiles

                                Fitted Model                CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit                                   Fitted Model               CF: Increasing Student Loan Limit



   (c) 4-Year College & Cognitive Ability (Age 25) (d) 4-Year College & Noncognitive Ability (Age
                                                   25)

Figure 21: Effects of Increasing Student Loan Limits on Attendance and Graduation (Fixed Credit Limits
by Education)




                                                                                                60
9   Summary and Conclusion

    This paper estimates a life cycle model of human capital and work experience with
parental transfers in the presence of endogenous borrowing limits and precautionary savings
motives. In our model, individuals are subject to uninsured human capital risks and choose
to invest in education, accumulate work experience and assets, and smooth consumption.
Borrowing is permitted up to an endogenously determined limit. The limit is explicitly
derived. Our model extends Aiyagari’s (1994) analysis by considering the effects of labor
supply and human capital accumulation on the supply of available credit. We account for the
private lending market and government student loan programs. We use our estimated model
to investigate the determinants of human capital inequality and to examine the relationship
between educational attainment, cognitive and noncognitive abilities, and parental education
and wealth. We analyze the effects of tuition subsidies and enhanced student loan limits
on educational attainment and human capital inequality. We do not introduce arbitrary
free parameters into our analysis of credit constraints, nor do we impose ad hoc borrowing
constraints.
    We find substantial evidence of life cycle credit constraints that affect human capital
accumulation and inequality. Constrained individuals fall into two groups. A large propor-
tion of the chronically poor with low initial endowments and abilities who acquire little skill
over their lifetimes are constrained. There is also a smaller portion of initially well-endowed
persons with high levels of acquired skills who are constrained early in their life cycles. The
first group has flat life cycle wage profiles. Most remain constrained over their lifetimes. The
second group has rising life cycle wage profiles. They are constrained only early on in life
because they cannot immediately access their future earnings. As they age, their constraints
are relaxed as they access their future earnings.
    Equalizing cognitive and noncognitive ability (separately and together) has dramatic
effects on reducing inequality in education. Equalizing parental backgrounds has a much
weaker effect on inequality in earnings and consumption. Reducing tuition has substantial


                                              61
impacts on schooling, but has only minor effects on our measures of inequality (even lifetime
utility). Enhancing student loan limits has minor effects on all outcomes studied.
   We compare the estimates from our model with those from a recent model that im-
poses ad hoc credit constraints by education level. There are differences in the predictions
across models. The ad hoc approach overstates the likely effectiveness of tuition policy and
understates the fraction of individuals who are constrained.

Acknowledgements
    We thank Dean Corbae, Mariacristina De Nardi, Lance Lochner, Steve Stern, and par-
ticipants at the Human Capital and Inequality Conference held at Chicago on December
17th, 2015, for helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. We
also thank Joseph Altonji, Peter Arcidiacono, Panle Jia Barwick, Jeremy Fox, Jorge Garcı́a,
Limor Golan, Lars Hansen, John Kennan, Rasmus Lentz, Maurizio Mazzocco, Aloysius Siow,
Ronni Pavan, John Rust, Bertel Schjerning, Christopher Taber, and participants at the
Cowles Conference in Structural Microeconomics and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical
Economics (SITE) Summer Workshop for helpful comments. We also thank two anony-
mous referees. Yu Kyung Koh provided very helpful comments on this paper. This research
was supported in part by: the Pritzker Children’s Initiative; the Buffett Early Childhood
Fund; NIH grants NICHD R37HD065072, NICHD R01HD054702, and NIA R24AG048081;
an anonymous funder; Successful Pathways from School to Work, an initiative of the Univer-
sity of Chicago’s Committee on Education and funded by the Hymen Milgrom Supporting
Organization; the Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global Working Group, an
initiative of the Center for the Economics of Human Development and funded by the Insti-
tute for New Economic Thinking; and the American Bar Foundation. The views expressed
in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
funders or the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The Web Appendix for this
paper is located at https://cehd.uchicago.edu/human-capital-constraints.




                                             62
Abbott, B., Gallipoli, G., Meghir, C., Violante, G. L., March 2016. Education policy and
  intergenerational transfers in equilibrium, under revision, Journal of Political Economy.

Aiyagari, S. R., August 1994. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 109 (3), 659–684.

Albuquerque, R., Hopenhayn, H. A., 2004. Optimal lending contracts and firm dynamics.
  Review of Economic Studies 71 (2), 285–315.

Altonji, J. G., Segal, L. M., July 1996. Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance
  structures. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3), 353–366.

Alvarez, F., Jermann, U. J., 2001. Quantitative asset pricing implications of endogenous
  solvency constraints. Review of Financial Studies 14 (4), 1117–1151.

Anderson, T. W., Rubin, H., 1956. Statistical inference in factor analysis. In: Neyman,
  J. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and
  Probability. Vol. 5. University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, pp. 111–150.

Bailey, M. J., Dynarski, S. M., 2011. Inequality in postsecondary education. In: Duncan,
  G. J., Murnane, R. J. (Eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and
  Children’s Life Chances. Russell Sage Foundation, New York, Ch. 6, pp. 117–132.

Belley, P., Lochner, L., December 2007. The changing role of family income and ability in
  determining educational achievement. Journal of Human Capital 1 (1), 37–89.

Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M., Meghir, C., Shaw, J., September 2016. Female labor supply,
  human capital, and welfare reform. Econometrica 84 (5), 1705–1753.

Browning, M., Hansen, L. P., Heckman, J. J., 1999. Micro data and general equilibrium
  models. In: Taylor, J. B., Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics. Vol. 1A.
  Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, Ch. 8, pp. 543–633.



                                            63
Cagetti, M., De Nardi, M., October 2006. Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth. Journal
  of Political Economy 114 (5), 835–870.

Cameron, S. V., Heckman, J. J., June 2001. The dynamics of educational attainment for
  black, Hispanic, and white males. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 455–499.

Cameron, S. V., Taber, C., February 2004. Estimation of educational borrowing constraints
  using returns to schooling. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1), 132–182.

Carneiro, P., Heckman, J. J., October 2002. The evidence on credit constraints in post-
  secondary schooling. Economic Journal 112 (482), 705–734.

Caucutt, E. M., Lochner, L. J., October 2012. Early and late human capital investments,
  borrowing constraints, and the family. Working Paper 18493, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Chatterjee, S., Corbae, D., Nakajima, M., Rı́os-Rull, J.-V., November 2007. A quantitative
  theory of unsecured consumer credit with risk of default. Econometrica 75 (6), 1525–1589.

Cooley, T., Marimon, R., Quadrini, V., 2004. Aggregate consequences of limited contract
  enforceability. Journal of Political Economy 112 (4), 817–847.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Fall 2008. Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology
  of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 738–782.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., Schennach, S. M., May 2010. Estimating the technology of
  cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.

De Nardi, M., 2004. Wealth inequality and intergenerational links. Review of Economic
  Studies 71 (3), 743–768.

Fernández-Villaverde, J., Krueger, D., August 2007. Consumption over the life cycle: Facts
  from consumer expenditure survey data. Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (3), 552–
  565.

                                            64
Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
  analysis. In: Friedman, B. M., Woodford, M. (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics.
  Vol. 3. Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, Ch. 11, pp. 547–599.

Gourinchas, P.-O., Parker, J. A., January 2002. Consumption over the life cycle. Economet-
  rica 70 (1), 47–89.

Heckman, J. J., Cameron, S. V., 1999. Can tuition policy combat rising wage inequality? In:
  Kosters, M. H. (Ed.), Financing College Tuition: Government Policies and Educational
  Priorities. AEI Press, Washington, DC, pp. 76–124.

Heckman, J. J., Humphries, J. E., Veramendi, G., April 2016. Dynamic treatment effects.
  Journal of Econometrics 191 (2), 276–292.

Heckman, J. J., Kautz, T., 2014. Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that improve
  character and cognition. In: Heckman, J. J., Humphries, J. E., Kautz, T. (Eds.), The Myth
  of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. University
  of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ch. 9, pp. 341–430.

Heckman, J. J., Mosso, S., August 2014. The economics of human development and social
  mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689–733.

Heckman, J. J., Navarro, S., February 2007. Dynamic discrete choice and dynamic treatment
  effects. Journal of Econometrics 136 (2), 341–396.

Heckman, J. J., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P. A., October 2013. Understanding the mechanisms
  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American
  Economic Review 103 (6), 2052–2086.

Huggett, M., September-November 1993. The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent
  incomplete-insurance economies. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17 (5–6),
  953–969.


                                              65
Jermann, U. J., Quadrini, V., 2012. Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks. The American
  Economic Review 102 (1), 238–271.

Johnson, M. T., October 2013. Borrowing constraints, college enrollment, and delayed entry.
  Journal of Labor Economics 31 (4), 669–725.

Kaplan, G., June 2012. Moving back home: Insurance against labor market risk. Journal of
  Political Economy 120 (3), 446–512.

Kautz, T., Zanoni, W., 2015. Measuring and fostering non-cognitive skills in adolescence: Ev-
  idence from Chicago Public Schools and the OneGoal Program, unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Keane, M. P., Wolpin, K. I., November 2001. The effect of parental transfers and borrowing
  constraints on educational attainment. International Economic Review 42 (4), 1051–1103.

Kehoe, T. J., Levine, D. K., 1993. Debt-constrained asset markets. Review of Economic
  Studies 60 (4), 865–888.

Lochner, L. J., Monge-Naranjo, A., October 2011. The nature of credit constraints and
  human capital. American Economic Review 101 (6), 2487–2529.

Lochner, L. J., Monge-Naranjo, A., September 2012. Credit constraints in education. Annual
  Review of Economics 4, 225–256.

Lochner, L. J., Monge-Naranjo, A., January 2015. Student loans and repayment: Theory,
  evidence and policy. Working Paper 20849, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Marcet, A., Marimon, R., 1992. Communication, commitment, and growth. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory 58 (2), 219–249.

Navarro, S., Zhou, J., 2016. Quantifying credit constraints, preferences, and uncertainty in
  a lifecycle model of schooling choice, under revision, Review of Economic Dynamics.


                                             66
Park, Y., 2016. Heterogeneity in parental altruism and optimal higher education subsidies,
  working paper, Canadian Economic Analysis Department, Bank of Canada.

Zeldes, S. P., April 1989. Consumption and liquidity constraints: An empirical investigation.
  Journal of Political Economy 97 (2), 305–346.




                                             67
