                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MONETARY POLICY LESSONS OF RECENT
                          INFLATION AND DISINFLATION




                                 William Poole




                             Working Paper No. 2300




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 1987




                                                                  in Economic
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
                                          those of the author and not those of
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2300
                                               June 1987




       Monetary Policy Lessons of Recent Inflation and Disinflation




                                ABSTRACT




     The decline of velocity in the 1980s is a surprise that
should not have been. Economists unwisely relied on a velocity
trend of 3 percent per year when they should have insisted on an
economic explanation for rising velocity. An analysis of
velocity and interest rates from 1915 to 1986 suggests that the
interest elasticity of money demand is substantially higher than
previously thought. The postwar increase of rates followed by a
major decline of rates in the 1980s explains velocity behavior.
The large decline in velocity almost certainly would have caused
severe economic problems had the Federal Reserve not accommodated
the decline through more rapid money growth.
     Federal Reserve policy between October 1979 and October 1982
emphasized control of money growth. Money market behavior during
this period, compared to periods before and after, provides
strong evidence that the market sets interest rates on the basis
of a sophisticated understanding of monetary policy. The
evidence makes clear that the monetary authorities cannot use
interest rates to provide information on the state of the economy
unless they know the extent to which interest rates reflect
expectations of future monetary policy.


                                              William Poole
                                              Department of Economics
                                              Brown University
                                              Providence, RI 02912
                                                    W. Poole, June, 1987


MONETARY POLICY LESSONS OF RECENT INFLATION AND DISINFLATION

                             William Poole*

    By 1975 most economists agreed that the money demand function in the
United States was reasonably stable and could serve reliably as the basis for
monetary policy formulation. Those suspicious of monetarism were on the
defensive in light of the apparently inexorable increase of Ml velocity of
about three percent per year with deviations of only a few tenths of a
percent. Experience with rising money growth and rising inflation through
1980 only confirmed rnonetarist views.

      As Figure 1 shows, by 1986 all this had changed. With disinflation in the
1980s Ml velocity departed convincingly from its 1953—79 trend. The money
demand function seems to have fallen apart, and is apparently not a reliable
basis for monetary policy after all. Consequently, the first major section
following this introduction is devoted to the decline of velocity after 1981 and
the demise of the "standard" money demand function. The second section
contains some thoughts on repairing the standard function.
       Events have not been kind to Keynesian monetary policy positions either.
Keynesians tend to concentrate on interest rates —— especially real interest
rates —— as the best guide to the effects of monetary policy on the economy.
The real rate is discussed in the third section of the paper. As can be seen
in Figure 2, real rates rose sharply in late 1979 and remained high through
1985.' The severity of the 1981—82 recession (as measured, say, by the peak
unemployment rate of almost 11 percent) is consistent qualitatively with the
high real rate of interest, but the vigorous growth of output and employment
in 1983—84 are not.

     The fourth section is devoted to an analysis of the importance of market
expectations about monetary policy. Much evidence on the behavior of market
expectations was created by the Federal Reserve's introduction of new
monetary control procedures in October 1979, and there is a substantial body
of research to review. The fifth section of the paper contains an evaluation
of the contribution of monetary policy to the disinflation of the 1980s. In the
                                             2               W. Poole, June, 1987

 sixth and final section I conclude with some comments on the implications of
 the previous sections for the debate on monetary rules.

 THE DECLINE OF VELOCITY AFTER 1981


      At least for most monetarists, and I believe for most Keynesians also, the
 behavior of velocity after 1981 was a surprise, and there is much to be
 learned, or relearned, from understanding why. Because the majority of
 economists have traditionally favored Ml and because the issues I discuss are
 not peculiar to Ml, I will confine my analysis to Ml and Ml velocity, and not
 take up the issue of whether definitions of money other than Ml should be
employed.

     The standard money demand function. The money demand function was
the subject of an enormous amount of work in the 1960s and 1970s. Most
economists settled on a formulation that made real money demand M/P a log
linear function of real income y and one or more interest rates R, as in eq.(1)
below. The money demand function was often stated in velocity form, as in
eq.(2).

(1) log(M/P)     —bo +   bi log(y) —   bz log(R)


(2) log(V)     log(yP/M)     bo + (1—bi) Log(y) +   b2   log(R)

    Most quarterly specifications included a lagged adjustment mechanism of
some sort, with the Koyck form most often employed. There was general,
though not unanimous, agreement that Ml was the most appropriate monetary
aggregate and that one or more short-term interest rates worked better than a
long—term interest rate. It appeared that the interest elasticity b2 was
relatively low (in absolute value), perhaps in the neighborhood of 0.15—0.25. It
also appeared that the real income elasticity bi was somewhat below unity,
perhaps in the neighborhood of 0.6 to 0.8.2

     Confidence in the stability of the money demand function began to erode
in 1975 as velocity rose more rapidly than could be explained by the standard
money demand function. The problem was "The Case of the Missing Money,"
                                       3            W. Poole, June, 1987

which was the title of a paper by Goldfeld (1976). I believed at the time, and
still believe, that estimates of money demand parameters were much less
precise than estimated standard errors indicated.3 The problem is that an
estimation period with an initial year after 1946 —— the initial year for many
estimations is 1952 or 1953 -- is dominated by upward drifts in all the
variables that enter the money demand function, as shown in Table 1 which
reports a correlation matrix for the relevant variables for 1947.1 to 1986.4.
The unreliability of money demand estimates is indicated by the fact that
widely differing specifications of regressions explaining velocity or real money
balances yield very different income and interest elasticities but only small
differences in the regression R2 or standard error of estimate. This point was
discussed in the 1970s, but not enough attention paid to it.

     Understanding velocity trends. In the mid 1970s a new strand of money
demand research arose based on the rapidly developing theory of time series
analysis. The pioneering paper was by Gould and Nelson (1974). They showed
that velocity over the period from 1867 to 1970 had statistical properties
closely resembling a pure random walk without drift. Later work by Nelson
and Plosser (1982) showed that most economic time series closely approximate
random walks.

      In extensive review articles, neither Laidler (1980) nor Judd and Scadding
(1982) reference the Gould and Nelson paper. Their reviews reflect the thrust
of mainstream money demand research which has been to find economic
explanations for changes in velocity. That search is indeed exactly the correct
enterprise. Analysis of the time series properties of velocity is not a
substitute for economic explanations of velocity but instead provides a
statistical base with which economic explanations must be consistent. Rasche
(1986) discusses the implications of time series analysis of velocity for
structural estimation of a money demand function, but he limits his study to
postwar U.S. data.

    Analysis of velocity trends has a long history. Irving Fisher argued that
improvements in communications and transportation would raise velocity.5
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz argued that velocity had a secular
downward drift through World War II due to an income elasticity of demand
                                        4            W. Poole, June, 1987

 for money above unity, and they attributed the postwar rise in velocity to
 increased confidence concerning economic stability.6 Many other examples of
 attention to velocity trends could be cited.

      Developments in econometrics theory in the 1970s suggested that it is
 dangerous to estimate equations using data subject to significant trends. Thus,
authors increasingly worked with detrended data or ran regressions with data
in first difference form. For a postwar sample period, using differenced data
in a regression with velocity as the dependent variable invariably yields an
estimated equation with a statistically and economically significant constant
term and a very low interest elasticity. The constant term in the regression
picks up the average velocity increase of about 3 percent per year and interest
rates add relatively little explanatory power.

      Although economists generally hesitate to put a time trend into a
regression as an explanatory variable, few seem to worry about leaving a
constant term in a first difference regression. This practice is peculiar in that
a constant term in a first difference regression is, of course, equivalent to a
linear time trend specification in a levels regression. The issue is critical for
estimating a money demand function because of the need to determine how
much of the postwar increase in velocity should be attributed to rising interest
rates and how much to a time dummy.

      Table 2 reports very simple Ml velocity regressions using first differences
of natural logs of annual data 1916—86. For reasons to be discussed later the
interest rate variable in the regressions is Moody's Aaa long—term bond yield
and the real income elasticity has been constrained to 1.0 by not including real
GNP as a regressor. The sample periods chosen for Table 2 reflect the facts
that: a) the end points of the available annual Ml data are 1915 and 1986; b)
the peak years for velocity before and after World War II were 1918 and 1981;
c) the trough year for velocity was 1946; and d) velocity was almost identical
in 1915 and 1957. The regressions cover periods of falling velocity, rising
velocity, and unchanged velocity.

   Table 2 tells a straight—forward story. When velocity is falling, as from
1919 to 1946, the constant term picks up the negative drift. In fact, for this
                                        5             W. Poole, June, 1987

period the interest rate coefficient has the wrong sign and the adjusted H2 is
negative. When velocity is rising, as from 1946 to 1986, the constant term
picks up the positive drift. The interest rate coefficient has the correct sign,
but its t—statistic falls short of conventional levels of statistical significance.
The adjusted H2 is only 0.056.

    For periods when the overall velocity drift is zero, as for 1916—57, the
constant term is very small and the coefficient on the interest rate is
considerably higher than for the regressions discussed in the previous
paragraph. However, the adjusted H2 is still very low. The full period 1916—
86 has a slight upward velocity drift. The regression for this period has a
higher constant term and lower interest rate coefficient than does the
regression for 1916-57. I conclude that the first difference specification with
a constant term is defective; parameter estimates are very sensitive to the
sample period.

     The 1970s research on money demand, and other developments, affected
policy advice late in the decade. The research findings, to summarize,
included instability of structural models of money demand, low estimates of the
interest elasticity, and the apparently highly predictable velocity increase of
about 3 percent per year. Other developments included the growing use of
time series (ARIMA) forecasting models and the increasing urgency of
controlling inflation. A number of economists, myself included, began to base
monetary policy advice on two assumptions: first, that velocity would continue
to grow at a 3 percent rate and, second, that the interest elasticity was
essentially zero.

    We committed an avoidable error: in analyzing money demand theory and
empirics we insisted on economic explanations for velocity trends, but in
analyzing monetary policy we relied on a velocity time trend. The standard
money demand function foundered in the mid and late 1970s and the reliable
velocity trend broke down in the early 1980s. Where does all this leave us?
                                         6            W. Poole, June, 1987

 REPAIRING THE MONEY DEMAND FUNCTION


      The first thing to say is that it is hopeless to attempt to resolve
 uncertainties about money demand through analysis of postwar U.S. data; the
 multicoflinearity problem is overwhelming. Second, transforming the data to
 first difference form yields, I believe, a serious underestimate of the interest
 elasticity of demand. Let me now explore this second point.

       Figure 3 shows Ml velocity, the commercial paper rate, and the Aaa bond
  yield for annual data 1915—86 plotted on a ratio scale. Velocity is an
  extremely smooth series compared to the two interest rate series. There has
- been a long debate over which interest rate to use in the money demand
  function, but on the face of it the long rate would seem to have the edge.
  The short rate simply looks too volatile.

     The lagged adjustment model is the usual way to reconcile the relatively
low volatility of velocity with the relatively high volatility of the short
interest rate. Goldfeld (1973) estimated an adjustment speed of 25—30 percent
per quarter. However, with annual data the conventional adjustment lag
argument is not convincing, Why should economic agents hold idle money
balances when non—monetary assets bearing a higher interest rate are so
readily available?

     The case for the long rate. Table 3 reports annual velocity regressions
in which the income elasticity is constrained to be 1.0 (for reasons discussed
later). These regressions yield a much higher estimate of the interest
elasticity for the long rate than for the short rate. Many others have found
this same result but, strangely, no one seems to have been puzzled by it.
Under the expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates the long
rate is a weighted average of expected future short rates, and consequently
the full—adjustment (or long-run) interest elasticity with respect to the long
rate ought to equal that with respect to the short rate.

     To see this point, suppose an economy operates for a long time with zero
inflation and short and long rates in the neighborhood of 3 percent, and then
adjusts to a long-lasting inflationary equilibrium with an inflation rate of 10
                                        7            W. Poole, June, 1987

percent and short and long rates in the neighborhood of 13 percent. Using
these hypothetical data, estimates of the interest elasticity from short rates
and from long rates should be identical because both rates have risen by the
same amount.

     Now consider an actual estimation. If the sample period is long, and if
the general level of rates changes significantly over the sample, the
correlation of short rates and long rates will be very high. For annual U.S.
data 1915-86 the correlation between the logs of the two rates in Figure 3 is
0.868. The estimated interest elasticity of money demand ought not to depend
very much on which interest rate is used in a regression.

     In fact, in the regressions in Table 3 the long rate not only yields an
estimated elasticity twice the elasticity of the short rate but also a higher R2.
I conclude that the long rate rather than the short rate belongs in the money
demand function. The short rate yields a lower interest elasticity because the
short rate measures the true opportunity cost variable with error.7

     It should be emphasized that this errors—in—variables argument could go
either way. The fact that the short rate has a higher variance than the long
rate does not automatically mean that the short rate will have a lower
regression coefficient.8 If velocity were in fact a function of the short rate,
then velocity would be much more volatile than it is. In this case the long
rate could yield a lower regression coefficient than the short rate because the
long rate would measure the short rate with error.

     The argument rationalizing the better fit of the long rate is that changes
in the amount of money held relative to income require that economic agents
make capital investments of various kinds in order to economize on money.
For example, to reduce cash balances a corporation may have to invest in
personnel and computers. Banks may open new offices to reduce travel time
("shoe—leather costs") for their customers. These investments will not be
undertaken unless an increase in interest rates is judged to be permanent ——
long—lasting enough relative to the life of the investment. Nor will a decline
in interest rates judged to be transitory lead agents to abandon past
investments that economize on the holding of money. The long—term interest
                                       8            W. Poole, June, 1987

 rate reflects expectations about future short—term interest rates, and so
 measures the appropriate cost variable in the money demand function more
 accurately than does the short-term interest rate. Although the long rate, on
 this argument, is the appropriate cost variable for the money demand function,
 in managing money balances agents may well be switching between money and
 short assets.9

     Money as a buffer. The usual conception of money demand is that the
error term in a money demand function is independent of other variables and
disturbances in the system of equations describing the economy. Such a
disturbance must be cleared through a change in one or more endogenous
variables in the system. A money demand disturbance will have the same
effect on the system as would a shift of the same size in the constant term of
the money demand equation.

     The buffer stock view of money demand has very different implications.
In the short run money is a "slack" variable that absorbs disturbances
originating elsewhere. Part of an agent's money balance at any given time
reflects what Keynes called the "precautionary motive" for holding money.
Another part reflects a particular realization of net cash flows from other
activities which leave an agent's money balance transitorily high or low.
Milton Friedman's phrase, "a temporary abode of purchasing power," carries
the right flavor. On a formal level, the stochastic inventory model by Miller
and Orr (1966) rings true to me.'°

     The implications of the buffer stock model can be seen by examining
several examples. Suppose the central bank increases the money stock
unexpectedly through an open market operation. In Figure 4, the initial money
demand function is LO, and we assume that the money stock jumps from MO to
Ml. The private sector holds more money and fewer bonds than before.
However, in the absence of any other disturbance there is no reason for
anyone to do anything in the short run. Agents do not know the source of
the extra money and have no reason to believe that the disturbance is
permanent. Consequently, in the short run the interest rate remains at RO and
the flow of spending does not change.
                                        9            W. Poole, June, 1987

     The econometrician, however, interprets this case as involving a
disturbance Ui to the money demand function shifting it from LO to Li and
assumes that Ui is independent of the increase in the money stock. That
interpretation is the only conventional way to reconcile the observation of a
money stock of MI with the interest rate of RO. Because the money demand
disturbance is interpreted as independent, the analyst may conclude that it is
very fortunate that the central bank accommodated the disturbance; if it had
not done so, then the interest rate would have risen to RI.

      For another example, suppose there is a jump in GNP due to a good
harvest. It is not necessary for agents to hold more money to finance the
 larger GNP for they already hold a buffer for just such eventualities. To the
econometrician there has been a downward shift in the money demand function;
GNP has risen, which should have been associated with higher a real money
stock and/or higher interest rate, but in fact neither the money stock nor the
interest rate has changed. The economist using this conventional model, which
includes the assumption of independence of money demand and money supply
disturbances, would believe that if the central bank had coincidentally
increased the money stock there would have been a double stimulus to
aggregate demand —— from the money demand disturbance and from the
increase in the money stock. However, under the buffer stock view of money
demand the apparent disturbance to money demand would not have been
observed in the first place if the central bank had just by chance increased
the money stock at the time of the good harvest.

     The buffer stock view is closely related to Milton Friedman's conception
of money demand as a function of permanent magnitudes. Transitory changes
in, say, output are not accompanied by changes in the amount of money that
agents want to hold. The problem with this conception of money demand, at
least as some have interpreted it, is that it requires that exogenous changes in
money supply be cleared by changes in the permanent variables such as
permanent income that enter the money demand function. That implication is
not necessary in the buffer stock model because changes in money supply are
willingly held in the short run without there being repercussions in other
markets.
                                          10            W. Poole, June, 1987

          Refer to Figure 4 again to consider a case in which new information ——
    such as election results, a policy announcement by the government, or a
    statistical release reporting last month's increase in the money stock —— leads
the market to bid up interest rates. The initial equilibrium has money demand
function LO, money stock MO, and interest rate RO. The interest rate rises
instantaneously to 111 when the market receives new information, but at this
instant the money stock does not change. On the conventional view of money
demand there has been a money demand disturbance Ui equal to the horizontal
distance between money demand functions LO and Li and this disturbance has
been cleared through the increase in the interest rate to Ri.

-   Surely, however, if the central bank had coincidentally increased the
money stock by the size of this disturbance —— that is, from MO to Ml —— the
interest rate would have gone up anyway to clear the credit markets in the
wake of receipt of new information. If the coincidental increase in the money
stock had in fact occurred the conventional view would be that a money
demand disturbance U2 had shifted the money demand function from LO to L2.
That is the only possible conventional interpretation to rationalize an interest
rate of Ri and a money stock of Ml. An observer holding to the conventional
view of independent money demand disturbances will believe that it is highly
desirable that the central bank followed an accommodative policy permitting
the money stock to rise to Ml, for otherwise the disturbance (which is really
a credit market disturbance) shifting the money demand function to L2 would
have pushed the interest rate up to R2.

     The only way, to my knowledge, to represent this analysis in a formal
system of equations is to assume that the disturbance in the money demand
equation is correlated with variables and/or disturbances in other equations.
In the examples discussed above money demand disturbances are correlated
with variables and/or disturbances in the credit market and with money supply
disturbances."

     This model leaves the econometrician in a difficult situation. There is no
obvious way to estimate the aggregate money demand function to get around
the problem that money demand disturbances are correlated with other
variables and disturbances in the system. Moreover, because expectations
                                       11            W. Poole, June, 1987

 (rational or otherwise) affect interest rates all information relevant to
 expectations is likely to be correlated with the money demand disturbances
 identified by the econometrician. Finally, the adjustment process through
 which departures of money balances from long—run equilibrium levels have
 effects on the endogenous variables in the money demand function is likely to
 be highly variable.

     These problems seem likely to be especially serious when estimating
 regressions in first difference form. A substantial part of the variance of
 quarter—to—quarter and year—to—year changes in interest rates reflects
 disturbances elsewhere in the economy that are correlated with
 (conventionally—defined) money demand disturbances. The effect is to produce
a substantial bias toward zero in the estimated interest elasticity of money
demand in a first difference equation.

     In a levels regression the noise in the interest rate is smaller compared
to the systematic part of the rate, and so the bias in the estimate of the
regression coefficient is less than in a first difference regression. However, in
a levels regression the residuals are highly serially correlated creating two
problems for the problem at hand. The first is that the estimates of the
standard errors are biased downward. That is not too serious an issue because
under usual assumptions the coefficient estimates themselves are not biased.
However, if the residuals are in fact generated by a random walk the levels
regression may yield biased coefficient estimates. With a random walk, even
one without drift, the mean of the levels residuals is unlikely to be zero and
may be time-dependent.

      Suppose the true money demand residuals starting with the first
observation (1915) accumulate so that the last observation (1986) has a residual
that is positive and relatively large. The true mean of the residuals is
positive, but the estimated regression will have coefficients such that the
estimated residuals have a zero mean. Thus, in a levels regression the ex post
drift in the residuals will be assigned to any variable in the regression that
has a drift (up or down) over the sample period.
                                       12           W. Poole, June, 1987

     Consider a levels regression with velocity as the dependent variable. If
the residuals are correctly modeled as a random walk, and if they have an
upward (downward) drift over 1915—86, then the interest rate will have an
upward (downward) biased coefficient because the rate rose over this sample
period. One way to avoid this bias is to use a sample period for which the
interest rate is about the same at both ends. Thus, in Table 3 the interest
elasticities estimated from the Aaa bond rate over 1915—64 and 1920—68 are
least likely to be biased. From these results I conclude tentatively that the
interest elasticity of demand for real money balances is about 0.6 in absolute
value.

     Although there is some protection against bias in the estimate of the
interest elasticity from using sample periods in which there was no overall
increase or decrease in interest rates, that protection is not available when
trying to estimate the income elasticity because income almost always rises.
In working on this paper I made no effort to estimate the income elasticity of
money demand because I am not convinced that I could learn anything from
the attempt. It seems likely that convincing evidence on the income elasticity
will have to come from studies using micro data and country cross section
data.'2

     Other money demand issues. It remains an open question as to whether
the best definition of money in the United States is Ml, M2, or some other M.
Various Ms are highly correlated with each other over long periods, and it
seems probable that there is no way to extract from time series data the
answer as to which M is best. This issue should be reexamined, but it seems
much less important than the interest elasticity and velocity trend issues
discussed above.

     An even more difficult issue is that of the short—run adjustment
mechanism. The approach underlying the standard money demand function
relies on a model of adjustment by an individual agent who brings actual
balances into line with desired balances. The problem is that this model,
whether in Koyck or distributed lag form, does not invert properly to the case
in which exogenous changes in the money stock yield lagged adjustments in
the arguments of the money demand function —— in the price level, nominal
                                        13           W. Poole, June, 1987

 interest rates, and real GNP. Because most central banks follow an
 accommodative policy in the short run, some of the data are generated by a
 process in which the aggregate money stock adjusts passively over time to
 changes in the arguments. However, the data also include observations in
 which the money stock changes actively and prices, incomes, and interes.t rates
 adjust over time.

      There is no obvious way to extract from the data these different types of
 adjustment. Here, even micro data may be of little assistance because macro
 lags may arise from the accumulation of relatively short lags at the micro
 level. Moreover, in the context of macroeconomic modelling, adjustment
 mechanisms are almost certain to be unstable for the reasons detailed by Lucas
 (1976) in what has come to be called the "the Lucas critique."

     To summarize these thoughts about money demand, experience in the
1980s fits a model with a considerably higher interest elasticity than was
generally accepted a few years ago. A reexamination of annual data back to
1915 supports this view. The case for the long—term interest rate appears
stronger than the case for the short—term rate. Most importantly, time trends
with a few breaks fit the velocity data very well but time is in fact a totally
unreliable explanatory variable. Time has a seductive but dangerous appeal as
an explanatory variable because velocity is a much smoother variable than most
regressor candidates. Finally, no one has constructed a convincing model of
lagged adjustment and we must conclude that we know essentially nothing
about adjustment speeds -— except that they are faster during hyperinflations
than at other times -- and nothing about the stability or regularity of
adjustment mechanisms.

THE REAL RATE OF INTEREST


      The behavior of the real rate of interest in the 1980s has been every bit
as much a surprise as has the behavior of velocity. Fama (1975) argued that
the ex ante real rate is a constant. Few economists accepted that hypothesis
as literally true, but the evidence did support the proposition that most of the
variance of nominal short—term interest rates reflected variance in inflationary
expectations rather than variance in the expected real rate of interest.'3
                                       14            W. Poole, June, 1987

Depending on the choice of short—term rate, for 1953—73 the real rate was 1 to
2 percent and for 1973—78 was 0 to —2 percent. For 1980 to 1985, however,
the real rate —— both ex ante and ex post —— was in the 4 to 8 percent range.
These rough figures are satisfactory for the purpose at hand; everyone agrees
that real rates were dramatically higher in the early 1980s than they were
during the previous several decades.'4

     In 1981—82 it was logical to attribute high real rates to monetary
stringency, just as it was logical to attribute abnormally low real rates in the
late 1970s to monetary laxity. On this interpretation no new lesson for
monetary policy arose from either experience. The period of accelerating
inflation and abnormally low real rates in the late 1970s would not have
bccurred if the Federal Reserve had held money growth to, say, 4 percent per
year. The deceleration of money growth and high real rates in 1981-82 would
not have occurred if the inflationary monetary policy of the late 1970s had not
occurred. Or, taking the initial conditions of 1980 as given, a more gradualist
monetary policy in 1981-82 would presumably have yielded a smaller increase in
real rates and a more shallow recession than the one actually experienced.

    Real determinants of the real rate. Whatever may be the validity of the
monetary explanation for high real rates 198 1—82, that explanation did not fit
the conditions following the recession trough in late 1982. Most Keynesians
predicted a slow recovery from the recession because real rates of interest
were higher in the early 1980s than at any time since the onset of the Great
Depression. In the past high real rates have almost invariably been associated
with recession and falling prices, as in 1929—32, 1920—21, 1907, and 1893—94.
(See Figure 2.) The combination of high real rates and vigorous cyclical
expansion during 1983-84 and continuing, though slow, expansion 1985-86 is
very unusual in the light of U.S. experience over the past century. The high
real rates during 1983—85 almost certainly reflected one or more real
disturbances, and the case for a real explanation is reinforced by the behavior
of the real exchange rate.

     Figure 5 shows the real exchange rate from January 1975 to April 1987
on a base of January 1985 100. For 1983—85, the behavior of the real
economy, of the real exchange rate, and of the real interest rate are simply
                                        15            W. Poole, June, 1987

  not consistent with a monetary explanation. Indeed, the monetary explanation
  for 1981—82 may have to be supplemented given that the real rate of interest
  was abnormally high by the standards of previous postwar recessions, although
  not by the standard of 1929—32.

       What were the real disturbances? I favor the view that the primary real
  disturbance was the 1981 change in U.S. tax law which had the effect of
 substantially increasing the real after—tax rate of return on new business
 investment. Others hold to the view that the substantial federal budget deficit
 that began in 1981 and continues to this writing is responsible.'5 For the
 purpose at hand, the source of the real disturbance is irrelevant. There was a
 real disturbance, and it was large.

      Another much—discussed class of real disturbances is the "supply shock,"
and there is a substantial literature on energy, food, raw materials, exchange
rate, productivity, and other shocks of the 1970s. Such shocks reduce output
and the real rate of interest, and raise the price level.'6 However, a
monetary hypothesis competes with the supply-shock hypothesis for explaining
the l970s because the alleged supply shocks occurred at times when the
economy was stressed by accelerating money growth. Monetary policy was
clearly inflationary in 1972-73 before the Mideast War and OPEC oil shock of
October 1973, and again in 1977—78 before the overthrow of the Shah of Iran
and the second oil shock in 1979. In both episodes inflation was
unambiguously rising before the oil shocks.

      My own position is that real disturbances are much over—rated as a
 source of the problems of the 1970s, and that the real effects of inflationary
 monetary policy are much under—rated. On this view the supply shocks would
have had relatively modest effects if they had occurred in an economy
characterized by both general price stability and confidence in that stability.
Inflationary monetary policy made the economy vulnerable to bad news; the
shocks surely were themselves a problem but their main significance was to
trigger the inflationary bomb that was bound to go off anyway.
                                      16            W. Poole, June, 1987

     Monetary policy implications of real disturbances. The issue of the
appropriate monetary policy response to a real disturbance, either through a
discretionary policy adjustment or through a monetary rule which has a
response built in, is too large to be discussed satisfactorily here. But the
dimensions of the problem are larger than I had previously thought. My
estimate of the magnitude of conceivable real rate disturbances in the U.S.
economy has risen and so also has my estimate of the interest elasticity of
money demand.

     Suppose the U.S. economy in 1981 had been operating at a stable and low
inflation rate and reasonably close to full employment. Suppose a disturbance
had raised the real rate of interest by roughly the magnitude actually
observed, and that as a consequence nominal interest rates had risen from 4
percent to 8 percent. This doubling of nominal rates is a logarithmic increase
of 0.7, and multiplying by an interest elasticity of money demand of 0.6 yields
a logarithmic change in velocity of 0.42, or 50 percent. That is a very large
velocity disturbance, and one that would obviously have a considerable impact
on both the real economy and the price level in the absence of a change in
the money stock.

    These calculations may provide a misleading picture of the magnitude of
the problem because there is evidence that the real rate and the expected rate
of inflation are negatively correlated. That is one of the findings in Fama and
Gibbons (1982). More casually, real rates fell in the late 1970s as inflation
expectations and nominal rates rose, and real rates rose in the early 1980s as
inflation expectations and nominal rates fell. In these two instances, then,
inflationary expectations changed by more than the real rate so that the real
rate and the nominal rate moved in opposite directions rather than in the same
direction as assumed in the preceding paragraph.

     The key issue here is whether the observed negative correlation between
the real rate and inflation expectations is a accident of history or is embedded
in the structure of the economy. The correlation almost certainly depends on
whether real disturbances over a particular period originate primarily on the
demand or the supply side of the economy and on whether a country has a
fixed or floating exchange rate.'7
                                        17           W. Poole, June, 1987


      To summarize, there is unmistakable evidence that a large real shock
 occurred in the early 1980s. There may also have been significant real shocks
 in the 1970s, although monetary shocks may be the larger part of the
 explanation. In any event, recent experience of inflation and disinflation in
 the United States suggests that monetary policy should be formulated in.such a
 way as to deal with the possibility of large real disturbances. Put another
 way, there is more to monetary policy than simply avoiding monetary
 disturbances, as important as that aspect of policy must obviously be.

 MARKET EXPECTATIONS CONCERNING MONETARY POLICY


     Both interest rates and money growth became more volatile after the
Federal Reserve changed its operating procedures in October 1979. After
October 1979 it became immediately apparent to the most casual observer that
market interest rates reacted quickly to weekly reports of money stock data
every Thursday afternoon (Friday afternoon for part of the period under
review). One useful outcome of the experience was a greatly improved
understanding of market responses to monetary policy.'8

      To understand the issues here it is best to think of Fed policy day by
day as involving an adjustable peg for the federal funds rate. That description
of Fed policy is certainly correct before October 1979, is approximately correct
after October 1982, and is in dispute for the period between. If this model is
accepted for the entire period, then market responses to receipt of information
provides evidence on the market's evaluation of the factors that lead the
Federal Reserve to adjust its federal funds rate peg.

      Effects of unexpectecj money. Investigators have partitioned each week's
money stock data release into expected and unexpected parts. The expected
part is based on a survey of market participants conducted by Money Market
Services every week prior to release of money stock data. The interest rate
response has been measured over 24 hours spanning the announcement time,
and over the period from 3:3Opm to 5:00pm spanning the announcement time.
                                     18           W. Poole, June, 1987

    Although the data contain some anomalies, the basic finding is that the
market responds to the unexpected part of the money stock data release. The
response was far greater during the period from October 1979 to October 1982
than either before or after. The decline in the response is no doubt due to
the fact that the Federal Reserve increasingly deemphasized money stock
control after October 1982. There is a documented decline in the response
through September 1985, and my casual impression is that the response fell
essentially to zero in 1986.

    The magnitude as well as the existence of the interest rate response to
money announcements is important. Roley and Troll (1983) and Roley (1986)
estimate that an unexpected increase of $1 billion in the money stock raised
the Treasury bill rate by a trivial 1.6 basis points from October 1977 to
October 1979, by 10.4 basis points from October 1979 to October 1982, by 3.4
basis points from October 1982 to February 1984, and by 1.4 basis points from
February 1984 to September 1985.

     These estimates of the effects on the bill rate of an unexpected change
in the money stock can also be used as an estimate of the effect of the
expected change in the money stock. As information accumulates day by day
the market will adjust its expectation of the change in the money stock, and
will presumably bid the bill rate up or down to the same extent as the
documented effect from unexpected changes in money. More precisely, the
relevant measure is the market's expected change in the money stock less its
guess as to the Federal Reserve's desired change in the money stock.

     This discussion has assumed that the market's response to money stock
data arises from speculation on future monetary policy rather than from the
effects of money growth on the market's expectation of future inflation. This
proposition is supported by the way in which the interest rate response to
money growth changed over time as the Federal Reserve changed its operating
procedures. However, the strongest evidence supporting this proposition arises
from an examination of the response of the exchange rate to unexpected
money. Engel and Frenkel (1984) studied data for October 1979 to August
1981 and showed that dollar appreciated (depreciated) against the German mark
in response to an unexpected increase (decrease) in the stock of money in the
                                        19            W. Poole, June, 1987

  United States. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that the interest
  rate response to unexpected money is a real rate response. If the inflationary
  anticipations argument were correct the exchange rate should have depreciated
  in response to unexpected increases in the money stock.

       I know of no study that sorts out the effects on interest rates of actual
 changes in the money stock as distinct from announcements of past changes.
 If I am correct that actual changes have little or no immediate effect on
 interest rates, then rates were much more volatile after October 1979 both
  because the market's response coefficient to unexpected money was higher and
  because money growth was less stable and less predictable than it had been
  before. Thus, the market's increased response to announcements of money
 stock changes after October 1979 would not have created increased interest
 rate volatility had the Federal Reserve been successful in stabilizing money
 growth. The issue is not a minor one; the effect of the Fed's October 1979
 procedures on interest rate volatility, which shows up dramatically in interest
 rate charts, had much to do with the Fed's abandonment of efforts to control
 money growth.'9

     Although there is a dispute concerning the Fed's technical capacity to
stabilize short—run money growth there is no doubt whatsoever that the Fed
can control nonborrowed bank reserves extremely precisely. The evidence
strongly suggests that if the Fed were to pursue an announced policy of
achieving a bank reserves target, and were to hit the target with a small
margin of error, then the unexpected part of monetary policy would have
minimal variance and interest rates would not be bid up or down by
speculation on Fed actions to offset the error in hitting its announced target.

      Effects of other information. There is also evidence of a dramatic
change in October 1979 in the market's response to adjustments in the Federal
Reserve's discount rate. Using data for the two—year period before and the
three—year period after October 1979, Roley and Troll (1983) report that per
100 basis points increase (decrease) in the discount rate the bill rate rose
(fell) 10 basis points in the first period and 54 basis points in the second
period.
                                      20            W. Poole, June, 1987

      This finding is something of a puzzle. Historically, the discount rate has
followed money market rates and there is no good reason for the discount rate
to have a separate influence on those rates. Particularly after October 1979,
discount rate changes ought not to have affected market rates at all if the
Fed had been controlling bank reserves to achieve money growth targets and
letting market rates of interest go wherever market forces took them. Given
a money growth target, the discount rate could affect the division of total
bank reserves between borrowed and nonborrowed reserves but not,
presumably, either the level of total reserves consistent with target money
growth or the level of interest rates consistent with target money growth. In
this model any change in the bill rate for any reason ought to have carried
with it the assumptions that the discount rate would follow (and so the market
would fully expect discount rate changes when they actually occurred) and that
the discount rate would not have any independent influence on market rates
anyway.

     The only way to make sense of the observed effect of the discount rate
on market rates is to assume that the Federal Reserve has persistent interest
rate targets. Before October 1979 the Fed changed its federal funds rate
target by a relatively small amount at a time and a discount rate change
announced to the market that the Fed had changed its funds rate target.
After October 1979 the Fed was much more aggressive in changing its funds
rate target and so the market's response to discount rate changes was much
larger. This response shows that the market believed that the Fed was
concerned either with the level of discount window borrowing per se, or with
the level of market interest rates, or both. On this interpretation, Fed policy
after October 1979 did not involve a target path for bank reserves that was
exogenous to short-run fluctuations in money market interest rates. Instead,
Fed policy must have involved aggressive use of the federal funds rate as the
policy instrument. The Fed adjusted the funds rate on the basis of the
observed money stock and other data and discount rate adjustments signalled
changes in the target zone for the funds rate.

     Roley and Troll (1983) and Roley (1986) also provide evidence on the
effect on the bill rate of the unexpected component in official releases of data
on inflation, unemployment, and industrial production. The estimated effects
                                        21            W. Poole, June, 1987

  are all statistically insignificant except for the industrial production index in
  the period from February 1984 to September 1985. These results may
  understate the importance of data releases because monetary policy tends to be
 asymmetric. My hypothesis is that when inflation is the major concern of the
  public the Fed will tend to push up interest rates in response to reports of
 high inflation, high employment growth, and growing industrial production but
 will tend not to push interest rates down in response to reports in the
 opposite direction. Similarly, when recession is the major public concern the
 Fed will tend to push interest rates down in response to low inflation, falling
 employment, and falling production but will tend not to push rates up in
 response to reports in the opposite direction.20

     Effects of market pctations on policy. From this evidence it is clear
that the market is extremely sensitive to the manner in which the Federal
Reserve conducts policy. There should be no surprise that in the winter and
spring of 1987 the market began to look especially closely at commodity price
indexes as concerns developed that inflation might rise significantly. Recent
appointees to the Board of Governors have suggested that commodity prices be
used as a key indicator of the appropriate stance of monetary policy. On this
view, monetary policy should become more restrictive when commodity prices
are rising; what that means in practice is that the Fed should push money
market interest rates higher.

     These considerations raise a serious issue concerning how the Federal
Reserve should interpret observed interest rate changes. Suppose, for example,
that the Treasury bill rate rises in response to a report of higher commodity
price inflation. If the Fed holds its target for the federal funds rate
unchanged, and does so systematically in such cases, the market will learn that
the Fed does not in fact change its funds rate target in response to
commodity price information. In time the bill rate will cease responding to
commodity prices. At the opposite extreme, the Fed may ratify the market by
adjusting the funds rate by an amount that matches the market's adjustment of
the bill rate. In this case the Fed would simply follow the market, which
would be an obviously unsatisfactory and ill—defined monetary policy.
                                       22            W. Poole, June, 1987

     If the Fed develops a systematic policy response to receipt of new
information, then changes in market interest rates upon receipt of new
information or upon market forecasts of future data releases will reflect
nothing more than the market's judgment of the Fed's response function. The
Fed cannot then use interest rate changes to provide information on
disturbances elsewhere in the economy.

    It is important to understand that the problem here is not just a
"practical" one. It is in principle impossible to extract useful information
about the private economy from any variable the Fed itself controls. No one
would dream of trying to extract information about the private economy from
the behavior of the discount rate. Nor should anyone try to extract
information about the private economy from the behavior of the federal funds
rate when that rate is closely controlled by the Federal Reserve, as was true
before October 1979 and after October 1983.

     Of course, the bill rate and other longer—term rates reflect market
expectations concerning both future data and the Fed's responses to the data.
The point remains, however, that the Fed cannot extract from interest rates
information about the economy without knowing market expectations
concerning Fed policy. In fact, the principle holds for all speculative prices.
The prices of storable goods —— commodities, land, securities, etc. —— reflect in
part expectations of future monetary policy because speculators know that Fed
actions will influence aggregate real demand and the general price level.

    In sum, interest rates —— whether nominal or real ——are a very poor
guide to monetary policy. Interest rates respond to disturbances in the real
economy, to disturbances in money demand, and to changes in market
expectations of future monetary policy. Recent studies have made clear that
market expectations concerning policy have economically significant effects on
interest rates. This fact ought to be factored into the design of monetary
policy; the issue is explored briefly in the final section of the paper on
monetary rules.
                                         23            W. Poole, June, 1987

 THE ROLE OF MONETARY POLICY IN REDUCING INFLATION


      Monetary policy played a critical role in reducing inflation in the early
 1980s, but quantifying the contribution would go beyond the scope of this
 paper. The issues involve the direct contribution of lower money growth, the
 contribution of changed inflationary expectations, and the contribution of real
 disturbances.

       Role of lower money growth. In the late 1970s inflation rose to a higher
  rate than would have been sustained in the long run by the rate of money
 growth at that time. On an annual average basis, Ml growth peaked at a
 little over 8 percent in 1978. Assuming secular growth of real GNP of about 3
 percent per year, sustained Ml growth of 8 percent per year would yield
 secular inflation of 5 percent per year if velocity has zero secular increase
 and 8 percent inflation if velocity has a 3 percent secular increase. Actual
 inflation on an annual average basis as measured by the fixed weight GNP
 deflator was 9.3 percent in both 1980 and 1981.

     Thus, at least one and perhaps four percentage points of 1980—81 inflation
were due to the acceleration of money growth in the late 1970s and/or the oil
price shock of 1979. Ending the acceleration of money growth was part of
monetary policy, but the effects of changing money growth should be
distinguished from those of the rate of money growth itself.

      Money growth fell in the early 1980s, and here again it is necessary to
 distinguish the effects of the deceleration from those of the lower rate itself.
On an annual average basis, Ml growth fell to 6.5 percent in 1981, rose to 9.8
percent in 1983, and fell back to 6.0 percent in 1984. Inflation as measured
by the fixed weight deflator fell to slightly less than 3 percent in 1986. On
the assumptions of secular real GNP growth of 3 percent per year and zero
secular change in velocity, sustained Ml growth of 6 percent per year would
yield sustained inflation of 3 percent per year. However, when the data are
averaged over several years it is clear that in the 1980s inflation fell much
more than did Ml growth.
                                       24            W. Poole, June, 1987

    On a qualitative level, the decline of inflation after 1980 is perfectly
consistent with the deceleration of money growth but the magnitudes seem
wrong. Although Ml growth did fall in 1980—81, its average rate over the
1979—84 period was essentially identical to its average rate over the 1975—79
period. It seems to me to be unreasonable to argue that monetary conditions
alone can account for the extent and duration of the decline of inflation.

     Role of inflationary expectations. One way to reconcile the sustained
reduction of inflation 1982—86 is to accept the hypothesis that inflation
expectations declined substantially from their level in the late 1970s. Without
question, inflation expectations did decline, and the Federal Reserve's
willingness to maintain a restrictive policy long into the 1981—82 cyclical
contraction must have had something to do with the decline.

      But it is difficult to attribute the durability of the decline in inflation
expectations entirely to monetary policy.21 it is illogical to argue that the
market was simply relying on Fed Chairman Paul Voicker for it was unclear
whether he would be reappointed in 1987 to another term as Chairman, and in
the event he was not reappointed. What was clear was that the Reagan
administration had ceased to be concerned with inflation, as evidenced most
clearly by the administration's policy starting in September 1985 to depreciate
the dollar on the foreign exchanges. It was also clear that Congress and the
administration both had an incentive to inflate in order to relieve pressures
arising from the large federal budget deficit.

    In sum, it appears that significant weight must be accorded to non-
monetary conditions as shaping both the actual inflation rate and inflation
expectations from 1981 through 1986. The obvious candidates for these non-
monetary conditions are those responsible for the high real rate of interest
1982—85.


    Role of non—monetary conditions. As mentioned earlier, there is
substantial disagreement as to the causes of high real rates of interest in the
United States 1981—85. However, there is agreement that the high real rates
were primarily responsible for the real appreciation of the dollar, which
reached its peak in February 1985. The strong dollar almost certainly had
                                        25           W. Poole, June, 1987

 much to do with the rapidity of the decline of the overall inflation rate in
 1982 and its further decline in 1986. Traded goods prices enter directly into
 price indexes, and also affect the prices of competing non—traded goods. Over
 the five years from 1981 to 1986 the fixed weight imports deflator fell by 9
 percent while the fixed rate exports deflator rose by only 6 percent.

     It is often argued that the decline of inflation in 1986 was due to an
 exogenous oil price decline, but this argument seriously underestimates the
 importance of the strong dollar. Consider in the abstract a commodity traded
 in world markets, and ask what happens when currency A appreciates in real
 terms against currency B. In general, the commodity's price should fall in
 terms of currency A and rise in terms of currency B, with the price changes
 depending on relative supplies and demands and their elasticities in countries A
and B.

     As the dollar appreciated after 1980 the OPEC oil cartel was able to
maintain a relatively unchanged dollar price of oil, with the result that oil
prices rose very substantially in non—dollar currencies. That outcome would
not have occurred in a highly competitive oil market; however, neither was the
outcome a profit—maximizing one for a cartel. Whether or not the OPEC
cartel weakened in the 1980s, a decline in the dollar price of oil was a
predictable consequence of substantial dollar appreciation. Given appreciation
of the dollar, OPEC changed the timing of the decline of dollar oil prices but
did not determine the decline itself.

      In sum, there is good reason to believe that non—monetary conditions
contributed significantly to the reduction of U.S. inflation in the 1980s.
However, it should be emphasized that these conditions were inherently
transitory. The United States could not expect continuing increases in its real
rate of interest and in the real value of its currency. Once these conditions
stabilized their contributions to reducing inflation would end and monetary
fundamentals would dominate the outcome.
                                       26            W. Poole, June, 1987

IMPLICATIONS OF RECENT EXPERIENCE FOR MONETARY RULES


     In past debates on monetary rules no clear distinction has been made
between the application of a rule in a situation of stable initial conditions and
the application in a period of high inherited inflation. Opponents of a
monetary autopilot seem to assume that the economy is always like a ship in a
crowded channel while proponents seem to assume that the economy is always
on the high seas.

    A monetary rule in the steady state. Suppose money growth were
constant at, say, 3 percent per year. What would be the operating
characteristics of the economy once the transition to the rule was complete?

     As argued earlier, recent experience suggests that the interest elasticity
of the demand for money is high enough that real disturbances have a
substantial potential to raise or lower the inflation rate and to push real
growth above or below its equilibrium path. The relatively high elasticity also
means, however, that independent disturbances to money demand will have less
effect on nominal GNP than would be the case with a lower elasticity.

     The buffer stock model of money demand requires a reinterpretation of
past evidence on money demand disturbances. If it is true that these
disturbances, as conventionally measured, are often dependent on disturbances
elsewhere in the economy, then money demand behavior is far more stable and
stabilizing, though less rigid, than many have come to believe. Conventionally-
measured money demand disturbances do not provide evidence supporting
discretionary monetary policy designed to offset them; such disturbances often
reflect money supply disturbances, which have effects of the type emphasized
by rational expectations models.

     Evidence on the behavior of interest rates under varying monetary policy
operating procedures confirms the validity of the general point emphasized in
the Lucas critique that parameters in macro model equations will not be stable
because these equations are not truly structural. Estimated macro models do
not provide any evidence whatsoever on how an economy would operate under
a constant money growth rule, and that point will remain even if the money
                                        27           W. Poole, June, 1987

 demand function in macro models is altered as I have suggested. My guess is
 that the only evidence that will be very persuasive will be that from actual
 experiments with a money growth rule because we will not in the foreseeable
 future be able to extract truly structural equations from data generated under
 present monetary arrangements.

       A monetar rule for disinflation. The monetary rule most often
 advocated for bringing inflation down from an excessive rate is that of
 gradual, predetermined reductions in money growth. In the late 1970s a
 number of economists, myself included, advocated a gradualist monetary policy
 of this type, but I now believe that experience 1980—85 has demonstrated quite
 decisively that the gradualist prescription is unreliable. The decline of
 velocity was far greater than economists had predicted, and it seems very
 unlikely that the economy could have adjusted satisfactorily if money growth
 had been reduced by, say, one percentage point per year starting in 1980.

      The reasoning behind this conclusion may be stated briefly.22 Start with
a provisional assumption that under a policy of gradualism velocity in the
 1980s would have followed the course actually observed. If money growth had
declined gradually, then by 1985 nominal GNP would have been falling. Thus,
if real growth had been positive in 1985 the price level would have been
falling. Nominal interest rates would presumably have been lower than those
actually observed, and so velocity would, if anything, have declined even more
than its actual decline. It seems very unlikely that real growth could have
been positive in these circumstances; the magnitude and speed of the
adjustment from the inflationary era of the 1970s could not have proceeded
rapidly enough to permit real growth.

     This argument is very casual, and it depends almost entirely on my feel
for the data, which I believe many others share in this case. A less casual
observation, though, is that there is certainly no precedent suggesting that the
real economy could have adjusted without a recession much deeper and more
prolonged than the recession actually experienced. Under the scenario of the
preceding paragraph the decline of the inflation rate between 1980 and 1985
would have been greater than the decline of inflation between 1928 and
1932.23
                                       28            W. Poole, June, 1987


     There is a serious and probably insurmountable problem to designing a
predetermined money growth path to reduce inflation. When policymakers
make a commitment to lower inflation they should expect that velocity growth
will decline, and perhaps become negative, if the policy is successful. The
pace of adjustment in financial markets and the real economy will depend on
expectations concerning future monetary policy and future inflation. If the
market expects lower inflation, then inflation will decline without a decline in
money growth. Under these circumstances, a decline in money growth might
have a significant depressing effect on real activity. A recession is
undesirable in and of itself, but also may make it impossible politically to
sustain the policy.

     The dilemma is that the necessary reduction of inflation expectations
probably requires that. money growth fall. It is irrational for anyone to bet on
lower inflation on the basis of a central bank's promises with no evidence that
the central bank is reducing money growth. Indeed, a recession may be
necessary to provide the evidence that the central bank is serious. A
constitutional amendment might avoid this problem, but at a time of great
public concern about inflation could an economist make a successful case for
an amendment that merely required the central bank to stabilize money growth
for, say, four years before starting to reduce it?

      Consider the following numbers. Using annual data and continuous
compounding, Ml growth was 7.5 percent per year 1976—79 and 7.6 percent per
year 1979—83. In this second period money growth was first lower, which
assisted the Federal Reserve in establishing credibility, and then higher. From
1983 to 1986 Ml growth was higher yet -- an average annual rate of almost 11
percent. How much of this burst of money growth is part of a continuing
velocity adjustment to lower inflation and lower interest rates and how much
is the leading wave of the next acceleration of inflation?

     To achieve the benefits of a constant money growth rule in the steady
state there must at some point be a decision that the transition period of
managed money during disinflation should be brought to an end. Just as I
have come to believe that there is no satisfactory rule for managing monetary
                                      29           W. Poole, June, 1987

policy during the transition, I also believe that there is no formula to
determine when the transition should terminate. Paul Voicker has earned a
place in history as an extraordinarily skilled manager of the disinflation
process, but his influence is unlikely to be permanent because he has not
established a monetary rule or standard of some sort to guide his successors.

     In summary, the last ten years has been a period rich in monetary policy
lessons. The money demand function has displayed characteristics different
from those that seemed so well established. Real interest rates in the l980s
were at sustained levels previously associated with depression, and yet the
economy grew at a rapid rate after the 1981—82 recession. Recent experience
makes clear that market interest rates are determined very importantly by
expectations concerning future monetary policy. Although events have not
changed the case for a monetary rule of constant money growth in the steady
state, they have not been kind to the rule of gradual reductions of money
growth to slow inflation.
                                      30            W. Poole, June, 1987

                             REFERENCES


Bordo, Michael, and Lars Jonung, "The Global Velocity Curve 1952—1982,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2074, November 1986.

Campbell, John Y., and Richard H. Clarida, "The Dollar and Real Interest
Rates," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2151.
(forthcoming in Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Amsterdam: North Holland.)

Cooley, Thomas F., and Stephen F. LeRoy, "Identification and Estimation of
Money Demand," American Economic Review, December 1981, 71, 825-44.

Deaves, Richard, Angelo Melino, and James E. Pesando, "The Response of
Interest Rates to the Federal Reserve's Weekly Money Announcements: The
'Puzzle' of Anticipated Money," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 2125, January 1987.

Fama, Eugene F., "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation,"
American Economic Review, June 1975, 65, 269—82.

              , and Michael R. Gibbons, "Inflation, Real Returns and Capital
Investment," Journal of Monetary Economics, May 1982, 9, 297—323.

Feldstein, Martin, and Philippe Bacchetta, "How Far Has the Dollar Fallen?,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2122, January 1987,

Fisher, Irving, The Purchasing Power of Money, New York: Augustus M. Kelley,
1963 (reprint of second revised edition 1922).

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867—1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1963.
                                           31           W. Poole, June, 1987

 Goldfeld, Stephen M., "The Demand for Money Revisited," in Arthur M. Okun
 and George L. Perry, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973:3, 577—
 638.


                  ,   "The Case of the Missing Money," in Arthur M. Okun and
 George L. Perry, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1976:3, 683—730.

 Goodfrjend, Marvin, "Reinterpreting Money Demand Regressions," in Brunner,
 Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Understanding Monetary Regimes, Carnegie—
 Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 22, Amsterdam: North Holland,
 1985, 207—42.


 Gould, John P., and Charles R. Nelson, "The Stochastic Structure of the
 Velocity of Money," American Economic Review, June 1974, 64, 405—18.

Huizinga, John, and Frederic S. Mishkin, "Monetary Policy Regime Shifts and
the Unusual Behavior of Real Interest Rates," in Brunner, Karl, and Allan H.
Meltzer, eds., The National Bureau Metp International Capital Mobility and
Other Essy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 24,
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986, 231—74.

Judd, John P., and John L. Scadding, "The Search for a Stable Money Demand
Function: A Survey of the Post—1973 Literature," Journal of Economic
Literature, 20, September 1982, 993—1023.

Laidler, David, "The Demand for Money in the United States -- Yet Again," in
Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds,, On the State of Macroeconomics,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 12, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1980, 219—71.

                 , "Expectations
                             and Adjustment in the Monetary Sector Revisited:
A Comment," in Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., Understanding
Monetary Regimes, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 22,
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1985, 234—54.
                                        32           W. Poole, June, 1987

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in Bruriner,
Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1976, 19—46.

Manikiw, N. Gregory, Jeffrey A. Miron, and David N. Weil, "The Adjustment of
Expectations to a Change in Regime: A Study of the Founding of the Federal
Reserve," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2124,
January 1987.

Miller, Merton H., and Daniel Orr, "A Model of the Demand for Money by
Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1966, 80, 413—35.

Mussa, Michael, "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real
Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications," in Brunner, Karl, and Allan H.
Meltzer, eds., Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange Rates, and Actual Policies,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1986, 117—213.

Nelson, Charles R., and Charles I. Plosser, "Trends and Random Walks in
Macroeconomic Time Series," Journal of Monetary Economics, September 1982,
10, 139—62.

Poole, William, "Whither Money Demand?" in Arthur M. Okun and George L.
Perry, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1970:3, 485—500.

                       Reserve Operating Procedures: A Survey and Evaluation
              , "Federal
of the Historical Record since October 1979," Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, November 1982, 14, 575—96.

              , "Is Monetarism Dead?," Business Economics, October 1986, 10—15.

Rasche, Robert H., "Ml Velocity and Money Demand Functions: Do Stable
Relationships Exist?" forthcoming in Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer, eds.,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27, Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1987.
                                         33           W. Poole, June, 1987


 Roley, V. Vance, "Weekly Money Supply Announcements and the Volatility of
 Short—Term Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
 Review April 1982, 3—15.

              , "Market Perceptions of U.S. Monetary Policy Since 1982,"
 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review May 1986, 27-40.

              ,   and Rick Troll, "The Impact of New Economic
                                                              Information on
the Volatility of Short—Term Interest Rates," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City Economic Review February 1983, 3-15.

Schwert, G. William, "The Time Series Behavior of Real Interest Rates," in
Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The National Bureau
International Capital Mobility and Other Essays, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, 24, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986, 275—88.

Sheehan, Richard G., "Weekly Money Announcements: New Information and Its
Effects," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, August/September 1985.

Wilcox, James A., "Why Real Interest Rates Were So Low in the 1970s,"
American Economic Review, March 1983, 73, 44—53.
                                      34             W. Poole, June, 1987

                               TABLE 1
              Correlation Matrix, Major Macro Variables
                      Quarterly, 1947.1 —— 1986.4

All data in logarithmic form except for time dummy
TIME:    Time dummy
GNP:     Gross National Product, Current Dollars
GNP82:   Gross National Product, 1982 Dollars
PGNP:    Gross National Product Implicit Price Deflator
MI:      Ml Money Stock
M1/P:    Ratio of Ml to PGNP
Aaa:     Aaa Bond Yield
TB:      13-week Treasury Bill Rate, Secondary Market
VEL:     Ml Velocity ratio of GNP to Ml
           TIME     GNP     GNP82 PGNP        Mi       Mi/P     Aaa         TB    VEL
  TIME  1.000      0.993    0.993   0.967    0.970    0.400    0.973   0.911     0.987
  GNP   0.993      1.000    0.979   0.989    0.989    0.387    0.970   0.893     0.975
  GNP82 0.993      0.979    1.000   0.939    0.945    0.427    0.964   0.928     0.991
  PGNP  0.967      0.989    0.939   1.000    0.996    0.348    0.949   0.846     0.939
  Ml    0.970      0.989    0.945   0.996    1.000    0.431    0.941   0.837     0.933
  Mi/P  0.400      0.387    0.427   0.348    0.431    1.000    0.290   0.233     0.302
  Aaa   0.973      0.970    0.964   0.949    0.941    0.290    1.000   0.932     0.973
  TB    0.911      0.893    0.928   0.846    0.837    0.233    0.932   1.000     0.943
  VEL   0.987      0.975    0.991   0.939    0.933    0.302    0.973   0.943     1.000
                                      35            W. Poole, June, 1987

                               TABLE 2
         Velocity Regressions, First Differences of Annual Data
Dependent Variable: first difference log Ml velocity
Independent Variable: first difference log Aaa bond yield

  Period
                Constant         Coefficient          Adj.        Std.
                CT—Stat)            (T—Stat)           R2         Err.      DW
  1916—86        0.007               0.238            0.103       0. 056   1.44
                (1.050)            (3. 005)
  19 19—46     —0. 030
              (—2. 001)
                                   —0. 161          —0.020        0.071    1.81
                                  (—0. 687)
  1947—81        0.032              0.071            0. 024       0. 024   1.90
               (6. 723)            (1.350)
  19 16—57      0.002               0. 284           0. 050       0.070    1.49
               (0. 182)            (1.774)
                                       36               W. Poole, June, 1987


                                 TABLE 3
              Velocity Regressions1 Levels of Annual Data
Dependent Variable: log Ml velocity
Independent Variables: RAAA log Aaa bond yield
                      RPAP   log commercial paper rate
Beg R Interest rate in first year of period
End R Interest rate in last year of period

               Coefficients (T—Stat)                    Adj.     Std.
  Period     Constant   RAAA      RPAP                  _____    Err.          OW


  1915—86      0.227        0. 669                      0.908    0.098     0.45
              (6.443)     (26. 542)
               0. 959                    0.316          0.732    0.168     0.22
             (29. 132)                 (13.594)
  Beg R                     4.   84      4. 01?
  End R                     9.   02?     6. 39

  1915—64      0.365        0. 584                      0.702    0.099    0.47
              (4. 956)    (10.796)
               0. 998                    0.188          0.648    0.108    0.36
             (45.842)                   (9.556)
  Beg R                     4. 84%          4. 01?
  End R                     4. 40%          3. 96?

  1920—68
               0.299        0.   645                    0.718    0.108     0.40
              (4.776)     (11. 103)
               0. 998                       0.208       0.653    0.119     0.30
             (41. 492)                  (9. 568)
  Beg R                     6. 12%          7 .   50?
  End R                     6. 18%          5. 90

  192 1—86     0.271        0. 670                      0.914    0.099     0.420
              (6.435)     (26.237)
               0.   963                  0. 326         0.757    0.167     0.231
             (29.435)                  (14. 278)
  Beg R                     5. 97's         6.    62?
  End R                     9.   02?        6.39
                                    FIGURE      1
                  VELOCITY AND VELOCITY TREND, QUARTERLY, 1953—1986




       6—

 C.)



 0
       5—




LI
0      4
Iii
re




                                                                                00-S
                                                                                CD



       3.                                                                       c-I


                                                                                CD




       1953.1   1958.1     1963.1     1968.1        1973.1   1978.1   .1963.1
                                        FIGURE 2
                           ONE YEAR REAL RATE OF INTEREST, EX POST
       18
       16
       14
       12
       10
        8
        6
        4
N       2
Ill
        0
z
N     —2
0
N     —4

      —6

      —8

      —10                                                                              0
                                                                                       0
                                                                                       -s
                                                                                       CD


      —12                                                                              c-I

      —14                                                                              CD




      —16
            1890   1900   1910   1920    1930    1940    1950    1960   197.0   1980
                               FIGURE 3
         VELOCITY AND INTEREST RATES, ANNUALLY, 1915—1986


                                                                                         16




                      Aaa Eond Rate
                                                                Interest Rates
                                                          (Ratio scale   at right)
                                                                                     2

                                        Commercial Paper Rate
                                                                                        1


4—


                                                                                              00
                                                                                               1
                                                                                              CD



              (Ratio scale   at left)
                                                                                              CD




1915   1925       1935           1945       155       1965          1Q5          1965
                      FIGURE 4
         DISTURBANCES TO MONEY DEMAND AND SUPPLY




    R2

    Ri
                                                   0
    RU
z



                                                   0
                                                   0
                                                   CD



                                                   C-4



                                                   CD




                          MONEY STOCK
                                       FIGURE 5
                         MULTILATERAL REAL VALUE OF TilE DOLLAR
      105

      100

      95

      90

      65

'.4
      80
z
I
      75

zI-   70

      65
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     0
                                                                                     CD


      60
                                                                                     CD


      55
       1975:1   1977:1        1979:1       1901:1      1963:1     1965:1.   1987:1
                                         42              W. Poole, June, 1987

                                   APPENDIX
                         Data Sources for Figures
Note: Data are from the Data Resources, Inc. data bank unless otherwise
     indicated.
Figure 1: Velocity is the ratio of current dollar GNP to Ml.
          GNP
          1953—1986: DRI Series GNP
          Ml
          1953—1958: Friedman—Schwartz series spliced by author to series for
                      1959—1986.
          1959—1986: DR1 Series MNY1

Figure 2: Nominal Prime Commercial Paper Rate
          1890—1960: Historical Statistics of the United States, Series X—445
                      (4—6 mo.)
          1961—1985: DRI, Series RMCML6NS (6 mo.)
          Nominal Yield on Treas Securities at Constant Maturity of 1 Year
          1954—1985: DRI Series RMGFCM1NS
          Real yields obtained by subtracting percentage change in Consumer
          Price Index, All Items
          1890—1912: Hist Stat Series E—135
          1913—1986: DRI Series CPIU
Figure 3: Commercial Paper Rate
          Same as Figure 2
          Aaa Bond Rate
          1915—18: Macauley Railroad bond yield, list Stat Series X—476, + 0.22
                to splice this series to the next one.
          1919-46: Moody's Aaa Corp Bond Yield, Hist Stat Series X—477
          1947-86: Moody's Aaa Corp Bond Yield, DRI Series RMMBCAAANS
         Velocity is ratio of current dollar GNP to Ml.
         GNP in Current Dollars
         1915—1928: Hist Stat Series F—i
          1929—1986: DRI Series GNP
         Ml
         1915—1958: Friedman—Schwartz series spliced by author to series for
                     1959—1986.
         1959—1986: DRI Series MNY1

Figure 5: Multilaterial Real Value of the Dollar, see Feldstein-Bacchetta paper
          in bibliography. Data updated by Bacchetta May 1987.
                                         43            W. Poole, June, 1987

                                  ENDNOTES
 *. Professor of Economics, Brown University. Special thanks go to Kerry
 Reinertsen and Louis Chan for research assistance and to Data Resources, Inc.
 for providing data.
  1. Each observation of the real rate in this figure is the annual average
 short—term interest rate for year t less the percentage change in the annual
 average of the Consumer Price Index from year t to year t+1. The figure
 shows the real rate calculated from the commercial paper rate for the entire
 period and from the one—year U.S. Treasury yield for 1954—85. Ideally, to
 match the inflation rate measured by annual averages of the CPI the interest
 rate should be the yield on a one—year security, but the only series readily
 available back to 1890 is the commercial paper rate. (See Appendix A for
 details on the data used.) The fact that there is so little daylight between
 the two real rate series for 1954—86 suggests that it is unlikely that the basic
 message of Figure 2 for 1890—1953 is much affected by using the commercial
 paper rate.
 2. See the influential paper by Goldfeld (1973).
3. My argument was spelled out in Poole (1970). The same point is made
much more forcefully and carefully by Cooley and LeRoy (1981). They argue
that, "[tihe data are such that a modestly energetic specification search will
give back almost whatever interest elasticity one wishes to extract...'t (p. 836).
I accept this argument if the empirical analysis is confined to U.S. data for
the postwar period. However, the argument surely goes too far if the data
universe includes, for example, a number of hyperinflatjon cases or a cross
section of countries with widely differing inflation rates.
4. The first quarter for which quarterly GNP data are available is 19471. The
correlation matrix for 1953.1 —1980.4 is essentially identical to Table 1.

5. Fisher (1963), pp. 79—88. The reference is to the 1963 reprint of the
second revised edition (1922) of this book.
6. Friedman and Schwartz (1963), pp. 639-45. Friedman and Schwartz
concentrated on M2 velocity whereas in this paper I am confining my attention
to Ml velocity. Although these two velocities have different levels and
different secular trends, changes in their growth rates from one subperiod to
another are quite similar.
7. More precisely, the short rate measures the true opportunity cost with
greater error than does the long rate. Goodfriend (1985) provides an
analytical argument that estimated lagged adjustment terms in the standard
money demand function are a spurious result of measurement error and that
measurement error leads to biased estimates of elasticities. He does not,
however, provide elasticity estimates corrected for the problems he notes.
8. The standard deviations of the log levels of the commercial paper rate and
AAA bond rate for 1915—86 are 0.46 and 0.88, respectively.
                                       44            W. Poole, June, 1987

9. This paragraph should not be read as claiming that real assets are
irrelevant to money demand. There is ample evidence that agents flee from
both money and fixed income assets into goods during periods of
hyperinflation. During moderate inflations, as in the United States in the
1970s, agents may economize on money by holding inventories of goods or
accelerating purchases of consumer durables.
10. Laidler (1985) provides a short discussion of the buffer stock argument and
a bibliography of relevant papers.
11. I explored these ideas in a formal but incomplete fashion in Poole (1982).
12. Bordo and Jonung (1986) provide cross section evidence for the hypothesis
that the income elasticity of demand for real money balances is above unity
for relatively low per capita income countries and below unity for relatively
high per capita income countries. However, these authors do not report
numerical estimates of income elasticities.
13. See Fama and Gibbons (1982) and the references in their paper.
14. For real rate estimates and charts see Huizinga and Mishkin (1986) and the
discussion of the Huizinga—Mishkin paper by Schwert (1986).
15. For a summary of these positions see Campbell and Clarida (1987), 30—37.
This paper also contains a bibliography of many of the contributions to this debate.
16. See Wilcox (1983) for an analysis of the effects of supply shocks on the
real rate of interest and a bibliography of relevant papers on supply shocks.
17. For evidence on the behavior of the real exchange rate under fixed and
floating rate regimes see Mussa (1986) and papers referenced by Mussa.
18. Sheehan (1985) provides a survey of findings and a bibliography. See also
the paper by Deaves, Melino, and Pesando (1987).
19. See Roley (1982) p.9 and Roley (1983) p.10.
20. Another interesting piece of evidence on the market's response to
monetary policy is in a recent paper by Manikiw, Miron, and Well (1987).
These authors examined the effect of the opening of the Federal Reserve
System in November 1914 on the time series characteristics of interest rates
and the term structure of rates. They conclude that the market responded
quickly and in the direction expected from a priori knowledge about how the
Fed would operate.

21. From market commentary and the behavior of nominal interest rates, it
appears that inflation expectations did not begin to rise again until early 1987.
22. See Poole (1986) for a more complete account.
                                      45           W. Poole, June, 1987

23. Using annual average data for the Consumer Price Index, the inflation rate
was —1.3 percent in 1928 and —10.3 percent in 1932, or a deceleration of 9.0
percentage points. In 1980 the inflation rate was 13.5 percent and in 1985 the
rate was 3.6 percent, or a deceleration of 9.9 percentage points. Under the
gradualism scenario the deceleration of inflation would have been greater.
Different price indexes would yield somewhat different numbers but would not
alter the conclusion.
