                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        FIRING COSTS, MISALLOCATION, AND AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY

                                    José-María Da-Rocha
                                   Marina Mendes Tavares
                                      Diego Restuccia

                                     Working Paper 23008
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23008


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




For helpful comments we thank participants at the Macroeconomics and Business CYCLE
Conference in Santa Barbara and Universidade de Vigo. All remaining errors are our own.
Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the Canada Research Chairs
program and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Mendes Tavares
gratefully acknowledges the financial support of DIFD. Da Rocha gratefully acknowledges the
financial support of Xunta de Galicia (ref. GRC2015/014). The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by José-María Da-Rocha, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firing Costs, Misallocation, and Aggregate Productivity
José-María Da-Rocha, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 23008
December 2016
JEL No. E1,E6,O1,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

We assess the quantitative impact of firing costs on aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) in a
dynamic general-equilibrium framework where the distribution of establishment-level
productivity is not invariant to the policy. Firing costs not only generate static factor
misallocation, but also a worsening of the productivity distribution contributing to large aggregate
TFP losses. Firing costs equivalent to 5 year's wages imply a drop in TFP of more than 20
percent. Factor misallocation accounts for 20 percent of the productivity loss, a relatively small
drop in TFP, whereas the remaining 80 percent arises from the endogenous change in the
productivity distribution.

José-María Da-Rocha                              Diego Restuccia
ITAM                                             Department of Economics
Av. Camino Santa Teresa 930 C.P.                 University of Toronto
10700 Mexico, D.F                                150 St. George Street
jmrocha@uvigo.es                                 Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
                                                 CANADA
Marina Mendes Tavares                            and NBER
Av. Camino Santa Teresa # 930                    diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
Col. Héroes de Padierna
C.P. 10700 México, D.F.
marinamendestavares@gmail.com
1       Introduction

A fundamental issue in economic growth and development is identifying the policies and
institutions that account for the large differences in total factor productivity (TFP) and
output per capita across countries. A recent literature has emphasized factor misallocation
across heterogeneous production units for aggregate TFP differences.1 While the empirical
evidence of factor misallocation across countries is overwhelming, the connection with the
specific policies and institutions that create the bulk of misallocation remain elusive.2 In this
paper, we assess the quantitative impact of a specific policy—firing costs—on aggregate TFP
in a framework where the distribution of establishment-level productivity is not invariant
to the policy. We focus on firing costs because unlike other specific policies, firing costs are
easily measurable in the data, show substantial variation across countries, and have been
studied extensively in the misallocation literature. Whereas the literature has attributed a
relatively small quantitative impact of firing costs on aggregate productivity (e.g., Hopen-
hayn and Rogerson 1993 and Hopenhayn 2014), we show that empirically-plausible measures
of firing costs generate larger aggregate TFP loses arising from changes in the distribution
of establishment productivity.

We consider an otherwise standard model of producer heterogeneity building on the seminal
works of Hopenhayn (1992) and Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993). The model is set up in
continuous time for analytical tractability. Establishments are heterogeneous in their TFP
that follows a stochastic process over time. Crucially, and differently from the related pre-
vious literature, policies that distort the size of establishments such as firing costs, have an
effect on the evolution of productivity for individual establishments and, hence, on the sta-
    1
    See Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), and Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
    2
    Some of the specific policies and institutions studied in accounting for factor misallocation and aggregate
TFP losses include firing costs (Hopenhayn and Rogerson, 1993), size-dependent policies (Guner et al., 2008),
financial frictions (Buera et al. 2011, Midrigan and Xu 2014, and Moll 2014), among many others. See
discussions of the literature in Restuccia and Rogerson (2013), Restuccia (2013), Hopenhayn (2014), and
Restuccia and Rogerson (2016).




                                                      2
tionary distribution of productivity across establishments and aggregate TFP. A well-known
property of firing costs in the context of dynamic models of producer heterogeneity is that
the policy generates an inaction zone in employment decisions whereby small but successful
establishments remain small and large but relatively less successful establishments remain
large. This type of inaction in employment decisions to changes in productivity generates
factor misallocation as the policy weakens the connection between the allocation of employ-
ment and productivity across establishments. In addition, in our framework we show that
this policy also alters the distribution of productivity across establishments contributing
to a substantial reduction in aggregate productivity (beyond static factor misallocation).
Our model also differs from the literature on firing costs in that rather than a continuous
choice of employment, establishments choose among a finite discrete set of employment lev-
els. This feature together with production heterogeneity imply dispersion in the value of
marginal products even in an undistorted economy with no firing costs. This dispersion can
be interpreted as arising from “real” adjustment costs and is not treated as misallocation
in our analysis.3 Importantly, firing costs create misallocation by inducing inaction in em-
ployment decisions but interact with discrete employment levels by reducing the adjustment
costs present in the undistorted economy. As a result, to the extent that in real economies
there are frictions in the adjustment of employment among establishments that are not due
to policies, our model with this feature provides a more accurate assessment—or represent
a more conservative estimate—of the firing cost policy than in a setting with continuous
employment choices.

We calibrate a benchmark economy with no firing costs to micro and macro data for the
United States and consider quantitative experiments that increase the size of firing costs—
the cost for an individual establishment to reduce employment—with a range from 6 months’
wages to 5 year’s wages. Relative to the benchmark economy with no firing costs, aggregate
   3
    In the analysis that follows our results on output and productivity are reported relative to a benchmark
economy with no firing costs.



                                                     3
TFP in the economy with a firing cost of 6 months’ wages is 0.96 and in the economy with 5
year’s wages is 0.79. These are very large TFP losses when compared to the previous liter-
ature in the context of models with exogenous distributions of establishment productivity.4
Interestingly, when we decompose the total effect of firing costs on aggregate TFP between
static factor misallocation and dynamic misallocation (as changes in the productivity distri-
bution of establishments), we find that dynamic misallocation accounts for around 80 percent
of the total effect. This implies that the quantitative effect of static factor misallocation is
of similar magnitude than that in the existing literature. For example, in a closely related
framework to ours in Hopenhayn (2014) with no entry/exit but instead with continuous em-
ployment choices, the TFP loss due to factor misallocation of a firing cost policy equivalent
to 5 year’s wages is 7.5 percent, whereas the TFP loss of factor misallocation of the same
policy in our model with discrete employment levels is 4.8 percent. But the policy translates
into a 20.7 percent TFP loss in our framework when accounting for the endogenous change
in the distribution of productivity.

A desirable property of our framework is that we are able to provide direct analytical re-
sults on the main variables of interest. Following the seminal work of Dixit (1989) in the
benchmark economy with no firing costs there is only one threshold productivity for which
large establishments become small and small establishments become large, in economies with
firing costs there is an inaction zone, a range of productivity for which establishments re-
main either large or small. Additionally, the inaction zone becomes larger with increases
in firing costs and general equilibrium effects shift the inaction zone towards lower levels
of productivity. This property of establishment decisions entails misallocation: large but
less productive establishments remain large and small but more productive establishments
remain small. As a result, relative to an undistorted economy, more employment is allocated
in less productive establishments and less employment in more productive establishments
  4
   See, for instance, Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993), Moscoso-Boedo and Mukoyama (2012), and Hopen-
hayn (2014). See also the partial equilibrium analysis in Bentolila and Bertola (1990).



                                                4
with firing costs.

Furthermore, we fully characterize the endogenous productivity distribution of establish-
ments and show how changes in firing costs impact the distribution by making the dis-
tribution flatter and reducing its average productivity. We solve the model using Laplace
transforms techniques, which allows us to fully characterize how changes in firing costs im-
pact the rate at which establishments adjust their size by firing or hiring workers. This
characterization allows us to connect the model with well-known moments in the data such
as growth rate of firms and the Gini coefficient of the establishment-size distribution. In the
model, higher firing costs reduce the average productivity of the economy.

As discussed earlier, our paper relates closely to the literature assessing the aggregate pro-
ductivity losses of firing costs such as Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993), Moscoso-Boedo and
Mukoyama (2012), and Hopenhayn (2014). A critical distinction between our framework
and these previous works is that firing costs affect the distribution of productivity which
greatly contribute to amplify the negative impact of the policy on aggregate productivity.5
More broadly, our paper shares with a growing literature emphasizing the dynamic effects
of distortionary policies.6 We differ from this literature in quantifying the effect of a specific
measurable policy. A key property of the distortionary effects of firing costs is its connection
with the inaction zone in employment decisions. In this respect, firing costs share with many
other policies and institutions that tend to produce inaction zones.7 For example, in our
framework, there is an equivalence between firing and hiring costs. We use this equivalence
to relate our work to previous analysis of size-dependent policies such as the work by Guner
et al. (2008) and more recently the empirical analysis in Gourio and Roys (2014) and Gar-
icano et al. (2013) using micro data from France. Our analysis reveals the importance of
   5
      Related to our work is also the analysis in Mukoyama and Osotimehin (2016), studying the effects of
firing costs in a model of endogenous growth.
    6
      See for instance Hsieh and Klenow (2014), Da-Rocha et al. (2014), Guner et al. (2015), Bento and
Restuccia (2016), among many others.
    7
      See for instance a trade model of inaction (decision to export or not) in Impullitti et al. (2013).




                                                   5
considering the dynamic productivity effects of the policy for a more accurate quantitative
assessment of the aggregate impacts of these policies.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section and Section 3, we
describe the economic environment in detail and characterize its main properties. Section
4 calibrates a benchmark economy with no firing costs to data for the United States and
perform a series of quantitative experiments to asses the aggregate implications of firing
costs. We conclude in Section 5. Appendix A contains the formal proofs of all the lemmas
in the paper.




2     Model

Our framework builds from the work of Hopenhayn (1992), Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993),
and Dixit (1989). Establishments hire labor in a competitive market and their productivity
follows a stochastic process. Time is continuous and the horizon is infinite. We focus on
a stationary equilibrium of this model and study the impact of firing costs on aggregate
measures of TFP and output.



2.1    General description

The unit of production in the economy is the establishment. Establishments are heteroge-
neous in their productivity z. They are described by a production function f (z, n) that uses
labor to produce output. The function f is assumed to exhibit decreasing returns to scale
in labor and to satisfy the usual Inada conditions. The production function is given by:


                                f (z, n) = znα ,   α ∈ (0, 1).




                                              6
We assume for simplicity that establishments can only hire two different amounts of labor
n1 and n2 , where n2 is larger than n1 . This assumption implies that there will be dispersion
in marginal products across establishments even when the economy features no firing costs.
We will discuss in our results that this assumption of discrete employment levels makes the
quantitative implications of firing costs on output and productivity conservative relative to
a setting with continuous employment.

Establishment’s productivity z follows a Geometric Brownian motion, that depends on the
establishment size, the Geometric Brownian motions are given by:


                     dz = µ1 zdt + σzdwz            and     dz = µ2 zdt + σzdwz ,


where the drift of the Brownian motion µi depends on the establishment’s size and the
standard deviation σ is the same for both sizes. There is a mass one of infinitely-lived
households with preferences over consumption goods and labor supply described by the
utility function,
                                  Z        ∞
                                               e−ρt [u(c) − v(n)] dt,
                                       0

where c is consumption, n is labor supply, and ρ is the discount rate. Households own equal
shares of the establishments. We next introduce firing costs that distort the decision of
establishments to adjust their size.



2.2    Policy distortions

In a distorted economy, we assume that establishments have to pay a firing cost τ in units of
labor per worker in order to reduce employment from large n2 to small n1 . The firing costs
policy creates inertia in employment decisions because establishments delay their decisions
of firing and hiring workers and consequently adjusting their employment size. We assume
that the revenue from firing costs paid by establishments is redistributed to households in

                                                      7
the form of a lump-sum transfer T .



2.3     Incumbents’ problem

Incumbents maximize the present value of profits. At each point in time, establishments
observe their current TFP shock z and their employment size ni , where i ∈ {1, 2}, and
decide to keep their current size or to adjust by hiring or firing workers. This is a standard
optimal switching problem described by Dixit (1989). The problem is characterized by the
value function at the current state and by the value matching condition at the switching
points. We first describe the dynamic problem of a small incumbent n1 and then we describe
the dynamic problem of a large incumbent n2 .

Small establishments observe their productivity and choose to keep their current size n1 or
to hire workers and become large n2 . They receive revenue from selling output and pay a
wage bill at every point in time. Formally, the dynamic problem of a small establishment is
defined by:

                                                                     dV1 (z)
                                    ρV1 (z)   =    znα1 − wn1 + Ez           ,              (1)
                                                                       dt
                                              s.t. dz = µ1 zdt + σzdwz ,


and by the value matching condition at the switching point z1 where small establishments
hire workers and become larger, V1 (z1 ) = V2 (z1 ), and the smooth pasting condition at the
switching, V10 (z1 ) = V20 (z1 ).

Large establishments observe their current productivity z and choose to keep their current
size n2 or to fire workers and become small n1 , paying firing costs τ w(n2 − n1 ). Large estab-
lishments receive revenue from selling output and pay a wage bill. Formally, the dynamic




                                                       8
problem of a large establishment is defined by:

                                                                                 dV2 (z)
                                         ρV2 (z)     =        znα2 − wn2 + Ez            ,                        (2)
                                                                                   dt
                                                    s.t. dz = µ2 zdt + σzdwz ,


and by the value matching condition at the switching point z2 , where large establishments are
indifferent between paying the firing costs τ and become small or being large, V1 (z2 )−τ w(n2 −
n1 ) = V2 (z2 ), and the smooth pasting condition at the switching point, V10 (z2 ) = V20 (z2 ). In
Lemma 1 we characterize the value function of small V1 (z) and large V2 (z) establishments
and the two policy functions {z1 , z2 }.

Lemma 1. Given a wage rate w, interest rates ρ, and firing costs τ , the value function of
small establishments V1 (z) and the value function of large establishments V2 (z) that solve the
small establishment’s problem (1) and the large establishment’s problem (2) are given by

                                                           ni α    wni
                                            Vi (z) =            z−     + Bi z βi ,
                                                         ρ − µi     ρ

                                     q
                µi       1                µi       1 2       2ρ
                                                    
where βi = −    σ2
                     −   2
                                 ±        σ2
                                               −   2
                                                         +   σ2
                                                                  for i ∈ {1, 2}, and the constants {B1 , B2 } and the
policy functions {z1 , z2 } solve the two value matching conditions and the two smooth pasting
conditions together.


Proof See Appendix A.1.

In order to fully characterize the impact of firing costs on the optimal decision of establish-
ments, we choose the positive root β1 for small establishments and the negative root β2 for
large establishments. The positive root for small establishment has the desirable property
that the option value of becoming larger increases when the productivity increases, while the
negative root for large establishment has the desirable property that the option of becoming
smaller decreases when the productivity increases. In the next Lemma 2, we show that B1


                                                                    9
and B2 are positive.

Lemma 2. If β1 is the positive root and β2 is the negative root, then B1 and B2 are positive.


Proof See Appendix A.2.

The value functions of large and small establishments have an intuitive interpretation, where
the first two terms are the present value of being a small or a large establishment when
switching is not allowed and the the last term is the present value of the switching option.
Changes in the firing costs have two effects on the incumbents’ problem. It has a direct
effect on the present value of being large and small through the constants B1 and B2 and a
general equilibrium effect through changes in wages. In the next Lemma 3 we characterize
these two effects.

Lemma 3. Given a wage rate w, interest rates ρ, and firing costs τ .
1) The inaction rate, θ = z2 /z1 , is the solution of the following non-linear equation:

                                             (Ω1 (θ) + 1)          1
                                 ϕ(θ) =            β     β
                                                              =        ,                   (3)
                                           (Ω1 (θ)θ 1 + θ 2 )   1 − ρτ

                 (1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)
where Ω1 (θ) =   (1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)
                                                  .
2) The policy functions z1 and z2 are given by:


                                      z1 = κΩ2 (θ)w and z2 = θz1 ,                         (4)


                                    β1 β2 (θβ2 −β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)
where Ω2 (θ) =   ((1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)+(1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1))
                                                                                     .


Proof See Appendix A.3.

Lemma 3 is key to understand the model dynamics. In the first part of Lemma 3, we
characterize the inaction rate θ, which is a function of the productivity process, summarized
by β1 and β2 , the interest rates ρ, and firing costs τ . Overall, an increase in firing costs

                                                         10
generates a decrease in the inaction rate. In an economy without firing costs, the inaction
rate is equal to one and establishments do not delay their decision of firing and hiring workers.
In this case, there is a unique switching point and no inaction zone.

An important result from Lemma 3 is that the inaction rate is independent of prices, but
the policy functions are linear in prices. A reduction in the wage rate moves the policy
functions to the left, reducing the average productivity in the economy. The final impact of
an increase in firing costs on the inaction zone depends on the combination of the impact
on the inaction rate, summarized by θ, and on the general equilibrium impact on the wage
rate w.

In Figure 1, we illustrate these two mechanisms. In the left panel, we illustrate how a
decrease in the inaction rate, increases the inaction zone measured by the area between z1
and z2 . In the right panel, we illustrate how an increase in firing costs τ reduces the inaction
rate θ∗ .


     n                                         ϕ
            6                                       6


     n2                                                   ϕ(θ)
                                 6


                        1 − θ∗
                                                                                       1
     n1            ?                                                                 1−ρτ


                                        -                                        -
                                                                   ∗
                   z2            z1       z                    θ                   θ

                        Figure 1: Inaction Zone and Inaction Zone Rate



The results in Lemma 3 are not restricted to firing costs. Instead, these results can be
easily extended to the case where the costs are on hiring workers instead of firing and this
is relevant empirically as many labor market policies generate costs associated with hiring


                                               11
workers above a certain threshold size. We establish an equivalence between firing costs and
hiring costs. The equivalence allows us to relate our results to the broad literature on size-
dependent policies in Guner et al. (2008) and Gourio and Roys (2014).8 We can rewrite the
small and large establishment’s problem where establishments face hiring costs τh instead of
firing costs τ . The new value-matching conditions are:


                                 V1 (z1 ) = V2 (z1 ) − τh w(n2 − n1 ),

                                 V1 (z2 ) = V2 (z2 ),


and the new smooth pasting conditions are the same in both the firing costs and hiring costs
problem. In Lemma 4 we show that solving the model with hiring costs is equivalent to
solving the model with firing costs.

Lemma 4. Given hiring costs τh , there is firing costs τ that generates the same inaction
zone rate, given by:

                                            1
                                                = 1 + ρτh ,
                                         1 − ρτ

where ρ is the interest rate.


Proof See Appendix A.4.

Lemma 4 demonstrates that there is a simple relationship between firing costs τ and hiring
costs τh . Given firing costs τ , we can find hiring costs τh that generates the same inaction
zone, and consequently the same equilibrium in both economies. In the next section, we
characterize the stationary distribution.
   8
    Gourio and Roys (2014) study a size-dependent regulation in the form of firing costs in France that only
apply to establishments with 50 or more employees.




                                                    12
2.4     Stationary distribution

We first characterize the stationary distribution in a distorted economy with firing costs and
then we solve for the stationary distribution of the undistorted economy.



2.4.1    Distorted economy


We characterize the solution of the stationary distribution of large establishments, leaving
the solution of the stationary distribution of small establishments to the Appendix A.5. In
order to solve for the stationary distribution, it is easier to work in the logarithm of the
establishment productivity z instead of levels. Let x be the logarithm of an establishment
with productivity z and size i relative to the switching point zi , that is x = log(z/zi ). The
variable x is equal to zero at the switching point and has domain in [0, +∞).

Let m2 (x, t) denote the number density function of large establishments with productivity
x at time t. At time t, the total number of large establishment is equal to the integral from
                                                                Z +∞
zero to plus infinity of the number density function, M2 (t) =        m2 (x, t)dx. The large
                                                                         0
establishments’ productivity process can be characterized by a modified Kolmogorov-Fokker-
Planck equation of the form:

                     ∂m2 (x, t)        ∂m2 (x, t) σ 2 ∂ 2 m2 (x, t)
                                = −µ̂2           +                  + B2 (x, t),                   (5)
                       ∂t                ∂x        2       ∂x2

                                         σ2
where the drift µ̂i is equal to µi −     2
                                              and the function B2 (x, t) is the mass of new large
establishments that arrive with productivity x at time t.9 The modified Kolmogorov-Fokker-
Planck equation (5) is supplemented by two boundary conditions:

                                                             ∂m2 (x, t)
                        lim m2 (x, t) = 0       and       lim           = 0.
                       x→+∞                             x→+∞   ∂x
  9
    We can rewrite the Geometric Brownian motion of large and small establishments as a Brownian motion
in the logarithm of the establishment productivity zi as dxi = µ̂i dt + σdwz .



                                                  13
The two boundary conditions guarantee that there is no establishments’ mass at the upper
limit and that the function is smooth at the upper limit. We are interested in the stationary
distribution of the number density function and consequently we are looking for a solution
that is separable in time, that is m2 (x, t) = M2 (t)f2 (x) and B2 (x, t) = M2 (t)b2 (x); where
f2 (·) is the large establishments’ probability density function and b2 (x) is a Dirac delta
function that describes the arrival of new establishments. After making this restriction, we
can rewrite Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation (5) as:

                             M20 (t)                        σ2
                                     f2 (x) = −µ̂2 f20 (x) + f200 (x) + b2 (x),                          (6)
                             M2 (t)                         2

        M20 (t)
where   M2 (t)
                  is the growth rate of establishments over time denoted by η2 and two boundary
conditions:10


                                lim f2 (x) = 0 and              lim f20 (x) = 0.                         (7)
                               x→+∞                         x→+∞



These two conditions are supplemented by the additional conditions that guarantee that
f2 (·) is a pdf:

                                                     Z     +∞
                                 f2 (x) ≥ 0 and                 f2 (x)dx = 1.                            (8)
                                                       0



In our model, arrival at the large establishment’s distribution occurs at the switching point
x1 = log(z1 /z2 ). In this point, small establishments choose to hire more workers and become
large. Mathematically, we can express the arrival using a Dirac delta function:
                                             
                                              +∞ if x = x1
                                             
                                δ(x − x1 ) =                                                             (9)
                                              0
                                                 if x 6= x1 ,
  10
     Note that we can rewrite the separation rate as M2 (t) = eη2 t M2 (0). When η2 is equal to zero the mass
of large establishments does not grow over time.




                                                     14
the function is equal to infinity at the point in which new establishments enter x1 and zero
otherwise. Let b̂2 be the arrival rate at point x, the function b2 (x) can be described as:


                                      b2 (x) = b̂2 δ(x − x1 ).                                   (10)


The Dirac delta function has two desirable properties: First, the integral over the domain is
                       Z ∞
the arrival rate b̂2 ,     b̂2 δ(x − x1 )dx = b̂2 and second, the integral weighted by the density
                        0                                           Z ∞
function is the mass of establishments at the switching point           δ(x − x1 )f2 (x)dx = f2 (x1 ).
                                                                        0

The constraints in equations (7) to (10) restrict the separation rate η2 , after integrating the
Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation (6), applying the boundary conditions, and using the
Dirac delta function’s properties, we find that growth rate of large establishments is given
by:
                                                    σ2 0
                                  η2 = −µ̂2 f2 (0) + f2 (0) + b̂2 .                              (11)
                                                    2

The expression for η2 has a very intuitive interpretation, it states that the growth rate of
the number (mass) of large establishments η2 is equal to the rate at which the number of
small establishments decide to hire workers and become large b̂2 , minus the rate at which
                                                                                2
large establishments decide to fire workers and become small, µ̂2 f2 (0) − σ2 f20 (0). As a result,
the large establishments’ mass grows when the hiring rate is larger than the firing rate, and
it is constant when both are equal. Since we are solving for the stationary equilibrium, we
restrict the solution to an economy with a constant mass of establishments of each size, that
is η2 equal to zero. We can now solve for the stationary distribution f2 (·).

After substituting η2 equal to zero into the Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation (6), we find
the following second order differential equation:

                                               σ 2 00
                             − µ̂2 f20 (x) +      f (x) + b̂2 δ(x − x1 ) = 0,                    (12)
                                               2 2




                                                     15
which supplemented by the boundary conditions and by f2 (·) being a pdf completely char-
acterize the problem. The presence of the Dirac delta functions in (12) indicates that we
cannot expect classical solutions to the problem in C 2 [0, +∞). We thus look for solutions
f2 (x) such that f2 (x) ∈ C 2 [0, +∞) ∪ L1 [0, ∞) and f2 (x) has continuous second derivatives
for all x ∈ [0, +∞) except perhaps at x = x1 .

We solve the second-order differential equation using Laplace transforms.11 In order to the
probability density function be bounded we need to impose a boundary condition at 0. This
boundary condition guarantees that the mass of establishments that are indifferent between
switching or not is equal to zero, f2 (0) = 0. In Lemma 5 we characterize the small and large
establishments’ stationary distributions.12

Lemma 5. Let x1 = log(z1 /z2 ) be the switching point, where small establishments that be-
come large enter the large establishment distribution, and let x2 = log(z2 /z1 ) be the switching
point, where large establishments that become small enter the small establishment distribu-
tion. The stationary distribution of small establishments f1 (·) and the stationary distribution
  11
       Laplace transforms are given by

                                      L [f 0 (x)] = sL [f (x)] − f (0),
                                      L [f 00 (x)] = s2 L [f (x)] − sf (0) − f 0 (0),
                                  L [δ(x − x∗ )] = e−sx∗

After applying Laplace transforms to equation (12), we find the following Laplace transforms equation:

                            (s2 − γ1 s)Y (s) = f20 (0) + (s − γ1 )f2 (0) − γ2 e−sx1 .

After applying the Laplace inverse and some algebraic manipulation, we find the following solution to the
boundary value problem:

                                  f20 (0) γ1 x           H(x1 ) h γ1 (x−x1 )    i
                       f2 (x) =          (e    − 1) − γ2         e           − 1 + f2 (0),
                                    γ1                    γ1

where H(x1 ) is Heaviside step function given by:
                                              
                                                  0        if   x ≤ x1 ,
                                     H(x1 ) =
                                                  1        if   x > x1 .

  12
    The characterization of the stationary distribution of small establishments follows the same methodology
and we leave it to the Appendix A.5.




                                                          16
of large establishments f2 (·) are given by:
                                
                                    −1 α1 (x−x2 )
                                       (e               − eα1 x ) ∀x ∈ (−∞, x2 ]
                                
                                
                                
                                   x2
                                
                    f1 (x) =
                                
                                
                                
                                    −1
                                       (1   − e α1 x )           ∀x ∈ (x2 , 0)
                                
                                
                                    x2



and
                                
                                    1
                                       (1   − eγ1 x )           ∀x ∈ [0, x1 )
                                
                                
                                
                                   x1
                                
                     f2 (x) =
                                
                                
                                
                                    1
                                       (eγ1 (x−x1 )   − eγ1 x ) ∀x ∈ (x1 , +∞)
                                
                                
                                    x1



             2µ̂2         2µ̂1
where γ1 =     2
                  and α1 = 2 .
             σ             σ

Proof See Appendix A.6.

In Figure 2 we illustrate the stationary distribution of small and large establishments, and
the stationary equilibrium dynamics. A small establishment hire workers at x equal to zero,
at this point the establishment leaves the small establishments’ distribution and enter the
large establishments’ distribution at point x2 . This establishment will stay at the large
establishments’ distribution until its productivity reaches the point x equal to zero, at this
point this establishment fires workers, becomes small again, and a new cycle starts. The
rectangular area between the switching points and zero is the inaction zone caused by the
firing costs policy, in the absent of firing costs large and small establishments switch at the
same point and there is no inaction zone. In the next section, we examine the stationary
distribution of an undistorted economy.




                                                         17
                                                             f2




                                                        x2 = log(z1 /z2 )        ∞



                                      f1


         −∞                                    x1 = log(z2 /z1 )


                        Figure 2: Stationary Distribution Dynamics



2.4.2   Undistorted economy


We characterize the stationary distribution of the undistorted economy following the same
methodology as in the distorted economy. In the undistorted economy, there is an unique
switching point z∗ . We solve the economy again in logs and after the renormalization, the
switching point is equal to zero, x∗ = log(z∗ /z∗ ) = 0. The stationary distribution of large
establishments in the undistorted economy is the solution of a modified Kolmogorov-Fokker-
Planck equation that after following the same steps as in the distorted economy we obtain
the following second-order differential equation:

                                               σ 2 00
                             − µ̂2 f20 (x) +      f (x) + b̂2 δ(x) = 0,                 (13)
                                               2 2

subject to the respective boundary conditions and f2 (·) being a pdf. The main difference
between the distorted and the undistorted economy is that in the undistorted economy there
is no inaction zone and establishments hire and fire workers in the same point x∗ . We




                                                  18
solve the boundary-value problem using Laplace transforms.13 After applying the Laplace
transforms, we find that the large establishments’ boundary conditions are satisfied only
when µ̂2 is negative, and following the same methodology to small establishments, we find
that the small establishments’ boundary conditions are satisfied only when µ̂1 is positive.
These two equilibrium conditions imply that small establishments grow at a faster rate than
large establishments and that the distribution is stationary. In Lemma 6 we formalize this
result.

Lemma 6. If γ1 is negative and α1 is positive, the stationary distribution of small establish-
ments f1 (·) and the stationary distribution of large establishments f2 (·) are given by:


                                         f1 (x) = α1 eα1 x ,        x ≤ 0,

                                         f2 (x) = −γ1 eγ1 x ,            x ≥ 0,


              2µ̂2              2µ̂1
where γ1 =    σ2
                     and α1 =   σ2
                                     .


Proof See Appendix A.7.
In the next section, we discuss the necessary equilibrium conditions to find a stationary
equilibrium.
  13
     After applying Laplace transforms on the large establishments’ second order differential equation (13)
we obtain the following differential equation:

                           (s2 − γ1 s)Y2 (s)   =   (f20 (0) − γ1 f2 (0) − γ2 ) + sf2 (0),

because the growth rate of large establishments is zero in equilibrium, the second term between parenthesis
must be zero, leading to the following solution to the stationary distribution of large establishments:

                                                            f2 (0)
                                                Y2 (s) =             ,
                                                           (s − γ1 )

and after solving for the Laplace inverse we obtain the following pdf f2 (x) = f2 (0)eγ1 x . We solve for the
constants f2 (0) to guarantee that the integral over the domain is equal to one.




                                                       19
2.5    Flow condition

Our focus is on the stationary equilibrium where the distribution of small establishments
f1 (·) and large establishments f2 (·) are constant, and the mass of small M1 and large estab-
lishments M2 are also constant. In order to guarantee that in the stationary equilibrium,
the mass of small and the mass of large establishments are constant, it is necessary that the
mass of establishments that leaves an establishment’s size distribution is the same as the
mass of establishments that enter on the other distribution.

The mass of establishments that leaves a distribution is equal to the total mass of establish-
ments multiplied the rate at which establishments reach the switching points, normalized to
zero, and the mass of establishments that arrives is equal to the born rate multiplied by the
mass. This condition gives rise to the following two equilibrium conditions one to small and
another one to large establishments:

                                           σ2 0
                                                 
                           M1 −µ̂1 f1 (0) + f1 (0)  = −M2 b̂2 ,                          (14)
                                           2
                                           σ2 0
                                                 
                          −M2 −µ̂2 f2 (0) + f2 (0)  = M1 b̂1 .                           (15)
                                           2

These two conditions guarantee that the total of mass of establishment is constant in the
stationary equilibrium.



2.6    Household’s problem

Households solve a static consumption-leisure maximization problem:


                                   max [u(c) − v(n)] ,
                                    c,n




                                             20
subject to the budget constraint c = wn + Π + T , where the right-hand side of the budget
constraint is given by the wage income wn, the lump-sum transfer given by the government
T , and the total profits of operating establishments Π. Now, we are ready to define the
equilibrium.



2.7    Equilibrium definition

Definition The stationary equilibrium for this economy is an stationary distribution for
small and large establishments {f1 (·), f2 (·)}, a value function for small and large establish-
ments {V1 (·), V2 (·)}, a mass of small and large establishments {M1 , M2 }, a policy function for
small and large establishments {z1 , z2 }, prices {w, ρ}, profits Π, transfer T , and household
allocations {c, n}, such that:


   i) Given prices and profits, the allocations {c, n} solve the household’s problem.

  ii) Given prices, incumbents’ policy functions {z1 , z2 } and value functions {V1 (·), V2 (·)}
      solve the incumbents’ problem.

 iii) The stationary distributions {f1 (·), f2 (·)} solve the Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equa-
      tions and determine aggregate profits.

 iv) Labor market clears.

  v) The flow conditions are satisfied.

 vi) The government budget constraint is satisfied, T = τ (n2 − n1 )w.

 vii) Mass condition M = M1 + M2 .


Conditions (i) and (ii) are standard. Condition (iii) is the key condition to find the station-
ary distribution. Condition (iv) is the labor market clearing and condition (v) guarantees


                                               21
that the total mass of establishments is constant. Last, condition (vi) guarantees that the
government budget constraint is satisfied and condition (vii) that the mass of establishments
clears. In the next section, we characterize the stationary equilibrium.




3       Solution and characterization

The model is very tractable and we characterize key stationary equilibrium properties in more
detail. From the flow conditions, we characterize the mass of small and large establishments.
After substituting the stationary distributions from Lemma 5 into equations (14) and (15)
we obtain the following condition:

                                               µ̂1        µ̂2
                                          M1       = −M 2     .                          (16)
                                               σ2         σ2

From this condition we obtain the mass of establishments as a function of the stochastic
process. In the case where the drift of small establishments is larger in absolute value
than the drift of large establishments, the above expression implies that in the stationary
equilibrium the mass of small establishments is smaller than the mass of large establishments.
This guarantees that the flows of large and small establishments is constant in the stationary
equilibrium.

We normalize the total mass of establishments to be equal to one. Finding the share of small
and large establishments consist in solving equation (16). Solving the stationary equilibrium
is very simple now, for a given firing costs τ , from Lemma 3, we find the inaction rate θ.
Since profits are linear in wages, the equilibrium wage can be found by solving the labor
market clearing condition, and then after applying the second part of Lemma 3, we find the
policy functions and then the stationary distribution.14
 14
      We leave the formal solution of the stationary equilibrium to the Appendix A.8.




                                                     22
In Figure 3, we illustrate the impact of firing costs on the stationary distribution. Panel (a)
illustrates the impact of firing costs on the entire distribution, whereas panel (b) focus on
the distribution of large establishments.


                                                                           g2 (z)

                      α 1 e α1 x       −γ1 eγ1 x
                                                                                    g20 (z)
                                          1
             − x12 (1 − eα1 x )           x1
                                             (1   − eγ1 x )
− x12 (eα1 (x−x2 ) − eα1 x )               1
                                           x1
                                              (eγ1 (x−x1 )    − eγ1 x )
                                                                     x                                       z
                                   0                                      z2 z∗ z1 /z2
           (a) Distribution of (log) TFP                                   (b) Misallocation Decomposition


                                        Figure 3: Distribution Dynamics

Notes: The figure reports the stationary distribution of establishment TFP for undistorted and distorted
economies. Dashed lines represent the distribution of the undistorted benchmark economy and solid lines for
the distorted economy. Panel (a) reports the distributions of log establishment TFP for the entire economy.
Panel (b) reports the distribution of TFP levels of large establishments. The TFP level, z∗ is the switching
point in the benchmark economy, whereas (z2 , z1 ) is the inaction zone in the distorted economy.


The distribution of TFP in the benchmark economy denoted by f is a combination of the
TFP distribution of large and small establishments. An increase in firing costs makes the
distribution flatter because of inaction. In panel (b), the effect of firing costs is decomposed
into two effects: (i) static misallocation - caused by large establishments that wait longer to
switch reducing the average productivity of large establishments, this is represented by the
area between z2 and z∗ , and (ii) dynamic misallocation - caused by the impact firing costs
on the selection of establishments that enter the large establishments’ distribution. When
there are firing costs small establishments wait for a larger productivity to hire workers and
become large, as result, small establishments enter the large establishment’s distribution
with higher productivity. This effect is represented by the area after z1 /z2 between the
undistorted economy’s density function and the distorted economy’s density function.

                                                                23
Since an objective of the paper is to understand the impact of firing costs on aggregate TFP,
we now characterize aggregate TFP in the model as:


                                    TFP = (1 − s)E1 z + sE2 z,


which is the weighted average of the productivity of large and small establishments.15
Changes in firings costs impact aggregate TFP by altering the distribution of large and
small establishments.




4     Quantitative analysis

We consider a benchmark economy with no firing costs and calibrate this economy to data
for the United States. We then study the quantitative impact of firing costs.



4.1    Calibration

We calibrate a benchmark economy with no firing costs to data for the United States. Our
main objective is to study the quantitative impact of firing costs on the distribution of
establishments and on aggregate outcomes relative to the undistorted economy in the same
spirit of Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). We start by defining
briefly our benchmark undistorted economy.

To calibrate this economy, we start by selecting a set of parameters that are standard in the
literature, these parameters have either well-known targets which we match or the parameter
values have been well discussed in the literature. Our calibration follows closely Hopenhayn
and Rogerson (1993). A model period is set to 5 years. Preferences are given by the following
 15                                  M1 nα                                   −µ̂2
   The weight s is given by s =   M1 nα
                                         1
                                             α   and M1 is given by M1 =   µ̂2 −µ̂1 ,   where we assume that
                                      1 +M2 n2
M1 + M2 = 1.


                                                    24
utility function:

                                                c1−η
                              [u(c) − v(n)] =        − An.
                                                1−η

We select η to be equal to 0.5 and normalize A to be equal to 1. We select M1 equal to
0.5 and we focus on a symmetric stationary equilibrium where the share of large and small
establishments is the same. We normalize the size of small establishments n1 to be equal 1
and we choose the size of large establishments n2 to be equal to 124.2 to match the average
size of establishments equal to 61.7 from Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993).

Following the literature we assume decreasing returns in the establishment-level production
function and set α equal to 0.64, e.g. Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993). We select the
discount rate ρ to generate an annual real interest rate of 0.04. We set µ1 equal to 0.27 to
match a 5 percent growth in productivity from Hsieh and Klenow (2014).

We calibrate the remaining parameter σ 2 by solving the stationary equilibrium so that the
Gini coefficient of large establishment’s size distribution in the model, −1/(4µ̂2 /σ 2 + 1),
matches the corresponding target in the data which is equal to 0.89 from Luttmer (2010).
Table 1 summarizes the calibrated parameter values.


                       Table 1: Benchmark Calibration to U.S. Data


                      Parameter    Value                        Target
                      A                 1             Normalization
                      α              0.64                 Literature
                      ρ              0.04                 Literature
                      η              0.05                 Literature
                      n1             1.00             Normalization
                      n2           124.20         Average firm size
                      M1             0.50        Employment share
                      µ1             0.27 Productivity Growth Rate
                      σ              0.52            Gini coefficient



                                             25
4.2     Firing costs

We quantify the impact of firing costs on aggregate TFP and output by comparing these
statistics in each distorted economy relative to the benchmark undistorted economy.

We study the impact of different firing cost policies by changing τ and report statistics
relative to the benchmark economy. Firing cost τ has a direct interpretation with other
values in the model. Since a period in the model is equal to 5 years, a value of τ equal
to 0.1 corresponds to firing costs equivalent to 6 months’ wages, a value of τ equal to 0.2
corresponds to firing costs of 1 year’s wages, and a value of τ equal to 1 corresponds to firing
costs of 5 year’s wages. We report the results of these experiments in Table 2 for a number
of statistics such as aggregate output, aggregate TFP, and wages. All statistics are reported
relative to the benchmark economy in percent.


                          Table 2: Effects of Changes in Firing Costs τ


                                                              τ
                                                        0.1   0.2    1.0
                                 Relative Y     97.9 95.8 79.4
                                 Relative T F P 97.9 95.8 79.4
                                 Relative wages 98.9 97.7 89.1

Notes: Values for τ of 0.1, 0.2, and 1 represent firing costs equivalent to 6 months, 1 year, and 5 year’s
wages. Statistics reported relative to the benchmark economy in percent.


In Table 2 firing costs have a substantial negative impact on aggregate output and TFP.
An economy with 6 months’ wages of firing costs has aggregate output and TFP that is
97.9 percent of the benchmark economy. While an economy with 1 year’s wage of firing
costs has aggregate output and TFP that is 95.8 percent of the benchmark economy, and
an economy with 5 years of firing costs has aggregate output and TFP of 79.4 percent of
the undistorted economy. The negative impact on TFP is much larger than estimates from
the related literature. For example, Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) estimate an impact on

                                                   26
                          Table 3: Effects of Changes in Firing Costs τ


                                                               τ
                                                        0.1    0.2    1.0
                                Inaction rate θ      0.68     0.61   0.39
                                Decision rule z1     1.17     1.20   1.21
                                Decision rule z2     0.80     0.74   0.48

Notes: Values for τ of 0.1, 0.2, and 1 represent firing costs equivalent to 6 months, 1 year, and 5 years’
wages. Statistics reported relative to the benchmark economy in percent.


average productivity relative to a benchmark economy of 99.2 percent for 6 months’ wages
and 97.9 percent to 1 year’s wage and Hopenhayn (2014) estimates the TFP loss of a firing
cost of 5 year’s wages at 7.5 percent.

Overall, differences in output and TFP relative to the benchmark economy are increasing
in the amount of firing costs, more firing costs implies lower TFP and consequently output.
Firing costs distort the employment decisions of establishments. Table 3 contains all this
information relative to the benchmark economy. The first result from Table 3 is that increases
in firing costs decrease the inaction zone rate, increasing the inaction zone, measured by the
difference between z1 and z2 .

In Figure 4, we plot the distribution of establishment TFP of the undistorted economy, the
distribution of an economy with 6 months of firing costs, and an economy with a year of
firing costs. The increase in the inaction zone makes the TFP distribution flatter, increasing
its variance. Since wages also decrease, from Table 2, the overall effect on the distribution
of TFP is both a move to the left of the distribution, caused by lower wages, and a flatter
distribution from the increase in the inaction zone.

We now discuss the implications for the results of our assumption of discrete levels of em-
ployment relative to a model with continuous employment such as that in Hopenhayn and
Rogerson (1993) and Hopenhayn (2014). We first note that our model features dispersion

                                                   27
       Figure 4: Stationary Distribution of Establishment TFP for Different Firing Costs


                    4000
                                                                        Zero Firing Costs
                    3500
                                                                        6 Months Firing Costs
                    3000
                                                                        1 Year Firing Costs

                    2500


                    2000


                    1500


                    1000


                     500


                      0
                           0.9   0.92   0.94   0.96   0.98    1      1.02     1.04          1.06   1.08   1.1
                                                             log z




in marginal products of labor across establishments even in the undistorted economy as
there is dispersion in productivity within large and small establishments due to the discrete
nature of employment levels.16 This dispersion reduces aggregate output and productivity
relative to an economy with continuous employment, but in our assessment of firing costs
we quantify their impact relative to the benchmark economy with discrete levels of employ-
ment. More importantly, the impact of firing costs on aggregate output and productivity is
smaller in a framework with discrete levels of employment than in an economy with continu-
ous employment. The reason is that firing costs mitigate the cost associated with adjusting
employment for other reasons. To the extent that firms in the real world face frictions in
the adjustment of labor that are not due to policy distortions, our model with discrete levels
of employment provides a more accurate—or at least a more conservative—assessment of
the quantitative impact of firing costs on aggregate productivity across countries than in a
setting with continuous employment choices. Nevertheless, our results indicate substantial
amplification effects of firing costs policies due to changes in the distribution of productivity.
  16
    One interpretation of the dispersion in marginal products in the benchmark economy is “real” factor
adjustment costs.




                                                             28
4.3     Static and dynamic misallocation

The impact of firing costs on misallocation can be decomposed in two effects: a static and
a dynamic. The static effect is the classic impact on the policy function of small and large
establishments, which causes large establishments to switch at lower levels of productivity
and small establishments to switch at higher levels productivity. The dynamic effect is due
to changes in the average productivity of switching establishments. Since in our model the
productivity distribution of establishments is endogenous, when large firms start switching
at lower levels of productivity, this also impacts on the distribution of productivity of small
establishments as switchers to low employment have on average lower productivity than
before, and the opposite is true for large establishments as small firms start switching at
higher level of productivity, the average productivity of switchers to high employment is
higher than before. In Table 4 we quantify these two effects of misallocation on aggregate
TFP.


                            Table 4: Static and Dynamic Misallocation


                        τ                                     0.1    0.2     1.0
                        Relative TFP                97.8 95.7 79.3
                        Decomposition:
                          Static misallocation (%)  10.0 13.0 23.0
                          Dynamic misallocation (%) 90.0 87.0 77.0

Notes: Values for τ of 0.1, 0.2, and 1 represent firing costs equivalent to 6 months, 1 year, and 5 years’
wages. TFP is reported relative to the benchmark economy in percent.


From Table 4 we observe that the bulk of the negative effects of firing costs on aggregate TFP
are due to dynamic misallocation. When firing costs are the equivalent of 6 months’ wages,
the TFP loss is around 2.2 percent: 90 percent due to dynamic misallocation (2 percent
TFP loss) and 10 percent due to static misallocation (0.2 percent TFP loss). When firing
costs are the equivalent of 5 year’s wages, the TFP loss is 20.7 percent: static misallocation


                                                   29
accounts for 23 percent (4.8 percent TFP loss) and dynamic misallocation accounts for
77 percent (16 percent TFP loss). As firing costs increase static misallocation becomes
more relevant, but not nearly as relevant as dynamic misallocation. As discussed earlier,
because of our assumption of discrete employment levels, the static effect of misallocation on
TFP is smaller in our model than in models with continuous employment. For instance, in
Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993), firing costs equivalent to 6 months’ wages reduce average
productivity by 0.8 percent compared to 0.2 percent in our model. In Hopenhayn (2014),
firing costs equivalent to 5 year’s wages reduce TFP by 7.5 percent compared to 4.8 percent
in our model. Nevertheless, in all these cases, the total effect of misallocation on TFP is
much larger in our model because of the negative effect of firing costs on the productivity
distribution.




5    Conclusions

We developed a tractable framework with heterogeneous production units that builds on the
work of Dixit (1989), Hopenhayn (1992), and Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993). We showed
that in this framework firing costs not only impact the employment decision of establishments
of firing and hiring workers as emphasized by the existing literature, but also impact the
distribution of productivity across establishments. We showed that in a calibrated version of
the model, firing costs have a substantial negative impact on aggregate TFP, a quantitative
effect that is orders of magnitude larger than in the earlier literature. We decomposed the
effect of firing costs on aggregate TFP in two channels: a static misallocation effect and
a dynamic effect through changes in the distribution of establishment productivity. This
decomposition allows us to show that the quantitative impact of the static misallocation
channel is in line with previous estimates in the literature and that the bulk of the effect
of firing costs on aggregate TFP in our model is due to the dynamic channel affecting the
distribution of establishment TFP.

                                             30
We also established an equivalence between firing costs and hiring costs. This equivalence
allows us to connect our findings to the vast literature that studies the impact of specific
size-dependent policies on aggregate productivity. In future work, this equivalence could
help connect our framework with micro data in specific contexts to obtain more accurate
empirical estimates of the impact of the much broader size-dependent policies on aggregate
TFP.




                                            31
References
Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo, “Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development Eco-
 nomics,” Handbook of Economic Growth, 2005.

Bento, Pedro and Diego Restuccia, “Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productiv-
 ity,” 2016. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Bentolila, Samuel and Giuseppe Bertola, “Firing costs and labour demand: how bad
 is eurosclerosis?,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57 (3), 381–402.

Buera, Francisco J, Joseph P Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin, “Finance and Develop-
 ment: A Tale of Two Sectors,” The American Economic Review, 2011, pp. 1964–2002.

Da-Rocha, José-Marıa, Marina Mendes Tavares, and Diego Restuccia, “Policy
 distortions and aggregate productivity with endogenous establishment-level productivity,”
 2014. Working Paper, University of Toronto.

Dixit, Avinash, “Entry and Exist Decisions under Uncertainty,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 1989, 97 (3), 620–638.

Garicano, Luis, Claire LeLarge, and John Van Reenen, “Firm Size Distortions and
 the Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France,” Working Paper 18841, National
 Bureau of Economic Research February 2013.

Gourio, F. and N. Roys, “Size-dependent regulations, firm size distribution, and reallo-
 cation,” Quantitative Economics, 2014, 5, 377–416.

Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu, “Macroeconomic Implications of Size-Dependent
 Policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 721–744.

Guner, Nezih, Andrii Parkhomenko, and Gustavo Ventura, “Managers and produc-
 tivity differences,” 2015.

Hopenhayn, H., “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,” Economet-
 rica, 1992, 60, 1127–50.

   and R. Rogerson, “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General Equilibrium Anal-
  ysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101(5), 915–38.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A, “Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review,”
 Annu. Rev. Econ., 2014, 6 (1), 735–770.



                                           32
Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1035–1084.

Impullitti, Giammario, Alfonso A Irarrazabal, and Luca David Opromolla, “A
  theory of entry into and exit from export markets,” Journal of International Economics,
  2013, 90 (1), 75–90.

Luttmer, E., “Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity,” Annual Reviews of Economics,
 2010, pp. 547–76.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu, “Finance and misallocation: Evidence from
 plant-level data,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 422–458.

Moll, Benjamin, “Productivity losses from financial frictions: can self-financing undo cap-
 ital misallocation?,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3186–3221.

Moscoso-Boedo, Hernan J and Toshihiko Mukoyama, “Evaluating the effects of entry
 regulations and firing costs on international income differences,” Journal of Economic
 Growth, 2012, 17 (2), 143–170.

Mukoyama, Toshihiko and Sophie Osotimehin, “Barriers to Reallocation and Eco-
 nomic Growth: the Effects of Firing Costs,” 2016. Manuscript, University of Virginia.

Restuccia, D., “Factor Misallocation and Development,” in Online Edition, ed., The New
 Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Palgrave Macmillan: Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence
 E. Blume, 2013.

   and R. Rogerson, “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous
  establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707–720.

   and    , “Misallocation and Productivity,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16 (1),
  1–10.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “The Causes and Costs of Misallocation,”
 2016. Working Paper, University of Toronto.




                                            33
A      Appendix

A.1      Proof Lemma 1

The proof is by guessing and verifying. We guess the following functional form for the value
function Wi (z) = ai + Ai z + Bi z βi and solving the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation we find that
       wni          ni α
ai = −     , Ai =         and βi is equal to
        ρ         ρ − µi
                                                  s
                                                             1 2 2ρ
                                                              
                                         µi    1        µi
                              βi = −        −     ±        −      + 2.                         (17)
                                         σ2 2           σ2 2        σ

Finally from the boundary and smooth pasting conditions we find B1 , B2 , z1 , and z2 solving the
following system of nonlinear equations:

                   (1 − β1 )B1 z1β1       = (a2 − a1 ) + (1 − β2 )B2 z1β2 ,                         (18)
                   (1 −   β1 )B1 z2β1     =    (a2 − a1 ) + (1 − β2 )B2 z2β2     + τ (n2 − n1 )w,   (19)
                           β1 B1 z1β1     =    (A2 − A1 )z1 + β2 B2 z1β2 ,                          (20)
                           β1 B1 z2β1     =    (A2 − A1 )z2 + β2 B2 z2β2 .                          (21)

And this conclude the proof. 


A.2      Proof Lemma 2

First we need to show that the positive root of (17) is greater than one. First note that this
polynomial is convex, since Ω00 (β) = 1, and at zero Ω(0) = − σρ2 , which is negative. So, Ω(β) has
a positive and a negative root. At one Ω(1) = σµ12 − σρ2 , since ρ is greater than µ1 , Ω(1) is also
negative. Consequently, the positive root must be greater than one. Now, we can prove that B1
and B2 are positive.

From Lemma 1 and the two equations on the smoothing pasting conditions (21) and (21), we can
write B1 and B2 as a function of parameters, z1 and z2 , the constant B2 is equal to:

                                              (A2 − A1 )(z21−β1 − z11−β1 )
                                   B2 =                                      .                      (22)
                                                 β2 (z1β2 −β1 − z2β2 −β1 )

Note that the numerator is positive (negative), because A2 − A1 is positive and (z21−β1 − z11−β1 )
is positive, since z1 > z2 and β1 > 1, as we can see from (β1 < 1). The denominator is also
positive, because β2 is negative and (z1β2 −β1 − z2β2 −β1 ) is algo negative. As a result B2 is positive.
Substituting the expression for B2 into equation (21), we find B1 equal to:

                                        (A2 − A1 )(z1 z2 )−β1 (z1β2 z2 − z1 z2β2 )
                              B1 =                                                   .              (23)
                                                 β1 (z1β2 −β1 − z2β2 −β1 )

Note that the numerator is negative, because z1 > z2 and z1β2 < z2β2 since β2 < 0. In addition, the


                                                           34
denominator is also negative, because (z1β2 −β1 − z1β2 −β1 ) is negative and β1 is positive, as result B1
is positive. 


A.3      Proof Lemma 3

In order to characterize the inaction zone rate, we first assume that z2 = θz1 for a θ ∈ (0, 1],
substituting z2 = θz1 into the expression of B1 in equation (23) and B2 into equation (22), we find:

                                                (A2 − A1 )z11−β1 (θ1−β2 − 1)
                                    B1 =                                     ,                      (24)
                                                     β1 (θβ1 −β2 − 1)
                                                (A2 − A1 )z11−β2 (θ1−β1 − 1)
                                    B2 =                                     .                      (25)
                                                     −β2 (θβ2 −β1 − 1)

Second we divide both sides of of the boundary condition (18) and the boundary condition (20) by
(1 − β2 )B2 and we substitute z2 = θz1 to obtain:

                               (1 − β1 )B1 β1                      (a2 − a1 )
                                           z − z1β2         =                 ,                     (26)
                               (1 − β2 )B2 1                      (1 − β2 )B2
                      (1 − β1 )B1                                 (a2 − a1 ) + τ (n2 − n1 )w
                                  (θz1 )β1 − (θz1 )β2       =                                .      (27)
                      (1 − β2 )B2                                        (1 − β2 )B2

We can substitute B1 and B2 from equation (24) and (25) into equation (26) and (27) and divide
the two equations to obtain:

                                               (Ω1 (θ) + 1)                   1
                                   ϕ(θ) =                            =            ,
                                             (Ω1 (θ)θβ1 + θβ2 )            1 − ρτ
                 (1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1 )
where Ω1 (θ) =   (1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1) .

To find z1 we can substitute B1 and B2 from equations (26) and (27) into the boundary condition
(18), after some algebraic manipulation we find z1 equal to:
                                         h         i
                                       − nρ2 − nρ1
                                 z1 = h nα      nα
                                                     i Ω2 (θ)w,
                                         2
                                       ρ−µ2  −   1
                                               ρ−µ1

                                    β1 β2 (θβ2 −β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)
where Ω2 (θ) =   ((1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)+(1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1))
                                                                                     .   


A.4      Proof Lemma 4

Consider the optimal switching problem of small and large establishments facing a hiring cost.
This problem is characterized by the two value matching conditions one for small and one for large




                                                          35
establishments and by the two smoothing pasting conditions:

                                   V1 (z1 ) = V2 (z1 ) − τh w(n2 − n1 ),
                                   V1 (z2 ) = V2 (z2 ),
                                   V10 (z1 ) = V20 (z1 ),
                                   V10 (z2 ) = V20 (z2 ).

From Lemma 1 we know thatq          the solution of this problem is given by two roots that solve the
                     µi                µi    1 2
                            1
                                                 + σ2ρ2 for i ∈ {1, 2}, and by the constants {B1 , B2 } and
                                              
polynomial βi = − σ2 − 2 ±             σ 2 − 2
the policy functions {z1 , z2 } solve the two value matching conditions and the two smoothing pasting
conditions together. Note that for a given stochastic process for small and large establishments the
two roots are the same in the case of firing or hiring costs. Following the same methodology as
Lemma 3, we find:

                                             (Ω1 (θ) + 1)
                                  ϕ(θ) =                         = 1 + ρτh ,
                                           (Ω1 (θ)θβ1 + θβ2 )
                           1−β2      β2 −β1
                                 −1)(θ       −1)
where Ω1 (θ) = (1−β 1 )β2 (θ
                (1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1) . Since ϕ(θ) only depends on β1 and β2 that are indepen-
dent of the costs we find that for a given hiring costs τh there exist a firing costsτ that solves
                                                 1
                                                        = 1 + ρτh
                                              1 − ρτ
and generate the same inaction zone rate θ. 


A.5      Small establishment’s stationary distribution

In order to find the stationary distribution of small establishments we apply the same methodology
as in the distribution of large establishments. First, let m1 (x, t) denote the number density func-
tion of small establishments. At time t, the small establishments productivity process follows the
modified Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation below:

                        ∂m1 (x, t)        ∂m1 (x, t) σ 2 ∂ 2 m1 (x, t)
                                   = −µ̂1           +                  + B1 (x, t),                   (28)
                          ∂t                ∂x        2      ∂x2
where the function B1 (x, t) are the new small establishment that arrival with productivity x at
time t. The partial differential equation (28) is supplement by the two boundary conditions

                                                                       ∂m1 (x, t)
                           lim m1 (x, t) = 0           and      lim               =0
                         x→−∞                                   x→−∞     ∂x
where in the case of small establishments the boundary conditions are at the bottom of the dis-
tribution. We are interested in solving for the steady state productivity distribution, as in the
case of large establishments, we look for a solutions with the form m1 (x, t) = M1 (t)f1 (x) and
B1 (x, t) = M1 (t)b1 (x), where substituting in the Kolmogorov-Fokker-Planck equation we find:

                           M10 (t)                        σ2
                                   f1 (x) = −µ̂1 f10 (x) + f100 (x) + b1 (x − x2 ),                   (29)
                           M1 (t)                         2


                                                        36
and the new boundary conditions:

                                                    lim f1 (x) = 0,
                                                 x→−∞
                                                  lim f 0 (x)        = 0,
                                                 x→−∞ 1

and the additional requirement that f1 (x) is also a pdf leads to the conditions:

                                                            f1 (x) ≥ 0,
                                                Z   0
                                                        f1 (x)dx = 1,
                                                  −∞

where now differently from large establishments, small establishment domain is from minus infinity
to zero. As in the large establishment problem, we calculate the separation rate of small establish-
ments by integrating equation (29) from minus infinity to zero, where small establishment decide
to become large. The growth rate for small establishment η1 , is given by
                          0                                                    x=0            +∞
                                                            σ2
                      Z                                                                 Z
                 η1           f1 (x)dx =       −µ̂1 f1 (x) + f10 (x)                 +             b̂1 δ(u)du,
                      −∞                                    2                  −∞         0

and applying the boundary conditions and using the delta function, we find that growth rate of
small firms is equal to:
                                                     σ2
                                   η1 = −µ̂1 f1 (0) + f10 (0) + b̂1 ,
                                                      2
which has the same interpretation as in the large establishment case. As in the large establishments,
we look for the stationary equilibrium in which the number of small establishments does not grow
over time, which restricts η1 to be equal to zero. Now, we can rewrite the Kolmogorov-Fokker-
Planck equation by substituting η1 we obtain:

                                          σ 2 00
                                  −µ̂1 f10 (x) +
                                             f (x) + b̂1 δ(x − x2 ) = 0,
                                          2 1
                                                   Z 0
subject to the boundary conditions f1 (0) ≥ 0 and         f1 (x)dx = 1. Therefore, the stationary pdf
                                                                     −∞
is the solution of the boundary-value problem that consists of solving the equation:

                                    f100 (x) − α1 f10 (x) + α2 δ(x − x2 ) = 0,
                                                        Z   0
and the boundary conditions f1 (0) ≥ 0 and                       f1 (x)dx = 1, where the constants α1 and α2 are
                                                         −∞
given by

                                                2µ̂1                             2b̂1
                                      α1 =                  and           α2 =        .
                                                σ2                               σ2




                                                                37
A.6     Proof Lemma 5

The stationary pdf is the solution of the boundary-value problem that consists of solving the
equation:
                                 f200 (x) − γ1 f20 (x) = −γ2 δ(x − x1 ),
                                                       Z +∞
subject to the boundary conditions f2 (0) ≥ 0 and           f2 (x)dx = 1. As in the undistorted economy
                                                         0
case, Lemma 6, we are going to use Laplace transforms. After some algebraic manipulation we
obtain the following equation:

                       (s2 − γ1 s)Y (s) = f20 (0) + (s − γ1 )f2 (0) − γ2 e−sx1 ,

and
                                        f20 (0) + (s − γ1 )f2 (0) − γ2 e−sx1
                              Y (s) =                                        .
                                                     (s − γ1 )s

Note that Laplace inverses of each component is         equal to:
                                           
                            −1       1                   1 γ1 x
                          L                   =             (e − 1) ,
                                 s(s − γ1 )              γ1
                                        
                                         1
                                  L −1        =         1,
                                         s
                                −sx1 
                            −1     e                     H(x1 ) h γ1 (x−x1 )   i
                          L                   =                  e           −1 ,
                                 s(s − γ1 )               γ1

where H(x1 ) is Heaviside step function given by:
                                          
                                             0 if            x ≤ x1 ,
                                 H(x1 ) =
                                             1 if            x > x1 .


Substituting the Laplace inverses in the second oder differential equation give us the stationary
distribution for large firms:

                             f20 (0) γ1 x        H(x1 ) h γ1 (x−x1 )    i
                  f2 (x) =          (e − 1) − γ2         e           − 1 + f20 (0).
                               γ1                 γ1

Note that f2 (0) must be equal to zero in order to the integral to be bounded. This boundary
condition guarantee the mass of firms that are indifferent between switching or not is equal to zero.
Now substituting the Heaviside step function H(x1 ) we find:
                          f 0 (0)
                                   γ x
                          γ1 (e 1 − 1)                               if x ≤ x1 ,
                           2


                f2 (x) =
                          f20 (0) γ1 x
                                        − 1) − γγ21 eγ1 (x−x1 ) − 1
                                                                  
                             γ1 (e                                    if x > x1 .


We only need to solve for f20 (0) to have the complete characterization of the large establishments




                                                       38
distributions. We find f20 (0) to guarantee that that the integral of f2 (·) is one.

                       f20 (0)         +∞                               +∞ 
                                 Z                                  Z
                                                               γ2                             
                                            (eγ1 x − 1) dx −                   eγ1 (x−x1 ) − 1 dx = 1,
                         γ1        0                           γ1   x1

where we can rewrite the integral above as:

 f20 (0) +∞ γ1 x                             f20 (0) x1
                                                               0
                      γ2 +∞ γ1 (x−x1 )
        Z                Z                          Z                      Z +∞
                                                               f2 (0) γ2
            e dx −             e        dx −            1dx −        −           1dx = 1.
   γ1    0            γ 1 x1                   γ1    0          γ1     γ1    x1

The last term of the integral is zero, so the mass of establishments is constant in equilibrium, by
integrating all the other terms we find the following expression:

                                                    f20 (0) γ2     f20 (0)
                                                −          +     −         x1 = 1.
                                                      γ12    γ12     γ1

Substituting γ2 gives

                                                  f20 (0) f20 (0) f20 (0)
                                              −          +       −        x1 = 1,
                                                    γ12     γ12     γ1

as a result, f20 (0) = − xγ11 = − x21µσˆ22 .

Now we can solve for the small establishment’s distribution, first we are going to change variables.
Let f1 (x) = g(−y) and δ(x) = δ(−y), we can rewrite the second order differential equation for
small establishment as:

                                            g 00 (−y) + α1 g 0 (−y) = −α2 δ(−y − x2 ).

After some algebraic manipulation we obtain the following equation:

                             (s2 − α1 s)Y (s) = −g 0 (0) + (s + α1 )g(0) − α2 e−sx2

and
                                                   −g 0 (0) + (s + α1 )g(0) − α2 e−sx2
                                       Y (s) =                                         .
                                                                (s + α1 )s

Applying the Laplace inverse as in the large establishment case we obtain the following equation:

                          −g 0 (0)            α2        h                         i
              g(−y) =              1 − e−α1 y −    H(x2 ) 1 − (y − x2 )e−α1 (y+x2 ) + g(0),
                           α1                   α1
using that

                                 f10 (0)                α2             h               i
                  f1 (x) =               (1 − eα1 x ) +    [1 − H(x2 )] eα1 (x−x2 ) − 1 + f1 (0).
                                   α1                   α1
Note that again as in the large establishment case we need to impose the boundary condition
f1 (0) = 0 to guarantee that integral is bounded and we use again the symmetric Heavside function




                                                                    39
H(x2 ) equal to
                                                           
                                                               0       if       x ≥ x2 ,
                                       1 − H(x2 ) =
                                                               1       if       x < x2 .

Last we obtain the following stationary distribution,
                          f 0 (0)
                                       α x    α       α (x−x2 ) )
                          1α1 (1 − e 1 ) + α12 (1 − e 1
                                                                                          if   x < x2 ,
                f1 (x) =
                          f10 (0)
                                      α1 x )
                             α1 (1 − e                                                     if   x ≥ x2 .


We only need to solve for f10 (0) to have the complete characterization of the small establishments
distribution. We find f10 (0) to guarantee that the integral of f1 (x) is one.

                    f10 (0)       0                                   x2
                              Z                                   Z
                                               α1 x          α2                               
                                      (1 − e          ) dx +                    1 − eα1 (x−x2 ) dx = 1,
                      α1      −∞                             α1    −∞

where we can rewrite the integral above as:

   f10 (0) 0 α1 x                            f10 (0) x1
                                                               0
                       α2 x2 α1 (x−x2 )
          Z                Z                        Z                      Z x2
                                                               f1 (0) α2
 −            e dx −            e       dx −            1dx −        +           1dx = 1.
     α1 −∞             α1 −∞                   α1 0             α1     α1    −∞

From the labor market clearing we find that the last term of the integral is zero, by integrating all
the other terms we find the following expression:

                                             f10 (0) α2 f10 (0)
                                         −          − 2−        x2 = 1.
                                               α12   α1   α1

Substituting α2 we obtain

                                            f10 (0) f10 (0) f10 (0)
                                        −          +       −        x2 = 1,
                                              α12     α12     α1

                           α1    2µˆ1
as a result, f10 (0) = −      =−        . 
                           x2    x2 σ 2


A.7      Proof Lemma 6

The stationary large establishment’s pdf is the solution of the following second order differential
equation
                                  f200 (x) − γ1 f20 (x) = −γ2 δ(x),
                                               2µ̂2       2b̂2
where the constants γ1 and γ2 are given by γ1 = 2 and γ2 = 2 , subject to the boundary
                          Z +∞                  σ          σ
conditions f2 (0) ≥ 0 and      f2 (x)dx = 1.
                                  0

We solve the boundary-value problem using Laplace transforms. By applying Laplace transforms



                                                                  40
in equation (A.7) we obtain:

                   (s2 − γ1 s)L [f (x)] − (s − γ1 )f2 (0) − f20 (0) = −γ2 L [δ(x)],

and after some algebraic manipulation, we find:

                       (s2 − γ1 s)Y (s) = (f20 (0) − γ1 f2 (0) − γ2 ) + sf2 (0).

First note that the first term between parenthesis in the right hand side is equal to zero, because
the growth rate of large firms η2 is equal to zero. So, we can simplify the expression and above and
obtain:
                                                           1
                                       Y (s) = f2 (0)             ,
                                                        (s − γ1 )

and after solving for the Laplace inverse we obtain f2 (x) = f2 (0)eγ1 x . Now we need to find the
constant f2 (0) = −γ1 to guarantee that the integral over the domain is equal to one. In addition,
note that the solution above only satisfy the boundary condition for γ1 negative.

For the small establishment distribution, we are going to follow the same methodology. The sta-
tionary small establishment’s pdf is the solution of the following second order differential equation

                                     f100 (x) − α1 f10 (x) = −α2 δ(x),
                                                         Z   0
subject to the boundary conditions f1 (0) ≥ 0 and                f2 (x)dx = 1. We solve the boundary-value
                                                           +∞
problem using Laplace transforms and after some algebraic manipulation we obtain:

                       (s2 − α1 s)Y (s) = (f10 (0) − α1 f1 (0) − α2 ) + sf1 (0),

as in the large establishment’s distribution, the term between the parenthesis is also zero, because
small establishments do not grow η1 = 0. We can simplify the expression and above and obtain:
                                                            1
                                      Y (s) = f1 (0)              ,
                                                        (s − α1 )

and after solving for the Laplace inverse we obtain f1 (x) = f1 (0)eα1 x . Now we need to find the
constant f1 (0) = α1 to guarantee that the integral over the domain is equal to one. In addition,
note that the solution above only satisfy the boundary condition for α1 positive. 


A.8     Stationary equilibrium

Formally, we find M1 , M2 , z1 , z2 , and w are obtained by solving the following 5 equations:


  (1) The inaction rate θ is found by solving the non-linear equation from Lemma 3:

                                          (Ω1 (θ) + 1)                   1
                                                                 =           ,
                                        (Ω1 (θ)θβ1 + θβ2 )            1 − ρτ



                                                    41
                                                                                                        q
                            (1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)                       µi       1
                                                                                                           µi          1 2
                                                                                                                                 2ρ
      where Ω1 (θ) =        (1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)     and βi = −        σ2
                                                                                        −   2       ±       σ2
                                                                                                                 −      2     +   σ2
                                                                                                                                       for i ∈
      {1, 2}.

  (2) We find the mass of small establishments M1 using the enter and exit condition:

                                                            µ̂1             µ̂2
                                                       M1     2
                                                                = −(1 − M1 ) 2 ,
                                                            σ               σ
      and

  (3) we find M2 as a residual since M2 = 1 − M1

  (4) The wage w is found using the labor market clearing condition:
                                                                                                           −η
                                 −1                   α1                      γ1                            (η−1)
                   w=A         (η−1)       M1 nα1          κΩ2 (θ) + M2 nα2        κΩ2 (θ)θ                         ,
                                                    1 + α1                  1 + γ1

                   2µ̂2            2µ̂1                                          β1 β2 (θβ2 −β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)
      where γ1 =   σ2
                        ,   α1 =   σ2
                                        ,   and Ω2 (θ) =     ((1−β1 )β2 (θ 1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)+(1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1))
                                                                                                                                                 .

  (5) The policy functions z1 and z2 are now characterized using Lemma 3:

                                                z1 = κΩ2 (θ)w and z2 = θz1
                                           β1 β2 (θβ2 −β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1)
      where Ω2 (θ) =    ((1−β1 )β2 (θ1−β2 −1)(θβ2 −β1 −1)+(1−β2 )β1 (θ1−β1 −1)(θβ1 −β2 −1))
                                                                                            .


In order to calculate TFP we defineψ as the share of small establishments and 1 − ψ the share of
large establishments. Then, the share of small establishment are such that ψ µ̂1 = −(1 − ψ)µ̂2 , as
result, ψ = µ̂−µ̂2
              2 −µ̂1
                     , and aggregate TFP in the model is defined by:

                                                      ψnα1 E1 z + (1 − ψ) nα1 E2 z
                                            TFP =                                  .
                                                          ψnα1 + (1 − ψ) nα2

In the case where there is no firing costsTFP is given by:
                                                           α1                     γ1
                                                    ψnα1 (1+α1) z∗ + (1 − ψ)nα2 (1+γ 1)
                                                                                        z∗
                                T F Pu =                                                            ,
                                                              ψnα1 + (1 − ψ)nα2

while in the case where there is firing costs, the TFP in the economy is given by:
                                          x                                  x       
                                  α1                                γ1
                          ψnα1 (1+α1)  z1 ex22 − x12 + (1 − ψ)nα2 (1+γ 1)
                                                                          z 2
                                                                               e 1
                                                                                x1 − 1
                                                                                     x1
               T F Pd =                                                                   .
                                                 ψnα1 + (1 − ψ)nα2




                                                                42
