                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CLIMATE CHANGE AND GROWTH RISKS

                                          Ravi Bansal
                                         Marcelo Ochoa
                                          Dana Kiku

                                      Working Paper 23009
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23009


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. We would like to thank Lars
Hansen, Geoffrey Heal, Christian Traeger, Ricardo Colacito, Tony Smith, Thomas Maurer,
Juhani Linnainmaa, and seminar participants at Duke University, the 2nd Macro Finance
Workshop, Developing the Next Generation of Economic Models of Climate Change Conference,
the 2015 AEA meeting, the 2015 MFA meeting, the 2015 WFA meeting and the Environmental
& Energy Economics workshop at the 2015 NBER Summer Institute for their helpful comments.
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ravi Bansal, Marcelo Ochoa, and Dana Kiku. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Change and Growth Risks
Ravi Bansal, Marcelo Ochoa, and Dana Kiku
NBER Working Paper No. 23009
December 2016
JEL No. E0,G0,Q0

                                         ABSTRACT

To study the welfare implications of rising temperature we propose a temperature-augmented
long-run risks model that accounts for the interaction between temperature, economic growth and
risk. The model simultaneously matches the projected temperature path, the observed
consumption growth dynamics, discount rates provided by the risk-free rate and equity market
returns, and the negative elasticity of equity prices to temperature risks documented in the data.
We use the calibrated model to quantify the social cost of carbon (SCC) and to frame the optimal
climate policy. We show that a preference for early resolution of uncertainty and long-run impact
of temperature on growth imply a significant SCC and motivate early actions to abate global
warming.


Ravi Bansal                                  Dana Kiku
Fuqua School of Business                     University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Duke University                              1206 South Sixth Street
1 Towerview Drive                            Champaign IL 61820
Durham, NC 27708                             dka@illinois.edu
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu

Marcelo Ochoa
Federal Reserve Board
Division of Monetary Affairs
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551
marcelo.ochoa@frb.gov
Introduction

Using data from global and US capital markets, Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016) show that
temperature ﬂuctuations, particularly low-frequency temperature risks, have a signiﬁcantly negative
eﬀect on equity valuations that suggests that global warming is an important source of economic
risk. This article makes a contribution towards a better understanding of the welfare implications
of rising temperature and, consequently, the optimal policy response to global warming. To study
the potential impact of climate change on the macro-economy, we present a temperature-augmented
long-run risks (LRR-T) model that accounts for the interaction between economic growth and
temperature risks. We show that a preference for early resolution of uncertainty and long-run
impact of temperature on growth imply a signiﬁcant social cost of carbon emissions and motivate
early actions to abate global warming.

   Our model builds on the long-run risks framework of Bansal and Yaron (2004) that features
recursive preferences of Kreps and Porteus (1978), Epstein and Zin (1989), and Weil (1990) with
a preference for early resolution of uncertainty and a persistent expected growth component in
consumption. To account for the potentially severe consequences of global warming we introduce
temperature-induced natural disasters that aﬀect current and future economic growth, similar in
spirit to Rietz (1988) and Barro (2009). Disasters are triggered when temperature breaches a
threshold level and capture the idea of tail risk related to global warming as discussed in Pindyck
(2012). Our LRR-T model provides a framework, in which temperature rises economic risk and
aﬀects aggregate wealth and valuations of long-lived assets. We show that with a preference for
early resolution of uncertainty, a rise in temperature, even in the distant future, lowers the current
wealth to consumption ratio and that temperature variations carry a positive risk premium. These
implications are consistent with the evidence of the negative elasticity of equity prices to long-
run temperature risks documented in the data. In contrast, under power utility, which is the
standard assumption in the integrated assessment models, aggregate wealth increases in states of
high temperature and high likelihood of disasters. Consequently, as we show, the incentive to abate
global warming, and the timing and the scale of abatement eﬀorts depend critically on the attitude
towards long-run (climate) risks.




                                                  1
       We calibrate our LRR-T model to match the projected climate change and consumption
dynamics, the estimates of temperature elasticity of equity valuations and the observed discount
rates from capital markets.1 The latter is important, as willingness to abate climate change and
the social cost of carbon are highly sensitive to discount rates as highlighted in Nordhaus (2008)
and Gollier (2012). We use the calibrated model to quantify the social cost of carbon (SCC) and
to frame the socially optimal response to climate change. The social cost of carbon is an important
concept in the economic analysis of global warming. Intuitively, it measures the present value of
damages due to a marginal increase in carbon emissions and as such, it allows us to quantify and
assess the incentive to curb industrial emissions. We ﬁnd that with a preference for early resolution
of uncertainty, the social cost of carbon is quite signiﬁcant. In our baseline LRR-T model, SCC
is measured at about 100 dollars of world consumption per metric ton of carbon. It declines to a
still sizable $40 when temperature is assumed to aﬀect the level of output but not the long-term
growth. Thus, when distant risks matter, carbon emissions and rising temperature carry a signiﬁcant
price. In sharp contrast, in a power-utility setting, climate change is not perceived as suﬃciently
risky because its impact is deferred to the distant future. Consequently, SCC under power-utility
preferences is very small, of merely 1 cent.

       To evaluate the optimal policy response to temperature risks, we consider a social planner
who may choose to abate a prospective increase in temperature and thus limit future disasters by
investing in the development of carbon-free technologies. Abatement policies are costly investments
that require resources that otherwise could be consumed. The optimal abatement eﬀort, therefore,
is chosen by trading oﬀ costs of lower current consumption versus beneﬁts of lower climate-change
risks in the future. We show that with a preference for early resolution of uncertainty, the social
planner opts for an immediate and a relatively stringent abatement policy that allows to avert
large disasters in the future. When the planner is indiﬀerent towards the timing of resolution of
uncertainty, as in the case of power utility, there is very little willingness to abate climate change.
The power-utility planner postpones abatement for nearly 50 years until after the eﬀects of global
warming start unfolding, and lets the economy to be exposed to sizable losses. In essence, preferences
for early resolution of uncertainty (which are supported by capital market data) are important to
   1
    We focus on the exchange economy to maintain tractability and ensure that the model is able to match the asset
market data. This is quantitatively diﬃcult to achieve in a production-based setting.



                                                        2
motivate early and signiﬁcant abatement.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we set up the LRR-T model.
Section 2 provides speciﬁcs of our calibration. In Section 3, we present the quantitative solution to
the model and discuss its implications. Section 4 concludes.



1     LRR–T Model

In this section, we set up a uniﬁed general equilibrium model of the world economy and global
climate. Our LRR-T model accounts for the interaction between current and future economic
growth and climate change in a framework that features elements of Epstein and Zin (1989), Bansal
and Yaron (2004), and Hansen and Sargent (2006) models. A unique dimension of our model is
that it incorporates temperature-induced natural disasters that are expected to have a long-run
eﬀect on future well-being. This feature is consistent with by now the consensus view that global
warming will have a long-lasting negative eﬀect on ecological systems and human society (IPCC
(2007, 2013)).2


1.1    Climate-Change Dynamics

We assume that industrial carbon emissions are driven by technologies that are used to produce
consumption or output. Let Yt denote the total (gross) amount of consumption goods, then the
level of CO2 emissions is given by:
                                                  Et = Ytλt ,                                                (1)

where λt ≥ 0 is carbon intensity of consumption. The (log) growth rate of emissions is, therefore,


                                      ∆et+1 = λt+1 ∆yt+1 + ∆λt+1 yt ,                                        (2)


where et ≡ log Et , yt ≡ log Yt , and ∆ is the ﬁrst diﬀerence operator.
   2
     While climate change has a broader meaning, we use it to refer to anthropogenic global warming due to the
continuing buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere caused by the combustion of fossil fuels, manufacturing of
cement and land use change.




                                                       3
    With no abatement eﬀorts, carbon intensity is assumed to be exogenous and we calibrate it to
match the projected path of CO2 emissions under the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario of Nordhaus
(2010). We assume that in the long-run limit, both intensity and emissions decline to zero to capture
the eventual replacement of current technologies with carbon-free ones as fossil fuel resources become
depleted. We will discuss our calibration in more details below.

    The accumulation of greenhouse gasses, of which carbon dioxide is the most signiﬁcant
anthropogenic source, leads to global warming due to an increase in radiative forcing.                             The
geophysical equation linking CO2 emissions and global temperature is a modiﬁed version of that in
Nordhaus (2008)’s DICE model.3 In particular, we assume that global temperature relative to its
pre-industrial level follows:
                                                Tt = νt Tt−1 + χet ,                                                (3)

where Tt is temperature anomaly (i.e., temperature above the pre-industrial level), et is the log of
CO2 emissions, νt ∈ (0, 1) is the rate of carbon retention in the atmosphere and, hence, the degree
of persistence of temperature variations, and χ > 0 is temperature sensitivity to CO2 emissions.4
Note that, eﬀectively, Equation (3) describes a stock of man-made emissions in the atmosphere (i.e.,
CO2 concentration), and temperature anomaly is assumed to be proportional to the level of carbon
concentration. These dynamics are also consistent with the conclusions of the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that establishes an unequivocal
link between the increase in the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gasses and the rise in
global temperature (IPCC (2013)).

    We assume that climate change due to global warming has a damaging eﬀect on the economy.
Once temperature crosses a tipping point, Tt ≥ T ∗ , the economy becomes subject to natural disasters
that result in a signiﬁcant reduction of economic growth. The probability of natural disasters and
the loss function are described next.
   3
     Nordhaus (2008) models carbon-cycle dynamics using a three-reservoir system that accounts for interactions
between the atmosphere, the upper and the lower levels of the ocean. The dynamics of temperature that we use is
qualitatively consistent with the implications of his structural speciﬁcation. Also, quantitatively, our calibration is
designed to match temperature dynamics under the BAU policy as predicted by Nordhaus (2010).
   4
     We assume that νt is increasing in carbon intensity. This feature implies a more persistent eﬀect of emissions at
high levels of CO2 concentration and temperature and is designed to capture re-inforcing feedbacks of global warming
due to melting ice and show that increases absorbtion of sunlight, an increase in water vapor that causes temperature
to climb further, a more intensive release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from soils as temperature rises,
a reduced absorbtion of carbon by warmer oceans, etc.


                                                           4
1.2      Consumption Growth Dynamics

Consumption growth follows the dynamics as in Bansal and Yaron (2004) augmented by the impact
of natural disasters caused by global warming. The growth rate of gross consumption (yt ≡ log Yt )
is given by:


                                    ∆yt+1 = µ + xt + σηt+1 − Dt+1 ,                                                (4)

                                      xt+1 = ρx xt + φx σϵt+1 − ϕx Dt+1 ,                                          (5)


where µ is the unconditional mean of gross consumption growth; xt is the expected growth
component; ηt+1 and ϵt+1 are standard Gaussian innovations that capture short-run and long-
run risks, respectively; and −Dt+1 is a decline in consumption growth due to temperature-induced
disasters. Eﬀectively, Dt+1 measures an economic cost of global warming.5

       Note that in our speciﬁcation climate-change disasters aﬀect current and future expected
consumption growth and, therefore, have a permanent eﬀect on the economy. We focus on potentially
catastrophic consequences of climate change that might not be possible to reverse or easily adapt to,
and as such they are expected to have a permanent eﬀect on human well-being. These include but
not limited to rising sea levels and drowning of currently populated coastlines and islands, intensiﬁed
heat waves, severe droughts, storms and ﬂoods, destruction of ecosystems and wildlife, spreading
of contagious tropical diseases, shortages of food and fresh water supply, signiﬁcant destruction
of property and human losses. To incorporate these types of large-scale and permanent eﬀects
we assume that disasters aﬀect the growth rate of the economy instead of just the current level of
output as is typically assumed in the integrated assessment models.6 A permanent impact of climate
change and its implications for policy decisions are also analyzed in Pindyck (2012). We consider
a more general speciﬁcation in which global warming may aﬀect not only current but also future
consumption growth. While uncertainty over adaptation to global warming is well recognized, the
assumption that rising temperature will have a negative eﬀect on human welfare and global economy
   5
     Our speciﬁcation of climate-change driven disasters as rare tail events is reminiscent of rare disasters models of
Rietz (1988), Barro (2009), Barro and Ursua (2012), Gabaix (2012) and Wachter (2013). As we discuss below, diﬀerent
from the standard disaster speciﬁcations, disaster risks in our model account for a relatively modest fraction of the
overall risk premia.
   6
     For example, the DICE/RICE models of Nordhaus (2008, 2010), the FUND model of Tol (2002a, 2002b) and
Anthoﬀ and Tol (2013), and the PAGE model of Hope (2011).


                                                          5
is standard in the climate-change literature (eg., Nordhaus (2010), Weitzman (2010), Anthoﬀ and
Tol (2012), Pindyck (2012)).7

       We assume that natural disasters are triggered when temperature reaches a tipping point T ∗
and model their impact using a compensated compound Poisson process,

                                                     ∑
                                                     Nt+1
                                           Dt+1 =           ζi,t+1 − dt πt ,                                      (6)
                                                      i=1


where Nt+1 is a Poisson random variable with time-varying intensity πt , and ζi,t+1 ∼ Γ(1, dt ) are
gamma distributed jumps with a time-varying mean of dt . We assume that both occurrence of
natural disasters and their damages are increasing in temperature. In particular, the expected size
of disasters is given by:                  
                                            q1 Tt + q2 T 2 , if Tt ≥ T ∗
                                                         t
                                      dt =                                                                        (7)
                                            0,               otherwise

and disaster intensity follows:
                                                   
                                                    l0 + l1 Tt , if Tt ≥ T ∗
                                 πt ≡ Et [Nt+1 ] =                                                                (8)
                                                    0,           otherwise,

where parameters q1 , q2 , l0 and l1 are greater than zero. Quadratic loss functions are commonly
used in the climate-change literature, e.g., Nordhaus (2008), Weitzman (2010), Lemoine and Traeger
(2012), Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and Tsyvinski (2014), and Heutel (2012).


1.3      CO2 Abatement Policies

The social planner may decide to lower the likelihood of natural disasters and the amount of damages
incurred by implementing a policy that limits carbon emissions and, consequently, slows down global
warming. The decision of which, if any, abatement action to take depends on its beneﬁts and costs.

       We model the beneﬁts of policy intervention as an acceleration in the development and adoption
of carbon-free technologies. That is, we focus on abatement actions that reduce carbon emissions
   7
    The implications of tail risks in the presence of uncertainty about climate-change impact are analyzed in Weitzman
(2009).



                                                            6
not only in the short but also in the long run. Speciﬁcally, we assume that:

                                                       λ∗t
                                           Et∗ = Yt          ,                                      (9)

                                         ∆λ∗t = ∆λt − θt ,                                         (10)


where Et∗ and λ∗t are CO2 emissions and carbon intensity under a chosen abatement policy,
respectively; λt is intensity under the business-as-usual scenario; and θt ≥ 0 is the emission reduction
function. Eﬀectively, we assume that the matter-of-course long-run decline in carbon intensity under
the BAU policy can be speeded up by θt if the social planner decides to act. Higher values of θt
represent more stringent policies, and θt = 0 corresponds to the BAU scenario.

   Abatement policies are costly investments — they require resources that otherwise could be
consumed. We assume that emission reductions cost Λt Yt units of consumption goods, and the
abatement cost at time t depends on the targeted reduction level (θt ):


                                              Λt = ξt θtk ,                                        (11)


where ξt > 0 and k > 0 (i.e., at any point in time, more stringent abatement policies cost more),
and ξt = ξ0 e−gt is assumed to decline over time at a rate of g > 0. A deterministic decline in the
cost function represents an improvement in cost-eﬃciency of abatement technologies over time.


1.4   Cost-Beneﬁt Tradeoﬀ

Under the BAU scenario, agents in the economy consume all available goods.                 Thus, their
consumption is given by: Ct = Yt . If an abatement policy is adopted, agents have to give up a
fraction of consumption goods to ﬁnance the policy in place. Consequently, their consumption is
reduced by the policy implementation costs:


                                           Ct = Yt (1 − Λt ) ,                                     (12)




                                                   7
and the actual consumption growth (in logs) is given by ∆ct ≈ ∆yt − ∆Λt . The net-of-costs
consumption growth, therefore, follows:


                             ∆ct+1 = µ − ∆Λt+1 + xt + σηt+1 − ϕc Dt+1 .                            (13)


In essence, by adopting an abatement policy, the social planner trades oﬀ costs of lower current
consumption versus beneﬁts of lower risk of natural disasters and lower damages in the future.


1.5     Preferences

Following the long-run risk literature, we deﬁne preferences recursively as in Kreps and Porteus
(1978), Epstein and Zin (1989), and Weil (1990). We use Ut to denote the continuation utility at
time t, which is given by:

                                 {           1    ( [      ]) 1− ψ } 1−1 1
                                                                 1
                                          1− ψ         1−γ    1−γ
                             Ut = (1 − δ)Ct    + δ Et Ut+1              ψ
                                                                           ,                       (14)


where δ is the time-discount rate, γ is the coeﬃcient of risk aversion, and ψ is the intertemporal
                                                   1
elasticity of substitution (IES). When γ =         ψ,    than preferences collapse to the power utility
speciﬁcation, in which the timing of the resolution of uncertainty is irrelevant. When risk aversion
exceeds the reciprocal of IES, γ ≥      1
                                        ψ,   early resolution of uncertainty about future consumption
path is preferred. Power utility is the standard assumption in the integrated assessment models
of climate change. Preferences for early resolution of uncertainty are the benchmark in the long-
run risks literature and, as emphasized in Bansal and Yaron (2004), are critical for explaining the
dynamics of ﬁnancial markets. We consider both speciﬁcations and highlight the importance of
preferences to risks and to temporal resolution of risks for the analysis of global warming and policy
decisions.

   Note that the maximized life-time utility is proportional to the wealth to consumption ratio,
Zt ≡   Wt
       Ct ,   and as such is determined by the present value of expected consumption growth from now
to inﬁnity. In particular,
                                             [         ] ψ
                                         Ut = (1 − δ)Zt ψ−1 Ct ,                                   (15)



                                                     8
and                                                [   ∞
                                                                      ]
                                                       ∑ Ct+j /Ct
                                         Zt = Et                          ,                        (16)
                                                             Rj,t+j
                                                       j=0

where Rj,t+j is the discount rate of the consumption strip with j-time to maturity. Because prices
are forward-looking, the current price of the consumption claim (and that of market equity) carries
information about the impact of climate change on future economic growth and risk.


1.6   Dynamic Optimization Problem

Each period, the social planner makes a decision of which abatement policy θt is optimal to
implement by solving utility-maximization problem. Let St summarize the state of the economy
and climate at time t: St = {Tt , Yt , λt , Λt , xt }. The dynamic optimization problem can be described
recursively as:

                                  {                ( [                  1− 1 } 1
                    ( )                       1
                                           1− ψ            (     )1−γ ]) 1−γψ 1− ψ1
                  Ut St   =    max (1 − δ)Ct    + δ Et Ut+1 St+1                    ,              (17)
                               θt ,Ct


                          s.t. Ct+1 = Yt+1 (1 − Λt+1 ) ,                                           (18)

                               St+1 = F (St , θt ) .                                               (19)


Utility maximization is subject to two constraints: the resource allocation constraint in Equation
(18), and the state dynamics in Equation (19), where F (·, ·) summarizes the transitional dynamics
of the state vector under the chosen policy.

   We solve the dynamic programming problem numerically using value function iterations. We
start at the “terminal” date at which temperature anomaly disappears and the solution becomes
stationary, and work backwards in time. We discretize the state space and use Chebyshev polynomial
approximation of the value and abatement policy functions. Expectations at the maximization stage
(see Equation (17)) are computed via simulations. Notice that the optimal abatement policy that
we derive is dynamically consistent, thus, future abatement decisions will comply with the policies
chosen today.




                                                        9
1.7   Social Cost of Carbon

The social cost of carbon (SCC) has become an important concept in the cost-beneﬁt analysis of
global warming. SCC measures the present value of damages due to a marginal increase in carbon
emissions. Formally, it is deﬁned as marginal utility of carbon emissions:

                                                   ∂Ut / ∂Ut
                                          SCCt =                                                 (20)
                                                   ∂Et ∂Ct

The scaling by marginal utility of consumption allows us to express the cost in units of consumption
goods (time-t dollars), which makes SCC easy to interpret. Using Equation (15), we can express
the social cost of carbon at time 0 as:

                                             ψ  ∂Z0 /∂E0
                                  SCC0 =                 C0 .                                    (21)
                                            ψ−1   Z0

That is, SCC is equal to the (appropriately scaled) monetized value of a percentage change in wealth
due to an additional unit of emissions. Intuitively, the social cost of carbon measures an increase in
current consumption that is required to compensate for damages caused by a marginal increase in
date-0 emissions.



2     Calibration of the BAU Scenario

We calibrate the path of carbon intensity (λt ) and temperature (Tt ) in the absence of any abatement
eﬀorts to match the business-as-usual forecasts of CO2 emissions and global warming in Nordhaus
(2010) and IPCC (2007, 2013). Time in the model is measured in decades and we assume that the
steady state in the BAU case will be reached in 60 periods or 600 years from now. The steady
state corresponds to the state in which anthropogenic emissions decline to zero and the temperature
anomaly disappears due to the ultimate de-carbonization of the economy. The ﬁrst two panels
of Figure 1 show the calibrated path of carbon intensity and the amount of emissions along the
transitional path. Under the BAU policy, carbon intensity is expected to remain relatively high
over the next two centuries and carbon emissions accelerate since the economy is growing.




                                                   10
      As more and more CO2 emissions are released, the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere
increases and temperature anomaly escalates. The projected BAU path of temperature is shown in
Panel (c) of Figure 1. Calibration of global warming dynamics and the impact of climate change on
consumption growth are presented in Table I.8 To capture re-enforcing feedback eﬀects of emissions,
we allow the retention of carbon in the atmosphere, νt , to increase in carbon intensity. We assume
that about 80% of current CO2 emissions will remain in the atmosphere for another century, their
decay will increase as the rate of emissions slows down. The average value of the retention rate under
the BAU scenario is equal to 0.962, which implies that about 70% of CO2 molecules emitted along
the transitional path are removed from the atmosphere within a century. The precise atmospheric
life of carbon dioxide is yet unknown but our calibration is designed to roughly match the available
estimates in the geophysical literature (Jacobson (2005), and Archer (eg., 2005, 2009)).

      We set the tipping point of global warming disasters to 2◦ C that according to the Copenhagen
accord is internationally recognized as a likely trigger of dangerous changes in the climate system.
If the current trend in emissions continues, temperature is expected to cross the disaster threshold
in about 30-35 years from now (see Figure 1). This assumption is fairly consistent with the most
recent forecast of the IPCC. As reported in the Fifth Assessment Report, the global mean surface
temperature anomaly is expected to exceed 2◦ C in three to four decades from now (IPCC (2013)).

      Once the 2◦ C tipping point is crossed, the global economy faces the risk of natural cataclysms.
Both intensity and size of climate-induced disasters are increasing with temperature and their
expected paths are presented in Figure 2. Time-varying intensity dynamics are motivated by the
evidence in Raddatz (2009) that, worldwide, the number of climatic disasters (such as droughts,
ﬂoods, and extreme temperature) has increased over the last four decades — the period that has
experienced a steep increase in temperature. The initial impact of global warming is assumed to be
relatively moderate but it is intensiﬁed as temperature keeps rising. In particular, we assume that
upon the crossing of the 2◦ C threshold, the annual probability of disasters is about 1.2% and their
average size is -0.7%. As temperature reaches its peak, the disaster probability rises to 2.8% per
annum and average losses increase to -6.0%.

      Table II summarizes our calibration of preferences and consumption dynamics. Our LRR-T
  8
      To facilitate interpretation of the calibrated parameters, we report and discuss them in annualized terms.



                                                           11
model features preferences for early resolution of uncertainty and incorporates a negative eﬀect of
global warming on current and future consumption growth. We choose preference parameters so
that the model is able to match key moments of ﬁnancial data. In particular, we set risk aversion
at 5, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution at 1.5, and the subjective time-discount factor at
0.99. We set the unconditional mean of consumption growth at 1.8% and assume that the standard
deviation of i.i.d. gaussian shocks is 1.6% per annum. We calibrate the dynamics of the long-run risk
component to match persistence of consumption growth in normal times. Consistent with the US
consumption data, in our speciﬁcation the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of consumption growth absent
climate disasters is equal to 0.44. Exposure of the expected consumption growth to disaster risks is
set at 0.05. Note that while the average size of climate disasters in the expected growth component
is assumed to be quite modest, their eﬀect on consumption is propagated due to persistence of
long-run risks. That is, upon a disaster, consumption growth does not immediately bounce back to
its normal level but is expected to remain low for a relatively long while.

   Note that in contrast to the standard integrated assessment models, in which climate change is
assumed to cause a deterministic loss in future output or consumption, in our model, global warming
aﬀects the economy entirely through a risk channel. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the implications of
global warming for the distribution of consumption growth in our baseline speciﬁcation. Notice that
because temperature-induced disasters are compensated, they have no eﬀect on the ex-ante mean
of log consumption growth (see Panel (a) of Figure 3). Thus, similar to gaussian i.i.d. and long-run
risks, ex-ante, global warming does not aﬀect the log level of future consumption path but does aﬀect
its variation. As Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows, climate-change driven disasters increase the annualized
ex-ante volatility of cumulative consumption growth by up to 0.18% (which is more than ten percent
increase in volatility relative to a no-disaster case). Also, because global-warming disasters represent
tail risks, the distribution of future consumption growth is both negatively skewed and fat-tailed.
A side-by-side comparison of the distribution of the normalized consumption growth at the peak of
climate-driven disasters and the corresponding distribution absent disasters is presented in Figure
4. To summarize, while ex-ante, global-warming does not alter the future path of consumption, it
introduces an additional source of risk in the economy. Thus, ex-post, global warming consequences
for consumption can be substantial.




                                                  12
   In addition to our LRR-T model, we discuss three alternatives. In all alternative speciﬁcations,
we shut down the long-run risk channel and assume that global warming aﬀects only realized
consumption growth. That is, if a disaster is realized, the level of consumption declines on impact
but future consumption growth remains unaﬀected. We use these simpliﬁed dynamics to analyze
the implications of risk preferences for policy decisions on climate change. To this end, we consider
three preference speciﬁcations: (1) preference for early resolution of uncertainty, which we refer to
as “KPEZW-Preferences”, (2) power utility with high degree of risk aversion — “CRRA-highRA”,
and (3) power utility with low risk aversion — “CRRA-lowRA”. In the KPEZW-case, we maintain
the same preference conﬁguration as in our LRR-T model. In the case of power utility, we set
either risk aversion or IES at their corresponding baseline values. That is, under CRRA-highRA
preferences, risk aversion is set at 5, and in the CRRA-lowRA case, risk aversion is set at 0.67 (the
reciprocal of our baseline IES value of 1.5).

   In our set-up, abatement policies are speciﬁed as an eﬀort to stimulate the development and
adoption of carbon-free technologies and, as such, they lead to a permanent reduction in emissions.
Anthoﬀ and Tol (2013) also allow abatement eﬀorts to have a permanent eﬀect, at least in part.
Given the similarities in our modeling approaches, we calibrate the abatement cost function to be
consistent with mitigation costs implied by their FUND model. More ambitious abatement eﬀorts
cost more and we assume that the cost function is convex by setting k at 1.5, the scale parameter
ξ0 is set at 5 (see Equation (11)). Abatement costs decline over time at a rate of 1.5% per annum
that is chosen to match the average TFP growth in the post-war US economy.

   The dynamics of future climate changes and their economic consequences are highly uncertain
and not yet well-understood. While some empirical evidence on the impact of rising temperature
and climatic disasters does exist, it is based on human experiences that have not yet been subjected
to catastrophic climate changes that we consider. Therefore, we can use it only as a guidance rather
than a target. Whenever possible, we calibrate the model parameters to be broadly consistent with
assumptions of the standard integrated assessment models and consensus forecasts outlined by the
IPCC. With this in mind, we do not intend to claim that our calibrated dynamics represent the future
better than others. We consider plausible dynamics and focus on highlighting the channels through
which beliefs about climate-change risks and risk preferences aﬀect policy decisions. To discriminate



                                                 13
across the LRR-T model and alternative speciﬁcations, we confront them with empirical evidence
on the impact of rising temperature on equity prices.



3     Policy Decisions and Welfare Implications

We begin our analysis with the LRR-T model, in which agents have preferences for early resolution
of uncertainty and global warming has a permanent eﬀect on the economy through climate-induced
disasters in realized and expected consumption growth. Afterwards we consider simpliﬁed dynamics
for consumption growth and explore the implications of risk preferences for the optimal cost-beneﬁt
tradeoﬀ and welfare.


3.1   LRR-T Model

In our model, detailed in Table II, temperature risks have a negative eﬀect on consumption level
and future growth and agents care about long-run risks through preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty. Solving the maximization problem, we ﬁnd that the social planner in this environment
opts for a stringent mitigation policy from the very beginning despite the fact that earlier eﬀorts are
relatively costly. The optimal level of abatement eﬀort (θt ) and its cost (Λt ) are presented in Figure
5. Figure 6 illustrates the policy implications for carbon emissions and temperature. Recall that
earlier abatement eﬀorts are valuable as they yield long-term beneﬁts, i.e., an earlier development
and adoption of carbon-free technologies implies a progressive increase in emission reductions over
time. Panel (a) of Figure 6 shows that industrial carbon emissions under the optimal policy are
expected to decline by about 80% in 100 years from now and essentially disappear by 2200. It is
optimal to give up about 0.03% of the current output and up to 0.95% later on to mitigate climate
risks. And while it is too costly to contain temperature anomaly under the tipping point, the
achieved reduction in carbon emissions guarantees that it does not exceed 2.8◦ C and does not stay
above the disaster threshold for too long.

    Note that in the BAU scenario, even at the peak of temperature anomaly, climate-induced
catastrophes are low-probability events. On average, the highest likelihood of disasters is short of
3% per year. However, if realized, their economic consequences can be highly signiﬁcant. Panel (a) of

                                                  14
Figure 7 shows that the 90%-conﬁdence interval of disaster size under the business-as-usual scenario
includes quite substantial losses of as large as 15%–18% of consumption. In our speciﬁcation, these
damages are non-recoverable — they lead to a permanent decline in consumption level and a long-
term reduction in growth. Under preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, such low-probability
yet sizable and persistent events represent a signiﬁcant concern that makes the social planner act
today to prevent them in the future. Panel (b) of Figure 7 shows that the optimal abatement policy
eﬀectively eliminates catastrophic outcomes. The average size of disasters is reduced to under 1%
and the 95-percentile of the disaster-size distribution is kept well under 4%. Notice also a signiﬁcant
reduction in duration of global warming disasters under the optimal policy — disaster period starts
later and is expected to last for only few decades.

   By trading oﬀ a fraction of current consumption for limiting the likelihood and size of disasters
in the future, agents are able to achieve a signiﬁcantly higher level of utility relative to the business-
as-usual scenario. The utility gain of the optimal abatement policy is around 11%. The immediate
call for action is also reﬂected in the social cost of carbon, which is quite sizable under the LRR-T
speciﬁcation. As shown in Table III, under the business-as-usual scenario, SCC is estimated at about
$104 per ton of carbon. The social cost of carbon is measured in 2012 dollars of world household ﬁnal
consumption expenditure per metric ton of carbon. In the presence of risks that aﬀect long-term
growth, agents’ utility is highly sensitive to emissions due to both high potential damages and late
resolution of climate risks. The two channels combined lead to the high price of carbon emissions.

   Temperature risks aside, our LRR-T speciﬁcation corresponds to the long-run risks model of
Bansal and Yaron (2004). As they show, with preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, risks
that matter for the long run carry high risk premia and are able to account for the dynamics of
equity prices and asset returns. Our calibration of the gaussian part of consumption dynamics is
similar to theirs and, therefore, is consistent with ﬁnancial market data. As Table IV shows, the
average risk-free rate in the LRR-T speciﬁcation is 0.9%, and the risk premium on consumption
claim is about 1.7%. Hence, assuming leverage of 3, the implied equity premium is about 5% per
annum. It is important to emphasize that most of the risk premium is the compensation for long-run
gaussian risks, and only a relatively modest fraction of it is due to temperature risks.




                                                   15
3.2   Welfare Implications of Risk Preferences

To examine the eﬀect of preferences for welfare implications and policy decisions, we consider three
alternative speciﬁcations. In all of them, we simplify consumption dynamics by shutting oﬀ the long-
run risk component and assume that the only eﬀect of global warming is through its negative impact
on realized consumption growth. Under these dynamics, climate risks continue to have a permanent
negative impact on consumption level but are assumed to have no eﬀect on future economic growth.
We compute and compare optimal climate policy decisions of three social planners under diﬀerent
risk preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, power utility with high degree of
risk aversion (and low IES) and power utility with low risk aversion (and high IES) as summarized
in Table II.

   Figure 8 plots the optimal level of abatement cost and the implied path of temperature for each
alternative speciﬁcation. Consider ﬁrst the economy with KPEZW-preferences. As Panel (a) shows,
the optimal response of the social planner under preferences for early resolution of uncertainty is
to promptly set up an abatement policy to slow down global warming and to avert large disasters.
Because the amount of temperature risks in the alternative set-up is smaller, the initial scale of
abatement is somewhat lower relative to that in the LRR-T model, yet similarly, an abatement
policy is set in motion right away and abatement eﬀorts are accelerated at a high rate in the future.

   The optimal response to climate risks in a power-utility setting is quite diﬀerent. A power-utility
planner (under the two risk-aversion conﬁgurations) chooses to postpone abatement into the future
and even then implements a relatively modest level of eﬀort. In fact, as Figure 8 shows, both
high- and low-RA power-utility planners ﬁnd it optimal to do nothing until temperature crosses
over the tipping point and the likelihood of economic disasters becomes nontrivial. From their
perspective, current abatement costs outweigh future beneﬁts and they do not act until climate-
change risks become real. In other words, the optimal response to global warming of power-utility
planners is to mitigate it as it unfolds rather than to prevent it. Even at the peak of climate-driven
disasters, power-utility planners are willing to spend only a small amount on abatement eﬀorts,
letting temperature stay well above the disaster threshold for a very long while. As Panel (b)
shows, under the KPEZW-based optimal policy, temperature anomaly is kept under 3.3◦ C and the
disaster period lasts for approximately one hundred years; whereas under the CRRA-based optimal


                                                 16
policies, temperature anomaly reaches 5◦ C and climate-induced disasters stretch out over more than
200 years.

   The reluctance to mitigate global warming in the power-utility settings is reﬂected in the social
cost of carbon, which under power utility is quite trivial. As Table III shows, SCC is merely 1 cents
per metric ton of carbon in the high risk-aversion conﬁguration and virtually zero in the case of low
risk aversion. This suggests that in the power-utility settings, climate-change risks are essentially
discounted out as they are expected to realize in a relatively distant future. In contrast, with
preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, distant climate risks carry a signiﬁcant weight and
their importance is reﬂected in a sizable $42 social cost of carbon. Also, while optimal abatement
eﬀorts are welfare improving in all three cases, their quantitative beneﬁts are quite diﬀerent. The
utility gain of the chosen optimal policy under KPEZW-preferences is a signiﬁcant 4.0%, whereas
it is only 0.02% and essentially zero in the power-utility setting with high and low risk aversion,
respectively.

   The magnitude of the social discount rate has become a subject of controversy and disagreement
in the climate-change literature. The level of the discount rate is certainly important for translating
future damages into their present-value terms, particularly in the context of global warming which
impact is expected to unfold over the course of centuries and, therefore, entails long-term discounting.
However, the magnitude of the discount rate that has attracted so much attention, by itself,
is not suﬃcient for understanding welfare implications of climate-change risks. To illustrate the
point, we refer to Table IV that presents asset pricing implications of the alternative speciﬁcations.
First, compare the implications of KPEZW-preferences and power utility with the low degree of
risk aversion. Because the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is the same, the risk-free rates
and therefore discount rates in the two speciﬁcations are very similar of about 2.2–2.3%. To be
precise, the level of discount rates of consumption strips across all maturities is slightly higher
in the KPEZW-case compared with CRRA-lowRA preferences. Given that the damage function
is identical, the present value of expected global warming damages in the power-utility case is
higher than that in the case of KPEZW-preferences. Yet, among the two, it is the planner with
KPEZW-preferences who is concerned with climate-change risks and attaches a high price tag
to carbon emissions. Further, if we now compare the two power-utility speciﬁcations, we ﬁnd



                                                  17
that despite big diﬀerences in discount rates (10.3% v.s. 2.2% under high and low risk aversion,
respectively), both social planners care equally little about temperature risks and do not consider
early or signiﬁcant abatement eﬀorts worthwhile. That is, in a power-utility economy, whether it is
characterized by high or low discount rates, distant temperature risks are not considered a pressing
issue and, consequently, current carbon emissions carry an almost zero marginal price. This evidence
demonstrates that the optimal response to climate-change risks is not simply a matter of discounting
but rather of temporal characteristics of climate risks and risk preferences.

   What accounts for diﬀerences in optimal climate policies and welfare implications is the elasticity
of discount rates and utility to carbon emissions. Hansen and Scheinkman (2012), and Borovička
and Hansen (2014) provide a rigorous analysis of cash-ﬂow and price elasticities. We illustrate
them graphically in Figure 9. Consider a one-percent increase in carbon emissions at time 0.
The additional amount of emissions leads to marginally higher temperature and, hence, a higher
probability and a larger size of disasters in the future. Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows the percentage
increase in annual expected damages due to the increase in current emissions. This is the negative
cash-ﬂow eﬀect of the additional unit of emissions, which is invariant to preferences. The discount-
rate eﬀect and therefore wealth implications are preference-dependent. As shown in Panel (b), under
KPEZW-preferences, an increase in current emissions leads to an increase in risk premia and a fall
in asset prices. In particular, the current wealth to consumption ratio of KPEZW-agents declines
by 0.003% and their utility decreases by 0.009%. In contrast, in the CRRA-highRA economy,
discount rates fall signiﬁcantly in response to higher emissions due to a fall in the risk-free rates.
The negative discount-rate eﬀect dominates the negative cash-ﬂow eﬀect resulting in an increase
in current prices. That is, under power utility, the wealth to consumption ratio is actually higher
if disaster losses are expected to be bigger. The power-utility agents are still worse oﬀ since their
utility is inversely related to wealth, but because both the elasticity of wealth to emissions and the
elasticity of utility to wealth are quite low, the decline in utility is very tiny, more than three orders
of magnitude smaller than the corresponding decline under recursive preferences. As the ﬁgure also
shows, the elasticity of discount rates and, consequently, utility in the case of power utility with low
risk aversion is virtually zero. To summarize, with preferences for early resolution of uncertainty,
the planner is wary of risks that are going to be realized in the distant future and does not disregard
them as easily as the power-utility planners. Consequently, the life-time utility of KPEZW-agents is


                                                   18
more sensitive to emissions compared with power-utility preferences, which is reﬂected in the higher
social cost of carbon.


3.3   Temperature Risks and Equity Prices

Using data from global and US capital markets, Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016) show that
temperature risks, particularly, low-frequency temperature risks have a signiﬁcantly negative impact
on equity valuations. Quantitatively, in the data, a one degree Celsius increase in temperature leads
to about -5% decline in equity valuations. They also show that the negative impact of temperature
on equity valuations has been rising over time. In Table V we report the model-implied response of
the price to consumption ratio to temperature risks under various speciﬁcations of preferences and
time-series dynamics. For each speciﬁcation that we discussed above, we simulate 50,000 paths of
emissions, temperature and consumption and solve for the price of the consumption claim. Then,
using the regression speciﬁcation of Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016), we regress the log of the price-
consumption ratio (valuation ratio) on temperature controlling for the relevant state variables. Note
that in our model, all temperature ﬂuctuations reﬂect long-run temperature risks because our model
abstracts from any short-run weather-type variations. Hence, our model-based estimates measure
elasticities of consumption claim prices to long-run temperature risks.

   As the table shows, under recursive preferences, valuations fall in response to an increase
in temperature. In particular, in out baseline LRR-T model, a one degree Celsius increase in
temperature lowers the price of the consumption claim by about 1.74%. While this magnitude
seems lower than the empirical estimates, it is important to recognize that inside the model we
consider the consumption-paying asset whereas the data estimates are based on market equity. If
we account for market leverage of about 3, the response of equity prices to temperature shocks
implied by our LRR-T speciﬁcation would be around −5.2%, which is fairly similar to the empirical
estimates. Also, consistent with the empirical evidence in Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016), the
model-implied sensitivity of asset prices to temperature risks increases as the economy approaches
the disaster threshold. In particular, ten and twenty years from now, the price response rises in
magnitude from the current −0.0174 to −0.019 and −0.021, respectively.

   The power-utility implied response of prices to permanent temperature risks is very diﬀerent

                                                 19
compared with recursive preferences. As Table V shows, in the power-utility case, asset prices
rise with temperature. This is the discount-rate or, more precisely, the risk-free rate eﬀect that we
discussed above. In the power-utility setting, an increase in temperature leads to a decline in discount
rates due to a signiﬁcant decline in risk-free rates and this eﬀect dominates the negative cash-ﬂow
eﬀect of temperature. Consequently, the wealth of the agent and the price of the consumption claim
increase. For example, under CRRA-highRA utility, the valuation of a levered claim on consumption
increases by about 0.045% in response to a one degree Celsius increase in temperature. This evidence
speaks strongly against power utility speciﬁcation as it fails to match a robustly negative elasticity
of asset prices to temperature risks documented in the data.



4    Conclusion

To study the potential impact of climate change, we propose a long-run risks model with
temperature-induced natural disasters that are expected to aﬀect future economic growth and risk.
Our model simultaneously matches the projected temperature path, consumption growth dynamics,
discount rates provided by risk-free and equity market returns, and the negative temperature
elasticity of equity prices documented in the data. We use the calibrated model to compute the
social cost of carbon and to solve for the optimal policy response to risks imposed by global warming.
We ﬁnd that concerns for the long run represented by preferences for early resolution of uncertainty
and long-run impact of temperature on economic growth yield a signiﬁcant SCC and a considerable
utility loss and, therefore, call for an immediate and sustained reduction in carbon emissions.




                                                  20
References

Anthoﬀ, David, and Richard S.J. Tol, 2012, The Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation
  and Distribution (FUND), Working paper, Technical Description, Version 3.6.

Anthoﬀ, David, and Richard S.J. Tol, 2013, The Uncertainty about the Social Cost of Carbon: A
  Decomposition Analysis using FUND, Climatic Change 117, 515–530.

Archer, David, 2005, Fate of Fossil Fuel CO2 in Geologic Time, Journal of Geophysical Research:
  Oceans 110, C09S05.

Archer, David, 2009, Atmospheric Lifetime of Fossil Fuel Carbon Dioxide, Annual Review of Earth
  and Planetary Sciences 37, 117–134.

Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa, 2016, What Do Capital Markets Tell Us About
  Climate Change?, Working paper, Duke University.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
  Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Barro, Robert J., 2009, Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs, American Economic Review
  99, 243–264.

Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursua, 2012, Rare Macroeconomic Disasters, Annual Review of
  Economics 4, 83–109.

Borovička, Jaroslav, and Lars P. Hansen, 2014, Examining Macroeconomic Models through the Lens
  of Asset Pricing, Journal of Econometrics 183, 67–90.

Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Intertemporal
  Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica 57, 937–
  969.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
  Macro-Finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.




                                               21
Gollier, Christian, 2012, Pricing the Planet’s Future: The Economics of Discounting in an Uncertain
  World. (Princeton University Press).

Golosov, Mikhail, John Hassler, Per Krusell, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2014, Optimal Taxes on Fossil
  Fuel in General Equilibrium, Econometrica 82, 41–88.

Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent, 2006, Robust Control and Model Misspeciﬁcation, Journal
  of Economic Theory 128, 45–90.

Hansen, Lars P., and José A. Scheinkman, 2012, Pricing Growth-Rate Risk, Finance and Stochastics
  16, 1–15.

Heutel, Garth, 2012, How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles? Optimal
  Policy Under Persistent Productivity Shocks, Review of Economic Dynamics 15, 244–264.

Hope, Chris, 2011, The PAGE09 Integrated Assessment Model: A Technical Description, Working
  paper, Cambridge Judge Business School.

IPCC, 2007, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. (Geneva, Switzerland).

IPCC, 2013, Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Climate Change
  2013: The Physical Science Basis. (Geneva, Switzerland).

Jacobson, Mark Z., 2005, Correction to “Control of Fossil-Fuel Particulate Black Carbon and
  Organic Matter, Possibly the Most Eﬀective Method of Slowing Global Warming”, Journal of
  Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 110, D14105.

Kreps, David M., and Evon L. Porteus, 1978, Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
  Choice, Econometrica 46, 185–200.

Lemoine, Derek M., and Christian Traeger, 2012, Tipping Points and Ambiguity in the Integrated
  Assessment of Climate Change, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, #18230.

Nordhaus, William D., 2008, A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
  Policies. (Yale University Press).

Nordhaus, William D., 2010, Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-Copenhagen
  Environment, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 11721–11726.

                                                22
Pindyck, Robert S., 2012, Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy, Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management 63, 289–303.

Raddatz, Claudio, 2009, The Wrath of God: Macroeconomic Costs of Natural Disasters, Working
  paper, World Bank Policy Research.

Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution, Journal of Monetary Economics
  22, 117131.

Tol, Richard S.J., 2002a, New Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part I: Benchmark
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 47–73.

Tol, Richard S.J., 2002b, New Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part II: Dynamic
  Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 135–160.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock
  Market Volatility?, Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.

Weil, Philippe, 1990, Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105,
  29–42.

Weitzman, Martin L., 2009, On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate
  Change, Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 1–19.

Weitzman, Martin L., 2010, What is the “Damages Function” for Global Warming – And What
  Diﬀerence Might It Make?, Climate Change Economics 1, 57–69.




                                              23
                                                   Table I
                                   Calibration of Global Warming


                     Parameter      Description                                    Value
                     Climate Dynamics
                      ν̄       Atmospheric retention of carbon                      0.962
                      χ        Temperature sensitivity to emissions                0.0045
                     Natural Disasters
                      T∗       Tipping point                                        2.0◦ C
                      ℓ0       Disaster intensity parameters                       0.0050
                      ℓ1       Disaster intensity parameters                       0.0033
                      q1       Damage function parameter                           0.0011
                      q2       Damage function parameter                           0.0011


Table I presents calibration of global warming under the business-as-usual scenario.   The parameter values are
annualized.




                                                      24
                                                    Table II
                    Calibration of Preferences and Consumption Dynamics



                        LRR-T                         Alternative Specifications
                        Model            KPEZW-Preferences   CRRA-highRA         CRRA-lowRA
 Preferences
    β                      0.99                    0.99                      0.99                    0.99
    γ                        5                       5                         5                     0.67
    ψ                       1.5                     1.5                       0.2                     1.5
 Consumption
    µ                     0.018                   0.018                     0.018                    0.018
    σ                     0.016                   0.016                     0.016                    0.016
    ρx                    0.96
    φx                    0.25
    ϕx                    0.05


Table II presents calibration of preferences and consumption dynamics under the business-as-usual scenario. Our
LRR-T model features preference for early resolution of uncertainty and incorporates a negative impact of global
warming on consumption level and expected consumption growth. Under Alternative Speciﬁcations, the conditional
mean of consumption growth is constant and climate change is assumed to only aﬀect the level of consumption.
We consider three speciﬁcations of preferences under the alternative dynamics: preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty (KPEZW-Preferences), power utility with high degree of risk aversion (CRRA-highRA) and power utility
with low level of risk aversion (CRRA-lowRA). Empty entries in the table correspond to zeros. The parameter values
are annualized.




                                                       25
                                                    Table III
                                           Social Cost of Carbon



                                                        BAU                      Optimal

                 LRR-T Model                            103.6                      4.32
                 Alternatives:
                    KPEZW-Preferences                   39.01                      1.18
                    CRRA-highRA                          0.01                      0.01
                    CRRA-lowRA                           0.00                      0.00


Table III reports the social cost of carbon in the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario and under the optimal abatement
policy (Optimal) in the LRR-T Model that features the long-run risk component and preferences for early resolution
of uncertainty, and alternative speciﬁcations with constant expected growth and three types of risk preferences:
preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (KPEZW-Preferences), power utility with high degree of risk aversion
(CRRA-highRA) and power utility with low level of risk aversion (CRRA-lowRA). The social cost of carbon is measured
in 2012 dollars of world consumption per metric ton of carbon.




                                                        26
                                                     Table IV
                          Asset Pricing Implications under BAU scenario



                            LRR-T                          Alternative Specifications
                            Model             KPEZW-Preferences   CRRA-highRA         CRRA-lowRA
 Risk-Free Rate               0.91                      2.11                      10.08                     2.22
 Risk Premia                  1.70                      0.16                       0.17                     0.02
 Discount Rates:
      10yr Strip              1.51                      2.28                      10.33                     2.24
     100yr Strip              2.41                      2.29                      10.31                     2.24


Table IV presents asset pricing implications of the LRR-T Model that features the long-run risk component and
preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, and alternative speciﬁcations with constant expected growth and three
types of risk preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (KPEZW-Preferences), power utility with
high degree of risk aversion (CRRA-highRA) and power utility with low level of risk aversion (CRRA-lowRA). The
moments are computed under the business-as-usual scenario. The table reports the risk-free rate and risk premia
on consumption claim averaged over the transitional path, and discount rates on consumption strips with 10- and
100-year maturities. Returns and premia are expressed in annualized percentage terms.




                                                         27
                                                      Table V
                      Model-Implied Price Response to Temperature Risks



                                                                    Response

                                  LRR-T Model                        −0.0174
                                  Alternatives:
                                     KPEZW-Preferences               −0.0063
                                     CRRA-highRA                       0.0002
                                     CRRA-lowRA                        0.0000


Table V reports the response of the price-consumption ratio to temperature risks for the LRR-T model that features
the long-run risk component and preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, and alternative speciﬁcations with
constant expected growth and three types of risk preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (KPEZW-
Preferences), power utility with high degree of risk aversion (CRRA-highRA) and power utility with low level of risk
aversion (CRRA-lowRA). For each speciﬁcation, we simulate the data and compute the model-implied response by
regressing the price-consumption ratio on temperature controlling for the relevant state variables. The simulated data
consist of 50,000 draws.




                                                         28
                                     0.4



                                     0.3



                                     0.2



                                     0.1



                                      0
                                               100     200    300    400    500    600



                                                     (a) Carbon Intensity


                                  30,000


                                  25,000


                                  20,000


                                  15,000


                                  10,000


                                   5,000


                                      0
                                               100     200    300    400    500    600



                                           (b) Expected Path of Carbon Emissions


                                      7

                                      6

                                      5

                                      4

                                      3

                                   T*=2


                                      1

                                      0
                                               100     200    300    400    500    600



                                      (c) Expected Path of Temperature Anomaly


                                Figure 1. Dynamics under the BAU Scenario

Figure 1 illustrates the business-as-usual scenario. Panel (a) shows the evolution of carbon intensity; Panel (b) presents
the projected path of carbon emissions; Panel (c) shows the projected path of temperature anomaly (temperature
relative to its pre-industrial level). Emissions are measured in millions of metric ton of carbon per annum, and
temperature is in degrees Celsius. The dotted line in Panel (c) represents the tipping point of global warming. The
horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.


                                                             29
                            0.030


                            0.025


                            0.020


                            0.015


                            0.010


                            0.005


                               0
                                       100       200       300         400   500       600


                                                 (a) Disaster Intensity


                               0


                           −0.01


                           −0.02


                           −0.03


                           −0.04


                           −0.05


                           −0.06


                           −0.07
                                       100       200       300         400   500       600


                                                   (b) Disaster Size


                       Figure 2. Global Warming Disasters under the BAU policy

Figure 2 shows the consequences of global warming in the business-as-usual case. Panel (a) plots the expected intensity
of climate change disasters per annum; Panel (b) shows the average annual size of disasters (−dt ). The horizontal axis
is the time-line measured in years from today.




                                                          30
                                 0




                                         100      200     300      400      500      600



                                                 (a) Change in Mean


                               0.20



                               0.16



                               0.12



                               0.08



                               0.04



                                 0
                                         100      200     300      400      500      600



                                               (b) Change in Volatility


                Figure 3. Change in Ex-Ante Consumption Moments due to Disasters

Figure 3 shows the change in the conditional mean and volatility of future consumption due to global-warming disasters.
Panel (a) plots the diﬀerence between ex-ante mean of cumulative log consumption growth under the business-as-
usual scenario and the conditional mean absent temperature disasters. Panel (b) presents the corresponding diﬀerence
in volatility of cumulative consumption growth. Volatility is annualized and expressed in percentage terms. The
horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.




                                                          31
                       0.12
                                   t = 0 (current)
                        0.1        t = 210 (disaster peak)

                       0.08



                       0.06



                       0.04



                       0.02



                          0
                         −40    −35    −30     −25    −20     −15    −10     −5      0      5




                               Figure 4. Distribution of Consumption Growth

Figure 4 shows the implications of global-warming disasters for consumption growth. The plot presents the distribution
of normalized consumption growth at time-0 (when disasters are absent) and 210 years from now (at the peak of global-
warming disasters).




                                                         32
                           0.05
                                                                               BAU
                                                                               Optimal

                           0.04



                           0.03



                           0.02



                           0.01



                             0
                                      100      200       300       400      500       600


                                               (a) Abatement Eﬀort


                          0.010
                                                                               BAU
                                                                               Optimal
                          0.008



                          0.006



                          0.004



                          0.002



                             0
                                      100      200       300       400      500       600


                                                (b) Abatement Cost


                                   Figure 5. Optimal Abatement Policy

Figure 5 shows the optimal abatement policy in the LRR-T model that features long-run risks and preferences for
early resolution of uncertainty. Panel (a) presents the optimal abatement eﬀort, Panel (b) shows the cost of optimal
policy. Abatement eﬀort represents the reduction in carbon intensity, cost is expressed as a fraction of consumption
goods. The horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.




                                                        33
                          30,000
                                                                                  BAU
                                                                                  Optimal
                          25,000


                          20,000


                          15,000


                          10,000


                           5,000


                              0
                                       100       200        300        400     500       600


                                                       (a) Emissions



                              7
                                                                                  BAU
                                                                                  Optimal
                              6


                              5


                              4


                              3


                              2


                              1


                              0
                                       100       200        300        400     500       600


                                                   (b) Temperature


                          Figure 6. Implications of Optimal Abatement Policies

Figure 6 shows the implications of the optimal abatement policy in the LRR-T model that features long-run risks
and preferences for early resolution of uncertainty. Panel (a) presents the optimal level of carbon emissions, Panel (b)
shows the implied evolution of temperature. Emissions are measured in millions of metric ton of carbon per annum,
and temperature is in degrees Celsius. The horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.




                                                            34
                                0

                            −0.02

                            −0.04

                            −0.06

                            −0.08

                            −0.10

                            −0.12

                            −0.14

                            −0.16

                            −0.18


                                         100       200       300       400      500       600



                                                    (a) BAU Scenario


                                0

                            −0.02

                            −0.04

                            −0.06

                            −0.08

                            −0.10

                            −0.12

                            −0.14

                            −0.16

                            −0.18


                                         100       200       300       400      500       600



                                                   (b) Optimal Policy


                                    Figure 7. Distribution of Disaster Size

Figure 7 shows the beneﬁts of the optimal abatement policy in the LRR-T model that features long-run risks and
preferences for early resolution of uncertainty. Panel (a) shows the distribution of disaster size in the business-as-usual
scenario; Panel (b) present the corresponding distribution under the optimal climate policy. The thick line is the
average disaster size and the shaded area represents the 5–95 percentile band. The horizontal axis is the time-line
measured in years from today.




                                                            35
                                                                    KPEZW−Preferences
                          0.005                                     CRRA−highRA
                                                                    CRRA−lowRA
                          0.004



                          0.003



                          0.002



                          0.001



                              0
                                      100       200       300       400     500       600


                                                (a) Abatement Cost



                              6
                                                                    KPEZW−Preferences
                                                                    CRRA−highRA
                              5                                     CRRA−lowRA

                              4


                              3


                              2


                              1


                              0
                                      100       200       300       400     500       600


                                                  (b) Temperature


                       Figure 8. Policy Decisions under Alternative Speciﬁcations

Figure 8 shows the cost of the optimal abatement policy (Panel (a)) and the implied temperature path (Panel (b))
under three alternative speciﬁcations of risk preferences. Time-series dynamics of consumption and climate impact
across the three speciﬁcations are kept the same: consumption is assumed to follow a random walk subject to climate-
induced disasters. The cost is expressed as a fraction of consumption and temperature is in degrees Celsius. The
horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.




                                                         36
                          0.003




                          0.002




                          0.001




                             0
                                      100       200       300       400       500      600



                                             (a) Sensitivity of Damages


                          0.010
                                                                    KPEZW−Preferences
                          0.008                                     CRRA−highRA
                                                                    CRRA−lowRA
                          0.006

                          0.004

                          0.002

                             0

                         −0.002

                         −0.004

                         −0.006

                         −0.008
                                      100       200       300       400       500      600



                                    (b) Sensitivity of Wealth-Consumption Ratio


                                     Figure 9. Sensitivity to Emissions

Figure 9 shows the impact of an increase in current emissions on future damages and the wealth-consumption ratio.
Panel (a) shows the percentage increase in annual expected damages if time-0 emissions are raised by 1%, Panel (b)
presents the corresponding elasticity of the wealth-consumption ratio. Both panels are constructed under the business-
as-usual scenario for three alternative speciﬁcations of preferences. The horizontal axis is the time-line measured in
years from today.




                                                         37
