                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




RECENT TRENDS IN U.S. TOP INCOME SHARES IN TAX RECORD DATA USING MORE
       COMPREHENSIVE MEASURES OF INCOME INCLUDING ACCRUED
                             CAPITAL GAINS

                                          Jeff Larrimore
                                      Richard V. Burkhauser
                                          Gerald Auten
                                          Philip Armour

                                       Working Paper 23007
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23007


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2016, Revised June 2017




All opinions are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the U.S. Treasury, the
Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve Banks, or their staff. We thank Jonathan Fisher,
Wojciech Kopczuk, and Maggie Jones, along with session participants at the National Tax
Association annual conference, the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management fall
research conference, and the American Economic Association annual conference for their helpful
comments on earlier drafts of this paper. Views and opinions expressed are those of the author
and do not necessarily represent official positions or policy of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23007.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jeff Larrimore, Richard V. Burkhauser, Gerald Auten, and Philip Armour. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Recent Trends in U.S. Top Income Shares in Tax Record Data Using More Comprehensive
Measures of Income Including Accrued Capital Gains
Jeff Larrimore, Richard V. Burkhauser, Gerald Auten, and Philip Armour
NBER Working Paper No. 23007
December 2016, Revised June 2017
JEL No. D31,H24,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

Access to IRS personal income tax records improves researchers’ ability to track U.S. income and
inequality, especially at the very top of the distribution (Piketty and Saez 2003). However, rather
than following standard Haig-Simons income definitions, tax form income measures were
designed to implement the Internal Revenue Code. Using IRS tax record data since 1989
statistically matched to Survey of Consumer Finances and Census data for income sources not
available in tax data, we explore the robustness of levels and trends in inequality using the top
income literature’s tax return market income definition (Saez 2016) compared to more
comprehensive income measures. We find that focusing solely on market income misses the
important redistributive effects of government taxes and transfers. In addition, we find that the
use of taxable realized capital gains changes the level and trend in top incomes relative to an
accrued capital gains measure that is more consistent with Haig-Simons income definitions.

Jeff Larrimore                                                Gerald Auten
Federal Reserve Board                                         Office of Tax Analysis
20th and Constitution Ave                                     U.S. Department of the Treasury
Washington, DC 20551                                          1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
jeff.larrimore@frb.gov                                        Washington, D.C. 20220
                                                              Gerald.Auten@treasury.gov
Richard V. Burkhauser
Cornell University                                            Philip Armour
Department of Policy Analysis & Management                    RAND Corporation
259 MVR Hall                                                  1776 Main Street
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401                                         Santa Monica, CA 90401-3208
and University of Melbourne                                   parmour@rand.org
and also NBER
rvb1@cornell.edu
I. Introduction

An important new international literature (Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2011) based on personal

income tax return data has focused on the share of income held by top income groups and how it

has changed over time. Piketty and Saez (2003) were the first to use Internal Revenue Service

(IRS) personal income tax record data to track U.S. levels and trends in income and its

distribution in this way. These administrative records offer substantial advantages over survey-

based data with respect to their sample size, high response rates, and lower recall bias.

           Federal individual income tax rules and forms are intended to implement the Internal

Revenue Code, however, and are not necessarily comparable with the income definitions

economic researchers prefer to use to measure income.1 Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011, p.

34) in their review of the results of research based on tax record data state that: “In all cases, the

estimates follow the tax law, rather than a ‘preferred’ definition of income, such as the Haig-

Simons comprehensive definition, which includes such items as imputed rent, fringe employer

benefits, or accruing capital gains and losses.” We add the importance of government to this list

by including cash and in-kind government transfers and netting out government taxes.2

           Unless supplemented with such data from other sources, researchers using IRS tax return

data will miss any non-taxable income that does not appear on IRS tax forms. Particularly

relevant for research on top income shares, whereas tax record–based researchers sometimes

include a measure of taxable realized capital gains as an alternative for accrued capital gains, we

show that doing so not only misses capital gains that are not taxed but also fails to reflect the


   1
      The U.S. income tax, in its various provisions, can be (or has been) described as a hybrid tax that is a combination income tax, consumption
tax, and gross receipts tax.
   2
      Including government taxes and transfers to more comprehensive measures of income is standard practice in the survey literature. This
method is recommended by the Canberra Group (2011) and the OECD (d’Ercole and Förster 2012) and is also consistent with a Haig-Simon
comprehensive definition of income.



                                                                         2
year in which these realized capital gains were accrued. As a result, the use of taxable realized

capital gains will dramatically alter levels and trends in the share of income flowing to the top

1% in a given year relative to a measure using accrued capital gains.

           This paper explores the impact of how income is defined on levels and trends in top

income shares. Using income tax records from the IRS Statistics of Income, with a statistical

match to Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) and March Current Population Survey (CPS) data

for income sources that cannot be observed in IRS data, we consider the extent to which trends in

top 1% income shares differ when using a narrow tax return–based income definition compared

to broader income definitions more in the spirit of Haig-Simons income principles.

           This research makes several substantial advancements relative to previous research that

considered how using more comprehensive income definitions influence inequality trends (see,

e.g., Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon 2012; Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore 2014;

Smeeding and Thompson 2011).

           First, by starting with income tax data from the IRS rather than survey-based data, we are

able to capture the trend in top 1% income shares using our broader income definitions and

compare them directly to top 1% income shares from Piketty and Saez (2003) that focus on

market income from tax returns.3 By contrast, most previous research considering the impact of

income definitions on inequality trends have exclusively used survey data that is less able to

track the top of the income distribution.4

           Second, we include estimates of accrued gains on housing based on individual-level

   3
     Researchers using survey-based data have typically avoided consideration of the top 1% income share because of concerns about the
coverage of the survey data at the top of the distribution as well as topcoding of data to protect the confidentiality of high-income respondents.
For additional information on these limitations of survey-based data for considering top income shares, see Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011),
Burkhauser et al. (2012) and Burkhauser et al. (2016).
   4
     Auten and Splinter (2016) show the importance of the base-broadening provisions in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 on income inequality
trends before and after 1986.



                                                                         3
property values from property-tax records and data on local-level housing appreciation. Doing so

provides a more accurate assessment of the capital gains from housing than does previous

research, which either ignored capital gains from housing or used only national-level housing

estimates (see, e.g., Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore 2014; Piketty, Saez, and Zucman 2016).

To our knowledge, this is the first paper to consider how capital gains from local-level housing

price trends impact broader measures of income inequality such as top income shares.

       When we evaluate distributional trends using broader income measures that include our

improved estimate of housing capital gains, we observe trends that differ in important ways from

those found using only income as it appears on income tax returns. Most notably, while Saez

(2016) and others using tax data including taxable realized capital gains find that top income

shares fell during the early years of the Great Recession, we find—using our accrued capital

gains measure that fully captures the collapse of the housing market in 2008 and its

disproportionate negative consequences for the American middle class—that these shares

dramatically increased.



II. Defining Income

       Recognizing that the choice of income definition may influence income trends, what is

the most appropriate way to measure income? The traditional view in the economics literature is

that an ideal income definition captures the total inflow of resources that individuals receive for

their potential personal consumption in a year, regardless of who provides the income or the

form it takes. This principle underlies the Haig-Simons income definition, which states that

individuals’ yearly income is equal to their consumption plus the change in their net wealth in

that year (see Auerbach 1989 and Barthold 1993 for discussions of the Haig-Simons income


                                                  4
approach and Haig 1921 and Simons 1938 for the original sources). On the income side of the

Haig-Simons equation, this implies that income should include any consumable resources

flowing to individuals in a given year. This approach includes not only before-tax cash income

but also in-kind employee benefits, imputed rents from owner occupied housing, and accrued

capital gains. It also recognizes the importance of government taxes and transfers by including

cash and in-kind government transfers and netting out government taxes.

          Despite general agreement that the comprehensive Haig-Simons income measure is the

gold standard for defining economic income, by necessity most researchers base their choice of

income definition on data availability. For example, some researchers using IRS tax records data

limit their analysis to pre-tax, pre-transfer income of tax units since non-taxable sources of

income are not included in these data (Piketty and Saez 2003). Similarly, researchers using

March CPS data typically include transfer income, but generally exclude in-kind transfers, taxes,

and all capital gains—none of which are captured in CPS data (see, e.g., Burkhauser, Feng,

Jenkins, and Larrimore 2011; Gottschalk and Danziger 2005).5

          One of the more important aspects of measuring comprehensive incomes in the spirit of

Haig-Simons is the appropriate treatment of capital income and returns to asset wealth. The four

major approaches to handling these returns to capital income used in the literature are: 1)

ignoring all capital gains (Aguiar and Bils 2016; Burkhauser, Larrimore, Simon 2012; Proctor,

Semega, and Kollar 2016); 2) including capital gains at realization as they appear on tax returns

(Congressional Budget Office 2016; Piketty and Saez 2003); 3) distributing corporate-retained

earnings in lieu of capital gains (Piketty, Saez, and Zucman 2016); and 4) distributing capital


   5
     Notably, while the Earned Income Tax Credit is among the largest cash transfer programs for low income individuals, since it is
administered through the tax system rather than as an independent transfer program, it is not included in the CPS questionnaire and is excluded
from both the Census Bureau’s official pre-tax, post-transfer income measures and most research using this income definition.



                                                                        5
gains as they accrue (Smeeding, and Thompson 2011; Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore

2014).6

           The first of these approaches—ignoring all capital gains—almost certainly understates

incomes, particularly among higher-income individuals and homeowners who may have

substantial capital income. Yet it is the dominant way income is measured in the income and

poverty survey-based literatures. The second—including capital gains at realization—is

convenient, as tax returns offer high-quality data on realized capital gains on taxable assets (see,

e.g., Piketty and Saez 2003; Saez 2016). However, as described in Armour, Burkhauser, and

Larrimore (2014), many realized capital gains are never reported on tax returns, including most

gains from primary housing, those occurring in certain tax deferred accounts, and those on assets

held until death. Furthermore, the realized capital gains that do appear on tax returns are often

not reported until years or even decades after they were accrued.7 This factor, in turn, impacts

both the observed level of capital gains and the timing of their receipt.

           The third approach—distributing retained earnings to shareholders— has been used by

researchers attempting to align individual incomes with national accounts (Piketty, Saez, and

Zucman 2016). This approach is advantageous for its alignment with some national accounts

measures. But since it distributes only current year corporate incomes to individuals, rather than

the value of a corporation based on its projected future earnings as reflected in stock prices, this


   6
      Although it does not directly address capital gains, a fifth, less common, approach to incorporating income from wealth is to include the
imputed annuitized value of wealth holdings with income regardless of whether that wealth generates any income (Wolff and Zacharias 2009;
Wolff, Zacharias, and Masterson 2012). This approach is useful for considering the inequality of potential consumption in a year, but it
systematically overstates the income of all individuals with a positive savings rate. This overstatement occurs because under this measure saved
income is included in both the year it is earned and in all subsequent years until it is spent. Since this approach reflects a hybrid of income and
wealth rather than annual income alone, we do not consider it further here.
   7
      Additionally, when sales of assets do occur, it is often not for consumption but rather to change investment vehicles. In early research,
Feldstein and Yitzhaki (1978) observe that two-thirds of the value of stock sale are “financial switches,” whereby the proceeds are reinvested in
another stock or financial asset within one year. Individuals who sell one financial asset and re-invest the proceeds in the same type of financial
asset are functionally similar to those who simply hold their financial assets without buying or selling. They will appear differently on tax returns,
however, since the former will report taxable realized capital gains in the year and the latter will not.



                                                                           6
method fails to fully capture capital income that occurs based on investors’ perceptions of a

corporation’s economic potential. As a result it does not necessarily reflect the change in the

price for which investors could sell their asset on the open market in any given year.

Additionally, simply distributing retained earnings will result in substantially lower levels of

observed long-run capital income than is observed in asset prices.8 The approach also does not

incorporate capital income from housing, which is not included with corporate retained earnings.

           The final approach—to capture capital gains as they accrue in each year—is most

consistent with Haig-Simons income principals and is the method we employ in this paper.

Including capital gains at accrual, rather than at realization, is commonly cited as a preferred

approach for measuring capital gains (see, e.g., Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez 2011; Roine and

Waldenström 2012; Slemrod 2016; Smeeding and Thompson 2011; Veall 2012), although data

availability often limits its implementation. Including capital gains at accrual is the approach

specified by the System of National Accounts, the international standard for national accounting

(European Commission et al. 2008), and capital gains are similarly included in this way in the

Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts produced by the Federal Reserve Board and the BEA

(Bond, Martin, McIntosh, and Mead 2007).

           Although many researchers agree that accrued capital gains is conceptually preferable to

realized capital gains for measuring income, a major limitation of this approach is the lack of

accrued capital gains data. As a result, researchers using this approach must impute accrued

capital gains on each of the assets held in household wealth portfolios. Smeeding and Thompson

(2011) do so by assuming that all assets receive the long-run average return for the asset class
   8
     This difference can be observed by comparing the accrued capital gains revaluation series in the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ (BEA)
Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts (Table S.3.a) to the undistributed corporate profits series in the BEA’s National Income and Product
Accounts (Table 1.12). From 1989 through 2013, the BEA reported $8.2 trillion in corporate retained earnings, compared to $15.9 trillion in
accrued capital gains from equities going to households and non-profits serving households, along with another $2.4 trillion in accrued gains from
mutual funds going to these groups (Bureau of Economic Analysis 2016a, 2016b).



                                                                         7
and Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2014) assume that all assets receive the current-year

return for the asset class. The advantage of the Smeeding and Thompson approach is that it

smooths the substantial year-to-year variance in accrued capital gains. Nevertheless, doing so is

inconsistent with the Haig-Simons principal since it systematically overstates capital gains in

years the actual rates of return are low and understates them in years the actual rates of return are

high.

        The analysis in the current paper builds on the Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore

(2014) method, which more closely captures accrued capital gains each year. However, we

present a new approach to measuring gains on owner-occupied housing that substantially

improves upon prior approaches for imputing housing incomes, as discussed further in our Data

section. Because of the regional differences in the housing bubble and crash over the last 15

years, this new approach provides a more accurate and nuanced picture of the pattern of these

gains. Throughout this paper, we focus on key income metrics from the inequality literature. We

consider two base-income measures and three treatments of capital gains.

        The first income measure is tax return income, which includes labor earnings and non-

labor market income such as small business income, farm income, taxable and tax-exempt

interest, dividends, rents, royalties, and taxable and non-taxable Social Security benefits. This is

a broader income measure than the tax return market income measure used by Piketty and Saez

(2003) and Saez (2016), in that it includes the non-market income sources that appear on IRS tax

returns: specifically, Social Security benefits and unemployment insurance. It also differs by

adding back the foreign earned income exclusion and by deducting gambling losses from

gambling winnings for those who itemize (reflecting that net gambling winnings are a more

accurate reflection than gross gambling winnings for this form of income). In addition, alimony


                                                   8
paid and state and local tax refunds (which adjust for over-deduction of taxes in the prior year)

and net operating losses carried over from prior years are also removed as they do not reflect

current year net income. Finally, to reflect that business expenses are part of the cost of

generating income rather than pure consumption, we exclude from income the net employee

business expenses that appear on tax returns.9

          The second income measure, comprehensive income, includes all elements of tax return

income but also includes federal income and payroll tax credits or liabilities along with major

cash transfers, in-kind transfers, imputed rents from owner occupied housing, and in-kind

benefits that do not appear on tax returns. The untaxed cash transfers include workers

compensation, supplemental security income, public assistance income, child support income,

and other financial and educational assistance as captured in the March CPS. The included in-

kind transfers are the ex-ante value of employer- and government-provided health insurance,

food stamps, housing subsidies, and school lunches. This measure also includes imputed rents as

part of income, which reflects the resource flow from homeownership and is an important

component of the Haig-Simons income definition. While Andrews, Sanchez, and Johansson

(2011) document that imputed rents are currently taxed in several countries (Iceland,

Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Slovenia, and Switzerland) and hence would be included in a tax

return income measure in those countries, imputed rents are not taxed in the vast majority of

countries, including the United States. Some researchers (e.g., Frick, Grabka, Smeeding, and

Tsakloglou 2010; Piketty, Saez, and Zucman 2016) estimate and include imputed rents in their


   9
     These expenses are observed only to the extent that they exceed 2 percent of AGI income for taxpayers who itemize their deductions.
Although all employee business expenses should in theory be netted against income, we cannot observe such expenses for those whose net
employee business expenses are less than 2 percent of AGI or for non-filers. As a result, to avoid treating someone whose net employee business
expenses are just above the 2 percent threshold and someone whose expenses are just below the threshold (or who does not itemize) differently,
we only remove from income the portion of reported employee business expenses that are above the threshold. The expenses we remove from
income are thus likely to reflect expenses that are unusually high relative to income, especially in certain occupations.



                                                                        9
measures of income, but most researchers do not. Imputed rents are included in the BEA’s Gross

Domestic Product estimates in the United States.10

           For each of these income measures, we also evaluate the impact on top income shares of

using the three distinct capital gains treatments described above: excluding capital gains

completely, including taxable realized capital gains, and including all capital gains at accrual.



III. Differences between Taxable Realized Capital Gains and Accrued Capital Gains

           Taxable realized capital gains and accrued capital gains differ in several important

respects. Taxable realized capital gains measure the gains at the point an asset is sold, rather than

at the point the asset appreciates in value. Thus, if an investor purchases an asset in 1990 for

$10,000, which appreciates to $40,000 by the year 2000, but remains largely flat thereafter until

it is sold in 2010, the $30,000 gain would appear on the investor’s 2010 tax return even though

virtually all the investment returns accrued in the 1990s.11 This method delays the timing of

when the gains appear in the data. Furthermore, it can also result in an artificial increase in

observed inequality when multiple years of capital gains from an asset are bunched into a single

year. IRS Sale of Capital Assets data from 1999 through 2007 show that 97 percent of realized

capital gains during this period were on assets held longer than one year, and more than 40

percent were on assets held for over a decade (Table 1). By contrast, accrued capital gains

include the change in asset values in the year that the asset appreciates (or depreciates), which


   10
       Recognizing that researchers often exclude imputed rents when considering broader income measures, we also compute the comprehensive
income series excluding imputed rents. Doing so generally has little impact on the top income shares. The one exception is when including
accrued capital gains in 2008. In that year, including or excluding imputed rents substantially affects top income shares, as these rents partially
offset the substantial accrued housing losses that occurred in 2008 among homeowners. Results that exclude imputed rents from comprehensive
income are available upon request from the authors.
   11
       This example follows the investment return of the S&P 500 over this period. $10,000 purchased in 1990 would have been worth $39,991 in
2000 and worth $38,086 in 2010. Consistent with how capital gains appear on tax forms, these values are in nominal dollars and are not adjusted
for inflation.



                                                                         10
better reflects the timing of gains. This approach may, however, result in an increase or decrease

in capital gains in any given year relative to realized gains, depending on the actual rate of return

on assets as well as the level of capital gains realizations.

           A second difference between the series is that taxable realized capital gains exclude

important classes of capital gains. First, this approach excludes all realized capital gains

occurring in tax-preferred accounts. In the case of traditional Individual Retirement Account

(IRA) returns, these gains are deferred from appearing on tax returns until retirement, when the

funds are withdrawn from the account and reported as ordinary income. In the case of Roth-IRA

returns, the capital gains never appear on tax returns. It also excludes all realized capital gains on

assets which are held until death, at which time the cost-basis of the asset adjusts to the value at

death so decedents owe no capital gains on the asset upon the sale (except for gains occurring

after the death). Furthermore, taxable realized capital gains exclude most capital gains on

housing assets. Current tax laws exclude the first $250,000 of capital gains on one’s primary

residence ($500,000 for married couples) from tax and from reporting on tax returns. Since the

median sales price on existing homes sold in August 2016 was $240,200 (National Association

of Realtors 2016), the vast majority of capital gains on housing are excluded from tax returns.12

In addition, taxpayers can exclude 50 percent (100 percent of new investment starting in 2010) of

up to $10 million of qualified business stock gains held at least five years and meeting various

requirements. The exclusions for these asset classes lower the observed levels of capital gains

captured as realized taxable capital gains in the tax record data, although the precise impact on

   12
       Auten and Gravelle (2009) found that only about 350,000 or 6.5 percent of the 5.7 million sales of existing homes were reported on tax
returns. Complicating long-term trends in taxable realized capital gains from housing is the changes to housing capital gains treatment from the
Tax Reform Act of 1997. Prior to 1997, housing capital gains were subject to taxation if the seller did not purchase a new home of equal or
greater value within two years, although because of the rollover of gains into new homes relatively few gains on housing were taxed. An
additional complication was a once-per-lifetime housing capital gains exclusion of $125,000 for individuals who were age 55 or older.
Cunningham and Engelhardt (2008), Shan (2008), and Auten and Gravelle (2009) describe these changes and discuss their impact on homeowner
mobility.



                                                                       11
the measure of the top 1% income shares depends on where in the distribution these non-

observed assets are held.

             A third limitation of taxable realized capital gains is that the full value of net capital gains

are included in Adjusted Gross Income (with the exception of those on certain tax-preferred

assets), whereas net capital losses are excluded to the extent that they exceed $3,000.13 Capital

losses exceeding the $3,000 limit may be carried forward to offset future capital gains but may

not offset ordinary income. Capital losses on principal residences are never observed because

capital losses on personal assets are not deductible. This factor was particularly important during

the Great Recession and its aftermath, when middle-class families who sold or experienced a

foreclosure on their houses may have realized substantial capital losses.14 The taxable realized

capital gains series will miss this aspect of the recession.

             Finally, a fourth limitation of taxable realized capital gains is that realizations are

sensitive to the capital gains tax rate, which influences the willingness of investors to sell

appreciated assets and realize the gain (e.g., Dowd, McClelland, and Muthitacharoen 2012

estimate a long-run tax elasticity of realized capital gains of –0.79). This condition was

particularly important in the 2000s, when the capital gains marginal tax rate in the Economic

Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (EGTRRA) and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief

Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA) tax reforms in 2001 and 2004 lowered the maximum tax rate for

long-term capital gains from 20.17 percent in 2001 to 15.7 percent in 2007. It can also be

observed in 2013, when the large increase in the top capital gains rate (from 15 percent to 23.8

percent) caused an acceleration of realized gains from 2013 into 2012 (US Department of

   13
        Realized capital losses in excess of the loss limit are fully reported on Schedule D, but are not carried to the 1040 form.
   14
       A portion of this debt may be observable in tax data using the 1099-C, which is the debt written off by lenders in foreclosure. However, this
would capture only a small subset of all capital losses and to our knowledge no researchers have attempted to incorporate these losses into
realized capital gains calculations.



                                                                            12
Treasury 2016). As a result, observed realized capital gains, and the top 1% income shares, are

sensitive to the behavioral responses of capital gains realizations to tax policies.15

           Accrued capital gains have neither missing asset class concerns, missing capital loss

concerns, nor concerns regarding behavioral responses of realizations to tax policies. When

considering accrued capital gains, gains or losses on all assets are included, although at the time

the asset appreciates in value rather than when the asset is sold. Because assets fluctuate in value

from year to year, however, accrued capital gains do exhibit greater volatility than is seen for

taxable realized capital gains. As such, top income shares that include accrued capital gains also

exhibit higher levels of volatility.



IV. Data

           The primary data in this paper are from the Individual Tax Files from the IRS Statistics of

Income division. These data are used directly for capturing tax return income (including wages,

taxable and tax-exempt interest, dividends, self-employment and small business income, pension

and retirement income, unemployment income, and Social Security income), taxable realized

capital gains, and federal income and payroll tax liabilities of tax filers.

           Although administrative tax return data is valuable for its high sampling rates at the top

of the income distribution, they do not observe non-filers or capture all the income sources of

those who do file. Adjustments and additions to the base tax data are made to address these

concerns as follows. (See the Data Appendix for a fuller discussion of each of the subsections

below.)

   15
       Realized long-term capital gains also increased after 1993 when the top rate on ordinary income increased and in 1997 when the top capital
gains tax rate was reduced from 28 to 20 percent. While occurring before the starting point of our analysis, substantial changes to the capital gains
tax rate in the 1986 Tax Reform Act also influenced the timing of capital gains realizations. Auten, Splinter, and Nelson (2016) discuss taxpayer
reactions to these changes in tax legislation, including shifting of income to minimize tax liabilities.



                                                                          13
A. Non-filers and Dependent Filers

           Recognizing that not all individuals file a tax return, we incorporate non-filers by

following the approach of Piketty and Saez (2003). They, and we, estimate the total number of

potential U.S. tax units each year based on Census Bureau survey data.16 We also follow their

assumption that the market income of non-filers is 20 percent of the mean market income of

filers in each year.17 Although this approach does not yield an actual distribution of non-filers in

the population, more than 80 percent of non-filers have income under $50,000 (Cilke 2014) and

it is generally believed that virtually all non-filers are well below the 90th percentile of income.

Therefore, for measuring top income shares, assuming that non-filers are below the 90th

percentile threshold, rather than knowing their full distributional characteristics, is sufficient to

identify the number of non-filers and the total income they receive.

           Although we generally follow Piketty and Saez (2003) in our treatment of non-filers, we

diverge with respect to non-resident filers, dependent filers, and other filers who are under age

20. Piketty and Saez include these tax returns in the same way as all other tax filers, although

based on the potential tax unit definition they are not included as potential tax units. This creates

an unusual result in 2007, in which (as a result of increased filing for stimulus payments), there

are more tax units who file a return than there are potential tax units. To correct for this concern,

we drop non-resident filers and dependent filers who are under age 20 from the sample prior to

calculating results and adjust the estimated number of tax units by the number of dependent filers

   16
       Under our approach, each single individual or married couple age 20 or older in the United States represents one potential tax unit, which
roughly matches the definition from Piketty and Saez (2003) and Burkhauser et al. (2012). Tax units represent individuals who file a tax return
together, and potential tax units represent individuals who either file together or would be expected to file together if they file a return. This
definition should not be confused with households or families, which are common units of aggregation in survey-based research (see, e.g.,
Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon 2012; Bricker et al. 2016; and Larrimore, Mortenson, and Splinter 2017 for discussions of these differences
and their impacts on distributional statistics).
   17
       Although we follow the non-filer imputation of Piketty and Saez (2003), Auten and Splinter (2016) observe that this approach may
understate the true income of non-filers and that their income levels are closer to 30 percent of the mean income of filers in each year. Increasing
the imputed income for non-filers would decrease the observed top income shares in all years.



                                                                         14
age 20 and over (primarily full-time college students).

B. Cash and In-kind Transfers not Reported on Tax Returns

          To incorporate income beyond that which appears on tax returns, we integrate data from

the IRS, other administrative agencies, the Census Bureau’s March CPS, and the Federal Reserve

Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances.

          Social Security benefits of filers are captured directly on tax forms (including Form

1099-SSA). To incorporate the benefits of non-filers, we compare the total Social Security

payment outlays reported by the Social Security Administration to the total reported on tax forms

by filers, and assign the residual to the non-filing population.

          Cash and in-kind transfers that are not reported on tax forms are added to the dataset

using a statistical match to CPS data. Since tax units are not delineated in the CPS data, we

divide households into tax units following the guidelines from Piketty and Saez (2003) to

estimate potential tax units described above and in our Data Appendix.18 For each tax unit in the

CPS data, we then determine their centile in the taxable income distribution, average their in-

kind transfer income from each source for that centile of the distribution, and assign that in-kind

transfer income to tax units in the IRS data in the same centile. Recognizing that major transfers,

including health insurance provided through Medicare, are correlated with the respondent’s age,

when imputing the value of cash and in-kind transfers from the CPS data for each tax unit, we

split the sample into those under age 65 and those over age 65 prior to computing income

centiles (based on the oldest member of the tax unit). Hence, for matching to the CPS data each

individual’s in-kind incomes are taken from the CPS data based on their centile within the

income distribution of those in the same age class. As a result, tax units with people who are over
  18
      Similar guidelines have previously been used to estimate tax units in the CPS data by Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2014),
Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon (2012), and Burkhauser et al. (2012).



                                                                  15
age 65 have substantially higher estimated Medicare benefits than those containing only younger

individuals. When incorporating these in-kind incomes, we follow the approach of Burkhauser,

Larrimore, and Simon (2012), the Congressional Budget Office (2016), and Piketty, Saez, and

Zucman (2016) and assign tax units the full ex-ante value of employer- and government-

provided health insurance.19

           We incorporate imputed rents by distributing the total imputed rental income of primary

residences as reported in the BEA’s Gross Domestic Product calculations to each homeowner in

the data based on their estimated house value. Our approach for estimating home values for each

taxpayer is based on the individual’s property tax payments reported on their tax form and the

ratio of home values to property tax payments in their local area, as described in the subsequent

section outlining the calculation of accrued capital gains on housing.

           The relative magnitudes of each of these components of comprehensive income can be

observed in Appendix Table A2, which shows the aggregate income in our data from each broad

category of income in the comprehensive income measure.



C. Accrued Capital Gains

           Perhaps the most important additions to the tax data are the estimates of accrued capital

gains for each tax unit, including the accrued gains from housing, which is the primary financial

asset for many families. To estimate accrued gains, we build on the methods of Armour,

Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2014), who estimated accrued capital gains as the product of the
   19
       Based on the observation of Finkelstein, Hendren, and Luttmer (2015) that only 20 to 40 percent of the welfare benefits of Medicaid accrue
to beneficiaries, some have argued that a more appropriate method for valuing health insurance benefits is to value them at 20 to 40 percent of
their ex-ante value. Since Finkelstein, Hendren, and Luttmer’s (2015) estimate comes in large part due to the uncompensated care that uninsured
individuals receive, were an adjustment for this care to be included, we believe it would be more appropriate to add the value of this
uncompensated care to those without insurance than to subtract its value from those with Medicaid or Medicare. Were we to add a value of
uncompensated care for the uninsured to our income definition, it would reduce the top 1% income share further relative to that reported here.
Were we to value Medicaid and Medicare at only 20 to 40 percent of the ex-ante value, it would increase the top 1% income share from that
reported here.



                                                                        16
underlying value of each asset at the start of a period and the rate of return from that asset class.

This approach is based on the gross capitalization technique for relating wealth to the income it

generates, which has also been used by Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2016), Saez and Zucman

(2016), and Smeeding and Thompson (2011).20

           In estimating annual accrued gains for owner occupied housing, it is important to account

for the diverse experiences of different regions and local areas with respect to the trends and

timing of changes in home prices. Since home equity accounts for a large part of wealth holdings

for many tax units, tracking changes in accrued capital gains and losses from housing is

potentially important in measuring income over the time period of our data. In this paper, for

what to our knowledge is the first time, we track these changes by taking advantage of the

property tax deduction information available in the income tax data.

           To calculate housing capital gains, we start by estimating the market value of houses

among homeowners. We first estimate the ratio of mean home market value to mean property tax

payment in each county using the county-level home values and property tax from the 1990 and

2000 Decennial Census and from the American Community Survey since 2005. (The property

tax ratios since 2005 using the ACS are from Harris and Moore 2013.)21 This estimate may differ

from the statutory property tax rates in local areas to the extent that the assessed values of homes

for property tax purposes do not match current market values as reported in the surveys.

           For any tax units who file a tax return and itemize their deductions—which comprises the

   20
       One concern with this approach is that those with higher incomes may be more knowledgeable or skilled at investing and therefore receive
a higher rate of return. However, Saez and Zucman (2016) provide evidence that high-income individuals do not, in fact, receive higher rates of
return on their assets than those farther down in the distribution. Lundberg and Waldenström (Forthcoming) consider the gross capitalization
model in Sweden and observe that the gross capitalization model accurately reflects the relationship between dividends and corporate stock value
for approximately two-thirds of cases, although they do not explore the relationship between asset values and overall investment returns.
    21
       Recognizing that the market value of homes to property taxes paid within a county is relatively flat over time except for when the property
tax rates are changed by state or local legislators, we use a weighted average of the closest observed years to determine this ratio in the
intermediate years between the 1990 and 2000 Decennial Census and between the 2000 Decennial Census and the start of the American
Community Survey in 2005. This procedure is modified for two states that had major school finance reforms that resulted in substantial decreases
in the mid-decade. In these cases, the ratio from the two bounding decennial census are used on each side of the reform.



                                                                        17
vast majority of high-income taxpayers—we then multiply the property tax payments that they

report on their tax return by the home-value to property-tax ratio for their county to obtain an

estimate of the market value of their specific home. To further improve coverage for taxpayers

who remained in the same zip code over three or four years, and for whom property tax

information is missing for the middle year, the missing year of property tax data is interpolated

based on the surrounding years. Since this approach uses information derived from the specific

valuation of their house (property tax payments) along with the local level information on how

these values relate to properties in their area of residence, it provides a more detailed assessment

of home values than can be obtained using national level information.

           Although this approach provides improved estimates of home values for itemizers, it does

not pick up the universe of homeowners since not all homeowners file a tax return and not all tax

filers itemize their deductions. However, nearly all taxpayers in the top centiles itemize their

deductions (96 percent of the top 1% in 2007), so the individuals for whom property-tax records

are missing are almost exclusively outside of the top centiles of the distribution. To capture the

market value of owner occupied homes for non-filers and non-itemizers, we observe the

difference between aggregate home values captured among itemizers using the approach above

and the aggregate home values reported by the BEA’s Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts

(IMA). This residual home value is then distributed among non-itemizing tax units.22

           Having estimated the current market value of houses owned by each tax unit, we then

calculate the accrued capital gains from housing for itemizers by multiplying the home value by




   22
      The precise distribution among the non-itemizers will not impact results unless the home values in this group are sufficiently concentrated
to push individuals into, or out of, the top 1% of the distribution.



                                                                        18
the home price appreciation rate from CoreLogic for their county of residence.23 For non-

itemizers and non-filers, because we do not know which specific tax units are the homeowners to

use local-level price trends, we use the national-level home price appreciation rate from

CoreLogic. This, in turn, provides our best estimate of the capital gains from housing in each

year among those who own a home.

           For accrued capital gains from publicly traded and private business investments, the

approach is similar. Following the procedure used by Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore

(2014), accrued gains on investments build on the wealth data from the Survey of Consumer

Finances (SCF).

           A strong predictor of whether individuals have any business investments, which would

generate capital gains, is whether they have any dividends or rents/business income. Each tax

unit is grouped based on whether they have neither of these types of income, dividends only

(over $100), rents/business income only (over $500 in absolute value), or both. Within each

group, individuals are then arrayed into centiles of their total income. For each centile within

each of the four groups, the publicly and privately traded business assets are estimated to be the

average holdings of individuals in the SCF data in the same centile of the group-level income

distribution.24

           For each asset class, we then impute the rate of return based on the average return of that

asset class in the given year. For stocks, we do so using the rate of return of the S&P 500 in the

specified year. For private business wealth, we use the implied rate of return on non-corporate

   23
       The CoreLogic Home Price Index tracks home prices using repeat sales transactions. Not all counties have sufficient sales volume for
CoreLogic to compute a county-level home price index. In these cases, the state level appreciation rate is used. For additional information on the
CoreLogic index, see http://www.corelogic.com/products/corelogic-hpi.aspx
   24
       The SCF organizes individuals into Primary Economic Units (PEU), which may consist of one or more tax units. As a result, in 2013 there
are approximately 122 million PEUs, compared to 162 million tax units. Prior to computing the average asset holdings of those at each point in
the distribution, it is necessary to split PEUs into tax units—which we do evenly throughout the income distribution.



                                                                        19
business equity from the revaluations series in the IMA.25

           Because the SCF is a triennial survey, to produce annual results the distribution of assets

in non-survey years is estimated using a weighted average of the previous and subsequent

survey. The rate of return for these intermediate years is still the actual return from the specified

year from the S&P 500 and IMA data.



V. Results

A. Trends in Tax Return Income with and without Capital Gains

           In Figure 1, we start by comparing the top 1% income shares of tax units for our tax

return income series to the top 1% tax return market income shares that are observed by Piketty

and Saez (2003), both with and without taxable realized capital gains. The inclusion of all

income sources that appear on tax returns, including Social Security and Unemployment

Insurance as well as the other refinements described above, results in top income shares that are

between 1 and 2 percentage points lower in most years—both when excluding and including

taxable realized capital gains.26

           Considering the top income share trends for these baseline series, the top 1% income

share for tax return income increased over the two-business cycles prior to the start of the Great




   25
       The IMA provides the revaluations of several asset classes, including nonfinancial noncorporate equity. These revaluations are similar in
concept to our annual accrued capital gains. To determine the implied rate of return, we take the ratio of revaluations from nonfinancial non-
corporate equity in each year to the prior-year end of year total asset value from nonfinancial noncoporate equity. This approach is a divergence
from the rate of return for private business wealth assumed by Armour, Burkhauser, and Larrimore (2014) who used the S&P 500 for private
wealth as well. Because the IMA-implied return on non-corporate business equity was lower in the late 1980s than S&P returns for publicly
traded businesses, using the IMA return lowers the top income shares using this approach at the early years in our period and makes top income
share growth more positive. Results using the S&P 500 rate of return for private business wealth instead would show slower top income share
growth.
   26
      When we use only the sources of income from the tax records that Piketty and Saez (2003) use in their tax return market income series, we
are able to nearly perfectly replicate their top 1% income shares series shown in Figure 1, so this difference can be fully attributable to the fuller
income measure and corrections to the tax record sample, rather than other methodological variations.



                                                                          20
Recession with or without the inclusion of taxable realized capital gains.27 However, as was

observed previously by Piketty and Saez, the level of top incomes and its growth is accentuated

when taxable realized capital gains are included in the calculation. From the business cycle peak

in 1989 to the peak in 2007 before the Great Recession, the top 1% share of tax return income

without capital gains rose by 5.7 percentage points. By contrast, when including taxable realized

capital gains, the top 1% share of tax return income rose by 9.1 percentage points. Thus,

reflecting the importance of capital gains, more than one-third (3.4 percentage points) of this 9.1

percentage point increase in top 1% income shares can be attributed to increases in the realized

capital gains of those at the top of the income distribution.

           During the Great Recession in 2008 and 2009, the top 1% income shares for these series

fell – particularly when including taxable realized capital gains. But the trend then reversed and

top 1% income shares rose through 2012 before falling again in 2013, when capital gains tax

rates were increased.28

           As discussed above, however, when including capital gains in income calculations,

focusing on taxable realized capital gains fails to reflect the true level and timing of the

economic income flow. Therefore, Figure 2 reveals how our top 1% income shares series differ

if we incorporate gains in the year they are accrued rather than in the year they are realized and

reported on tax returns. To do so, we once again show our tax record income series with no

capital gains and with taxable realized capital gains from Figure 1. To better show how housing

   27
       Throughout the paper, for the analysis of the period before the Great Recession we focus on the 1989 and 2007 business cycle peaks. We
do so, in part, because 1989 is the first year for which SCF data is available. However, since 1989 and 2007 are both peaks of business cycles,
this comparison is also advantageous as it allows us to consider long-run trends in top income shares while avoiding conflating the comparison
with business cycle effects.
    28
       Ahead of the 2013 increase in both ordinary and capital gains top rates and the new 3.8 percent tax on net investment income, the highest-
income taxpayers—who were the only ones effected—shifted ordinary income and accelerated the realization of capital gains into 2012 (Auten,
Splinter, and Nelson 2016; Saez 2016). This shift produced a spike in 2012 in the top 1% income share based on ordinary income or including
realized capital gains. This result can be seen in Appendix Table A1, as realized capital gains increased by 60 percent in 2012 and then decreased
by over 20 percent in 2013. By contrast, stock prices increased by 30 percent in 2013 compared to only 13 percent in 2012. In 2014, Saez (2016)
reports that the top 1% share increased, although not back to the level observed in 2012.



                                                                        21
versus investment gains impact top 1% income share trends, we add these accrued capital gains

in two steps. We first add accrued capital gains from investments in publicly traded corporations

and privately held businesses to our no capital gains series (dashed line with diamonds) and then

add the accrued capital gains from housing in a subsequent step (solid line with diamonds).

       Considering first the longer-term trend over the two full business cycles before the Great

Recession (1989 to 2007), the growth in top 1% income shares using capital gains in the year

they are accrued is slower than the growth found using taxable capital gains in the year they are

realized. This is the case irrespective of how inclusively we measure accrued gains. The top 1%

income share including taxable realized capital gains rose by 9.1 percentage points from 1989 to

2007. Using our most inclusive accrued gains measure—which includes accrued gains from

public investments, private business, and housing—the increase in the top 1% income share was

approximately 40 percent smaller, rising by 5.3 percentage points from 1989 to 2007.

       Both these longer-term trends, as well as their short-run fluctuations, are partially driven

by the strength of the equities markets at any given time that result in increases or decreases in

capital gains accruals. For example, the increase in the top 1% income share in 1995 corresponds

with a 31 percent increase in the S&P 500 in that year, which was followed by continued

strength in the equities market for much of the late 1990s (see Appendix Table A1). Similarly,

the increase in top income shares in 2003 through 2005 resulted from strength in the rate of

return on public equities in 2003 and on privately held businesses in 2004 and 2005. Overall, the

average nominal return on the S&P 500 was 13 percent in the 1980s and 16 percent in the 1990s.

It was only 1 percent from 2000 through 2007. This decline in the rate of return on public

equities reduces the growth in top 1% income shares over the period coming from accrued

capital gains when it is not offset by gains in other assets held by the top of the distribution, such


                                                   22
as privately held businesses (as was seen in 2004-2005). After a 38.5 percent decline in 2008, the

equities market has been quite strong since 2009, with an average annual return on the S&P 500

of nearly 16 percent per year through 2013, which explains the more recent increases in top 1%

income shares.

       In addition to more accurately reflecting the timing of when capital gains are received,

this series also includes capital gains from housing, which are almost completely absent from the

taxable realized capital gains series. Since housing is the main asset of many tax units outside of

the top income centiles, incorporating these gains into the income definition reduced the level of

top income shares when housing values were increasing in the early 2000s (this can be observed

by comparing the series with only capital gains from public and private investments to the most

inclusive series that includes housing capital gains as well). But, even in 2007, when housing

values began to decline, the top 1% income share is below that observed when only taxable

realized capital gains are counted and its increase over the two business cycles since 1989 is

slower than that observed when using taxable realized gains.

       However, although incorporating accrued capital gains from housing mitigates the

growth in top income shares prior to the Great Recession, using this more inclusive capital gains

definition results in an enormous spike in top income shares during the first year of the Great

Recession and accentuates the growth in top income shares during the recovery. The decline in

top 1% income shares we observed for the taxable realized capital gains series in 2008 came

primarily from the decline in taxable realized gains among those at the top of the distribution.

But it missed the scope of capital losses throughout the distribution, including the capital losses

from housing. When incorporating capital gains and losses into income definitions, these

substantial losses are an important part of the trend during the recession, and more fully reflect


                                                  23
the magnitude of the recession than do the decline in capital gains realizations. As seen in

Appendix Table A3, total accrued capital losses (including housing) in 2008 amounted to $8.2

trillion (compared to tax return income excluding capital gains of $8.6 trillion in Appendix Table

A2). Because of the unprecedented scale of the capital losses in 2008 that almost completely

counterbalanced income from other sources reported on tax returns in that year, once we include

accrued losses we observe that this top 1% income share series exhibited an enormous spike in

2008. In particular, the top 1% share of tax return income including our total measure of accrued

capital gains was over 100 percent in 2008. In other words, when focusing on income from tax

returns only—but including capital gains and losses in a way that more closely reflects its level

and timing—the net income of many taxpayers was actually negative in 2008 because their

accrued capital losses were greater than their tax return income from other sources. Although this

top 1% income share measure exhibited a dramatic spike in that year, we emphasize that this

does not mean that very-high-income individuals were exempt from these capital losses or that

their incomes increased during this period. Since centiles of the distribution are always based on

the income measure evaluated, the observed spike also reflects a reshuffling of who is in the top

1% of the distribution relative to a series with no capital gains, as some individuals who have

high tax return incomes experienced substantial capital losses that caused them to drop out of

this top 1% series that captures these losses in its income measure.29

The spike in top income shares in 2008 proved to be a single-year event for this series, as top 1%

income shares dropped back to 16.5 percent in 2009. But in subsequent years of the economic

recovery, stock prices recovered more rapidly than did house prices. As a result, from 2009
   29
       This issue reflects a broader challenge with measuring income shares for a single year. Auten, Gee, and Turner (2013) for example, observe
that in any given year only about two-thirds of those in the top 1% of the income distribution on tax returns are also in the top 1% in the
following year. Since Auten, Gee, and Turner (2013) focus on taxable realized capital gains rather than accrued capital gains, the rates of
persistence that they observe will likely differ from those using our measures. In 2008, in particular, persistence of the top 1% from the prior year
and subsequent year are likely lower using our accrued gains series due to the magnitude of the accrued losses.



                                                                          24
through 2012 the assets of those at the top of the distribution in this series (as well as others with

significant investment and business assets) recovered faster than did the investments of those in

the middle of the distribution (housing assets). Hence, by 2012 the top 1% income share

including these three sources of accrued capital gains increased back to its 2007 level, before

falling slightly (0.2 percentage points) in 2013. This result is in sharp contrast to the top 1%

income share series using taxable realized capital gains. It fell by 1.2 percentage points in 2013

due to artificial timing shifts in realizations to avoid the tax increases and the 3.8 percent net

investment income tax that began in 2013 (Auten, Splinter, and Nelson 2016; Saez 2016). The

contrast between 2012 and 2013 observations in these two series nicely shows the extent to

which accrued capital gains series are less susceptible to behavioral changes by individuals

deferring or locking in gains based on changes in the tax code.

B. Trends in Comprehensive Income with and without Capital Gains

       Although tax return income is useful for understanding the distribution of income as

captured by the tax code—including income from labor market and investment activities—it

presents an incomplete picture of the full distribution of resources to Americans beyond solely its

incomplete treatment of capital gains. This is because cash and in-kind transfers that do not

appear on tax returns, along with in-kind employer benefits and tax credits and liabilities, are

important components of resources for many tax units even though they do not show up in

income as observed on tax returns. This approach also misses the imputed rental income of

homeowners, which helps accentuate the gains from homeownership in most years, but partially

offsets the losses among homeowners in 2008. In addition, tax credits including the EITC, the

Child Tax Credit, the 2008 stimulus rebate, the 2009 and 2010 Making Work Pay Credit and

homebuyer tax credit, the 2011 and 2012 payroll tax holiday, and the American Opportunity Tax


                                                   25
Credit all have material impacts on the financial resources of their recipients. The spike in top

1% income shares that is observed in 2008 when using only income that appears on tax returns,

along with accrued capital gains including housing, partially reflects the fact that the income

base from which top income shares are computed fails to include these additional resources that

individuals receive.

       Figure 3 illustrates the impact of including taxes, transfers, and in-kind benefits on the

top 1% income share, excluding capital gains. Using a more inclusive income definition lowers

the top 1% income share and slows its growth. Reassuringly, progressive taxes and transfers

mitigate income inequality to some degree. The top 1% share in 2013 was 17.4 percent based on

the Piketty-Saez narrower tax return market income definition (excluding capital gains). As

observed previously in Figure 1, including other pre-tax cash income that is captured on the tax

return lowers this share to 15.9 percent. When broadening the income definition even further by

including taxes, in-kind transfers, and non-taxable cash transfers, it lowers the top 1% income

share in 2013 to 11.1 percent. Thus, even before evaluating the impact of capital gains, using a

more comprehensive income measure reduces the top 1% income share in 2013 by 6.4

percentage points relative to the Piketty-Saez income measure and by 4.9 percentage points

relative to the tax return income measure.

       Just as important as its impact on levels is the impact that including additional income

sources has had on the trend of top incomes. Using only tax return income (excluding capital

gains), the top 1% income share increases by 5.7 percentage points between over the two

business cycle period between 1989 and 2007. Using our comprehensive income definition, the

growth over the two business cycles prior to the Great Recession is slower than that for tax

return income (and slower still than the growth in top income shares for market income seen in


                                                 26
Figure 1)—increasing by only 3.1 percentage points from 1989 through 2007. Top income shares

over the period from 2007 through 2013 fell by 1.6 percentage points from 2007 through 2013

using the more comprehensive income measure.

       Though top 1% income shares are now lower, the impact of each of the potential capital

gains treatments on our comprehensive income series is substantively similar to that observed

previously when we added capital gains to tax return income—with the exception of 2008.

Adding taxable realized capital gains to comprehensive income (see Figure 4) increases the level

of inequality as well as its growth over time. Adding capital gains at accrual also increases the

level of top 1% income shares in most years relative to the no-capital-gains series. But, using

accrued capital gains rather than taxable realized capital gains results in a slower growth from

1989 through 2007 in the top 1% income share. Using our preferred income measure—

comprehensive income with accrued capital gains from all sources including housing—the top

1% income share rose by only 1.7 percentage points from 1989 through 2007.

       While observed inequality growth is slower in the two business cycles prior to the Great

Recession when using accrued gains rather than realized taxable gains, we again see that at the

start of the Great Recession the top 1% income share increases in 2008 due, in part, to our ability

to better capture capital losses, including those from housing, with this measure. Once again, this

reflects the fact that when measured at accrual the capital losses for many taxpayers in 2008

exceeded income from other sources. By using a broader income measure that is closer to a full

Haig-Simons definition, however, the accrued losses at the start of the recession are less

substantial as a share of income from other sources. As a result, although the top 1% income

share still rises in 2008, it does so less dramatically than previously shown using the narrower

income definition. The top 1% income share in this year was 21.5 percent.


                                                 27
       Finally, looking at more recent years, we observe a steady growth in the top 1% share of

our most comprehensive income measure during the economic recovery since 2009. The 16.5

percent top 1% income share using this series in 2013 is the highest of any year since 1989, other

than in 2008. Despite the increase in the share of comprehensive income going to the top 1%,

this 2013 level is still below the 22.8 percent share of market income plus realized capital gains

observed by Piketty and Saez in 2012 and the 20.0 percent share that they observe in 2013, as

reported in Figure 1. Hence, when considering the full 24-year period for which we have data,

using a more comprehensive income measure results in lower levels of top income inequality in

most years and slower inequality growth than was previously believed from 1989 through 2007,

but more rapid inequality growth from 2007 through 2013.



VI. Discussion and Conclusion

       Empirical researchers are ultimately limited by available data in their ability to provide

answers to policy questions. Piketty and Saez (2003) in their seminal effort to capture long-term

trends in U.S. income inequality were the first to show the value of using tax record data for this

purpose. But to do so consistently over the entire period, they had to focus on the share of market

income held by top income groups and, to the extent that they include capital gains, had to do so

at the point of realization when the gains appeared on tax returns. Using these data, Piketty and

Saez observed that the share of market income (both including and excluding capital gains) of

the top 1% rose over the first part of the 20th century and fell almost continuously up to the mid-

1950s. But more importantly, they found that thereafter this decline levelled off and in the early

1980s began to increase. Especially when including realized capital gains, the increase that

Piketty and Saez observe since 1989 has been dramatic—with the top 1% income share


                                                 28
increasing by 61 percent (from 14.5 percent to 23.5 percent) between the two business cycle

peak years of 1989 and 2007. The share then fell during the first two years of the Great

Recession and rose and fell thereafter through 2013.

       Here, with access to much richer contemporary data for the years 1989 through 2013, we

show the sensitivity of Piketty and Saez’s finding of rapid increases in income equality between

1989 and 2007 as well as the pattern of change since then to the nature of their income

definition. We show that moving from a market income to a taxable income to a comprehensive

income measure that is more closely aligned with the Haig-Simons definition not only lowers top

income shares but also reduces inequality growth up through the start of the Great Recession.

But even more importantly, we show that the decision by Piketty and Saez to focus on taxable

realized capital gains rather than accrued capital gains greatly affects their patterns of levels and

trends not only relative to income measures that do not include capital gains but to one that uses

a Haig-Simons preferred accrued capital gains measure.

       Figure 5 most directly focuses on Piketty and Saez’s preferred measure—market income

including taxable realized capital gains—and our two proposed alternatives—comprehensive

income with and without accrued capital gains.

       Our comprehensive measure without capital gains is similar to their measure in direction

but with both lower levels of inequality and muted trends throughout the entire period from 1989

through 2013. At the business cycle peak in 2007 before the start of the Great Recession, the top

1% income share we find using our comprehensive measure without capital gains reached a peak

of 12.7 percent, well below the 23.5 percent peak Piketty and Saez report. Additionally, although

both top 1% income shares were greater than they were in 1989, our comprehensive measure

without capital gains rose less rapidly. Relative to 1989 levels, our top 1% income share


                                                   29
increased by 2.1 percentage points (19.8 percent), compared to the 9.1 percentage point (61

percent) growth they report. The six years since the start of the Great Recession in both series

show initial declines in levels and trends in top 1% income share that are only partially offset by

increases in later years.

        When we compare our comprehensive income including accrued capital gains measure

with the Piketty and Saez measure of market income with taxable realized capital gains, our

measure is again below their measure in all years between 1989 and 2007 and growth is

considerably lower in our series with accrued capital gains compared to their series. But unlike

our comprehensive measure without capital gains, the year trends in our accrued capital gains

series are quite different and do not peak in business cycle peak years as do the other two series.

During each expansion, the growth in top 1% income shares in our accrued capital gains series

seem to precede that observed in the other two series.

        The contrast between our comprehensive income series with accrued capital gains and the

Piketty and Saez series with taxable realized capital gains is also clearly apparent during the

Great Recession and its aftermath. During the initial year of the Great Recession, using accrued

gains more fully encapsulates the magnitude of the recession, as the capital losses from equities,

private businesses, and housing in that year more than offset income from other sources for many

tax units. This observation results in a notable increase in the top 1% income share in that year

that is not observed in the taxable realized capital gains series. Additionally, during the economic

recovery from 2009 through 2013—which exhibited particular strength in the equities markets—

the top 1% share increased by more than previously observed using a taxable realized capital

gains series (particularly in 2013, where the taxable realized gains series is especially sensitive to

the changes in the tax law).


                                                  30
       The divergences that we highlight in Figure 5 suggest that in the unsettled question of the

place of capital gains in the income literature, it is not sufficient to simply focus on the question

of whether to include capital gains but, if so, how to include them. Only by including capital

gains as they accrue, and incorporating capital gains and losses that do not make it onto tax

records, are we able to fully observe the experience of tax units within and outside the top 1% of

the income distribution during the Great Recession.



References

Aguiar, M., & Bils, M. 2016. Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?
       American Economic Review 105(9), 2725–56.
Andrews, D., Caldera Sánchez, A., & Å. Johansson. 2011. Housing Markets and Structural
      Policies in OECD Countries. OECD Economics Department Working Paper 836.
Atkinson, A. B., Piketty, T., & Saez, E. 2011. Top Incomes in the Long Run of History. Journal
       of Economic Literature 49(1), 3–71.
Armour, P., Burkhauser, R. V., & Larrimore, J. 2014. Levels and Trends in United States Income
      and Its Distribution: A Crosswalk from Market Income Towards a Comprehenesive
      Haig-Simons Income Approach. Southern Economic Journal 81(2), 271–93.
Auerbach, A. J. 1989. Capital Gains Taxation and Tax Reform. National Tax Journal 42(3),
      391–401.
Auten, G., & Gravelle, J. 2009. The Exclusion of Capital Gains on the Sale of Principal
       Residences: Policy Options. Proceedings of the 102nd Annual Conference of the National
       Tax Association. Washington DC: National Tax Association, 103–12.
Auten, G., Gee, G., & Turner, N. 2013. Income Inequality, Mobility, and Turnover at the Top in
       the US, 1987-2010. American Economic Review 103(3), 168–72.
Auten, G. & Splinter, D. 2016. Using Tax Data to Measure Long-Term Trends in U.S. Income
       Inequality. Working Paper.
Auten, G., Splinter, D., & Nelson, S. 2016. Reactions of High-Income Taxpayers to Major Tax
       Legislation. National Tax Journal 69(4), 935–64.
Barthold, T. 1993. How Should We Measure Distribution? National Tax Journal 46(3), 291–99.
Bond, C. A., Martin, T., McIntosh, S. H., & Mead, C. I. 2007. Integrated Macroeconomic
       Accounts for the United States. Survey of Current Business 87(2), 14–31.




                                                   31
Bricker, J., Henriques, A. Krimmel, J., & Sabelhaus, J. 2016. Measuring Income and Wealth at
       the Top Using Administrative and Survey Data. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
       261–312.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2016a. National Income and Product Account Tables. Available
      online via: https://www.bea.gov//national/nipaweb/DownSS2.asp.
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2016b. Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts for the United
      States. Available online via:
      https://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/Ni_FedBeaSna/Index.asp.
Burkhauser, R. V., Hérault, N., Jenkins, S., and Wilkins, Roger. What Has Been Happening to
      UK Income Inequality since the Mid-1990s? Answers from Reconciled and Combined
      Household Survey and Tax Return Data.” February 2016. NBER Working Paper
      w21991.
Burkhauser, R. V., Feng, S., Jenkins, S. P., & Larrimore, J. 2011. Trends in United States
      Income Inequality Using the March Current Population Survey: The Importance of
      Controlling for Censoring. Journal of Economic Inequality 9(3), 393–415.
Burkhauser, R. V., Feng, S., Jenkins, S. P., & Larrimore, J. 2012. Recent Trends in Top Income
      Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March CPS and IRS Tax Return Data.
      Review of Economics and Statistics 94(2), 371–88.
Burkhauser, R. V., Larrimore, J., & Simon, K. 2012. A Second Opinion on the Economic Health
      of the Middle Class. National Tax Journal 61(1), 7–22.
Canberra Group (2011). Handbook on Household Income Statistics, second edition. Geneva:
    United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
Cilke, J. 2014 The Case of the Missing Strangers: What We Know and Don’t Know About Non-
        Filers. Mimeo
Congressional Budget Office. 2016. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes,
      2013. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Cunningham, C. R., & Engelhardt, G. V. 2008. Housing Capital-Gains Taxation and Homeowner
      Mobility: Evidence from the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. Journal of Urban Economics
      63, 803–15.
d’Ercole, M. M., & Förster, M. 2012. The OECD approach to measuring income distribution and
       poverty: strengths, limits and statistical issues. In: D. J. Besharov and K. A. Couch (eds.),
       European Measures of Income and Poverty: Lessons for the U.S. New York: Oxford
       University Press, 27–58.
Dowd, T., McClelland, R., & Muthitacharoen, A. 2012. New Evidence on the Tax Elasticity of
      Capital Gains: A Joint Working Paper of the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation
      and the Congressional Budget Office. Joint Committee on Taxation JCX-56-12.
European Commission, International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Co-operation
      and Development, United Nations, and World Bank. 2008. System of National Accounts
      2008. Available online via:
      http://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/SNA2008.pdf.

                                                 32
Feldstein, M., & Yitzhaki, S. 1978. The Effects of the Capital Gains Tax on the Selling and
       Switching of Common Stock. Journal of Public Economics 9(1), 17–36.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N., & Luttmer, E. F. P. 2015. The Value of Medicaid: Interpreting
       Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. NBER Working Paper 21308.
Frick, J. R, Grabka, M. M., Smeeding, T. M., & Tsakloglou, P. 2010. Distributional Effects of
        Imputed Rents in Five European countries. Journal of Housing Economics 19(3), 167–79.
Gottschalk, P., & Danziger, S. 2005. Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family Income in
       the United States, 1975–2002. Review of Income and Wealth 51(2), 231–54.
Haig, R. M. 1921. The concept of income-economics and legal aspects, in R. M. Haig (ed.) The
       Federal Income Tax, Columbia University Press, New York: pp. 54–76.
Harris, B., & Moore, B.D. 2013. Residential Property Taxes in the United States. Urban-
        Brookings Tax Policy Center Research Report.
Kuznets, S. 1955. Economic Growth and Income Inequality. American Economic Review, 45(1):
      1–28.
Larrimore, J., Mortenson, J. & Splinter, D. 2017. Household Incomes in Tax Data: Using
      Addresses to Move from Tax Unit to Household Income Distributions. Board of
      Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series
      2017-002.
Lundberg, J., & Waldenström, D. Forthcoming. Wealth Inequality in Sweden: What Can We
      Learn from Capitalized Income Tax Data. Review of Income and Wealth.
National Association of Realtors. 2016. Median Sales Price of Existing Homes
       [HOSMEDUSA052N], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
       https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/HOSMEDUSA052N/, October 19, 2016.
Piketty, T., & Saez, E. 2003. Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–1998. Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 118(1):1–39. Supplementary data updated to 2015 in June 2016.
        Available online via: http://elsa.berkley.edu/~saez/.
Piketty, T., Saez, E., & Zucman, G. 2016. Distributional National Accounts: Methods and
        Estimates for the United States. NBER Working Paper 22945.
Proctor, B.D., Semega, J., & M.K. Kollar. 2016. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2015.
       US Census Bureau Population Reports, P60-256. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
       Printing Office.
Roine, J., & Waldenström, D. 2012. On the Role of Capital Gains in Swedish Income Inequality.
       Review of Income and Wealth 58(3), 569–87.
Saez, E. 2016. Striking it Richer: The Evolution of Top Incomes in the United States (Updated
       with 2015 Preliminary Estimates). Available online via:
       http://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/saez-UStopincomes-2015.pdf.
Saez, E., & Zucman, G. 2016. Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
       Capitalized Income Tax Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 519–78.



                                                33
Shan, Hui. 2008. The Effect of Capital Gains Taxation on Home Sales: Evidence from the
       Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. Federal Reserve Board Working Paper 2008-53.
Simons, H. C., 1938. Personal Income Taxation: The Definition of Income as a Problem in
      Fiscal Policy. Chicago University Press: Chicago.
Slemrod, J. 2016. Caveats to the Research Use of Tax return Administrative Data. National Tax
      Journal 69(4), 1003–1020.
Smeeding, T., & Thompson, J. 2011. Recent Trends in Income Inequality: Labor, Wealth and
      More Complete Measures of Income. Research in Labor Economics May, 1–49.
US Department of Treasury. 2016. Taxes Paid on Long-Term Capital Gains, 1977-2013.
      https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-analysis/Documents/Taxes-Paid-
      on-Long-Term-Capital-Gains.pdf
Veall, M.R. 2012. Top Income Shares in Canada: Recent Trends and Policy Implications.
       Canadian Journal of Economics 45(4), 1247–42.
Wolff, E., & Zacharias, A. 2009. Household Wealth and the Measurement of Economic Well-
       being in the United States. Journal of Economic Inequality 7, 83–115.
Wolff, E., Zacharias, A., & Masterson, T. 2012. Trends in living standards and inequality, 1959-
       2007. The Review of Income and Wealth 58(2), 475–99.




                                               34
Table 1: Realized Capital Gains in 1997 through 2007, by length of time holding the asset
before sale

                              Percent of
                              realized
Holding period                capital gains
less than 1 year               2.8
1 to 2 years                  13.3
2 to 5 years                  21.2
5 to 10 years                 19.6
10 to 20 years                23.4
20 years or more              19.8

Source: IRS Sale of Capital Asset data, 1997 to 2007 (Schedule D)
Note: Short-term gains of unknown holding period are included as less than one year. Long term
gains with unknown holding period are excluded.




                                               35
Figure 1: Top 1% income share for market income and tax return income with and
without realized taxable capital gains
                              25




                              20
 Top 1 percent income share




                              15




                              10




                              5




                              0
                               1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
                                             Piketty-Saez, no capital gains
                                             Piketty-Saez, taxable realized gains
                                             Tax return income, no capital gains
                                             Tax return income, taxable realized capital gains


Source: Piketty and Saez (2003) and authors’ calculations using IRS tax return data




                                                                  36
Figure 2: Top 1%income share for tax return income with various treatments of capital
gains
     25




                               20
  Top 1 percent income share




                               15




                               10




                               5




                               0
                                1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
                                       Tax return income, no capital gains
                                      Tax return income, taxable realized capital gains
                                      Tax return income, accrued investment and business gains
                                      Tax return income, accrued investment, business, and housing gains


Source: Authors’ calculations using IRS tax return data, the Survey of Consumer Finances, the
American Community Survey, and the Decennial Census.




                                                                     37
Figure 3: Top 1% income share for various income definitions, excluding capital gains

                                25




                                20
   Top 1 percent income share




                                15




                                10




                                5




                                0
                                 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013
                                                 Piketty-Saez, no capital gains
                                                 Tax return income, no capital gains
                                                 Comprehensive income, no capital gains


Source: Piketty and Saez (2003) and authors’ calculations using IRS tax return data and the
March CPS.




                                                                  38
Figure 4: Top 1% income share for comprehensive income with various treatments of
capital gains
                             25




                             20
Top 1 percent income share




                             15




                             10




                             5




                             0
                              1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                                    Comprehensive income, no capital gains
                                    Comprehensive income, taxable realized capital gains
                                    Comprehensive income, accrued investment and business gains
                                    Comprehensive income, accrued investment, business, and housing gains

Source: Authors’ calculations using IRS tax return data, the Survey of Consumer Finances, the
March Current Population Survey, the American Community Survey, and the Decennial Census.




                                                                    39
Figure 5: Comparing top 1% income share using comprehensive income measures to that
seen using market income with taxable realized capital gains
                             25




                             20
Top 1 percent income share




                             15




                             10




                             5




                             0
                              1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                                   Piketty-Saez, taxable realized gains
                                   Comprehensive income, no capital gains
                                   Comprehensive income, accrued investment, business, and housing gains


Source: Piketty and Saez (2003) and authors’ calculations using IRS tax return data, the Survey
of Consumer Finances, the March Current Population Survey, the American Community Survey,
and the Decennial Census.




                                                                     40
Data Appendix
1. Determining the population of tax units and the number of non-filers
The total number of tax units for this paper starts with the number of potential tax units in each
year from Piketty and Saez (2003) and their subsequent updates. This count is based on Census
Bureau data of the total number of individuals or married couples who are over the age of 20.
The Census resident population of the United States includes people whose usual residence is in
the 50 states and the District of Columbia and does not include members of the Armed Forces
overseas, their dependents, or other U.S. citizens residing outside the United States. We then
remove from the total count of potential tax units the dependent filers who are over age 20, since
they do not represent independent entities. As a result, in each year we have somewhat fewer tax
units than is observed by Piketty and Saez.
The total number of tax units that file a return in each year is the total number of non-dependent
resident tax filers who submit a return covering the specific income year. This approach differs
from that taken by Piketty and Saez in three ways. The first is that this approach removes tax
filers who report their residence as being outside of the United States. The second is that it
removes all dependent filers from the data, whereas Piketty and Saez include them. However,
although we remove all dependent filers, removing those under age 20 does not impact the total
number of (filing plus non-filing) tax units under their definition since these young dependent
filers were not counted as potential tax units in their Census-based population count.30
The third way our count of the number of filing tax units differs from Piketty and Saez is that we
focus on the year in which income is received rather than the year in which the tax return is filed.
For example, if an individual files their tax return for income year 2000 in the spring of 2002, we
treat this return as reflecting their 2000 income, whereas the data that Piketty and Saez use will
consider this income with the other returns filed in 2002 that reflect 2001 incomes (the calendar
year prior to filing). Additionally, if the same taxpayer files an amended return in the spring of
2003, then their income from 2000 would appear twice in the data used by Piketty and Saez. We
correct this problem by reassigning late-filed returns to the income year for which the income
was reported and use only the most recent tax return submitted.
The number of non-filing tax units in each year reflects the residual between the total number of
non-dependent tax units for that year and the total number of non-dependent tax units who file a
return.
2. Incorporating non-taxable income sources for comprehensive income
Most income of tax units is determined based on the incomes reported on annual tax return
forms, such as the Form 1040. However, there are several cash and in-kind transfers and
employee compensation that do not appear on tax returns but are captured by the Census
Bureau’s March Current Population Survey (CPS). The cash income items that are included in

  30
       The problem with dependent filers under age 20 is particularly notable in 2007, when more tax returns were filed—including dependent
filers—than there were potential tax filers under the Piketty and Saez (2003) approach.



                                                                     41
the March CPS but not the IRS data are public assistance income (such as AFDC/TANF),
supplemental security income, child support, education and financial assistance income,
veteran’s income, and worker’s compensation. The in-kind resources, which we value at market
value and include with income, are food stamps, school lunches, housing assistance, Medicare,
Medicaid, and employer provided health insurance. (See Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon
2012 for a broader discussion of the decision to value health insurance resources at their market
value.)
To incorporate these additional sources of income into the comprehensive income measure, we
first construct tax units in the CPS data using the approach described in the main text, whereby
all individuals over age 20 and their spouses are considered separate tax units (along with any
dependent children that they may have who are under age 20). These tax units are then split into
two groups based on whether any individual in the tax unit is over age 65. The split by age is
intended to recognize that several of these items, such as Medicare, are substantially more
prevalent among older adults. Within the two age groups, the tax units are then arrayed based on
their income (incorporating only those components that appear on tax returns) and split into 100
centiles based on their position in the income distribution within their age group. A similar
procedure is undertaken on the IRS side to create centiles of the income distribution within the
two age groups in the tax data.
Using the March CPS, we compute the mean value of each income source that does not appear in
the tax data for each centile of the population within the two age groups. This mean value is then
assigned to individuals in the same centile and age group in the IRS data and added to the
resources of that tax unit when computing comprehensive income.
3. Imputed rents for owner occupied housing
The Haig-Simons income measure includes imputed rents along with the other income sources
described above. To incorporate imputed rents, we start with the aggregate level of imputed rents
in each year from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Gross Domestic Product calculations. We
then distribute these imputed rents to homeowners in proportion to their estimated home values
(calculated using the procedure from section 4.A of this appendix and as discussed in the main
text) to reflect that homeowners with more expensive homes will also have higher levels of
imputed rents.
In most years, the inclusion of imputed rents reduces the top 1% income share by approximately
one-half percentage point. This reflects that imputed rents (and housing wealth) is less
concentrated among the top 1% than is the rest of comprehensive income. The inclusion of
imputed rents has a larger impact on the top 1% income share in 2008. In this year, the fuller
income measure substantially reduces the spike in top 1%income shares, since the addition of
this income source has a larger relative impact on the overall levels of income than it does in
other years. With the inclusion of imputed rents as part of income, the top 1% income share still
spikes in 2008 but not to the same degree as seen in the series that exclude these values from
income.


                                                 42
4. Determining asset values for use in accrued capital gains calculations
A. Housing Values, itemizers
Among taxpayers who itemize their taxes, estimates of home values start with line 6 of Schedule
A of the IRS Form 1040 – the deduction for real estate taxes paid. Recognizing that some
individuals may not itemize every year, for individuals who remain in the same zip code for
three consecutive years and itemize in years t-1 and t+1, but not in year t, their real estate tax
payments in year t are assigned the average of their real estate tax payments in the two adjoining
years. The real estate tax is interpolated for individuals who fail to itemize for two years but
remain in the same zip code all four years. After these adjustments, taxpayers who remain in the
same zip code are assumed to have the same amount of real estate tax for up to three additional
years. Though this procedure may slightly understate the tax paid, it provides a close
approximation and helps identify additional home-owners.
To convert real estate tax payments to home values, we use self-reported property tax payments
and home values from the Decennial Census (1990 and 2000) and from the American
Community Survey (ACS) (2005 through 2013). In these surveys, respondents report the
estimated market value of their house as well as the property tax payments.31 Using these data,
we compute the ratio of the average property value to the average property tax payment for each
county using the following approach:
          (1) For years since 2005, when ACS data is available, the ratio of property values to
          property tax payments is taken from the analysis by Harris and Moore (2013) of county-
          level property taxes using this data. Not all counties have data available using the one-
          year ACS, so a hierarchical approach is taken, where one-year ACS data is used for
          counties where it is available. If the one-year ACS data is not available for a county then
          the three-year data is used, and if the three-year ACS data is not available then then five-
          year data is used. When multi-year ACS data is used for a county, the value-to-tax ratio
          for a year is the multi-year estimate with a midpoint closest to the year of interest.
          (2) For the two decennial census years (1990 and 2000), the ratio of property values to
          property tax payments is computed using the IPUMS public use microdata sample. Since
          IPUMS data does not report the county, we compute the property tax and property values
          at the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) level and then calculate the county-level
          result as the population-weighted average of overlapping PUMAs using the PUMA-
          County crosswalk files from the Missouri Census Data Center.32
          (3) For years between decennial census years, the ratios in each county are computed as
          the weighted average of the two decennial censuses—so the ratio for a county in 1991
          will equal 90 percent of the ratio from that county in 1990 plus 10 percent of the ratio

   31
      For the Decennial Census, property tax payments are reported in ranges, and we use the mid-point of each range and 1.5 times the topcode
value ($4,500 in 1990 and $9,100 in 2000) for the highest category. We similarly assign topcoded property values (above $600,000 in 1990 and
above $1 million in 2000) 1.5 times the topcode threshold.
   32
      See, http://mcdc.missouri.edu/allabout/geo_pumas.shtml.



                                                                      43
           from that county in 2000. Similarly, for years between the 2000 Decennial Census and
           the start of the ACS data in 2005, the ratio for each county is computed as the weighted
           average between the 2000 Decennial Census and the 2005 ACS.
The county-level ratios of home values to property tax payments are then assigned to each zip
code (since zip codes are reported on tax forms whereas counties are not) using the county-zip
crosswalk file from the Department of Housing and Urban Development.33 In the case where a
zip code includes multiple counties, the zip code is assigned the results from the county in which
the largest fraction of the zip code’s residents reside.
Individual-level property values are then computed as:



where           is the taxpayer-level home value for itemizers in year t,       is the taxpayer-
level property tax payment in year t,                is the county-level average home value in
year t, and              is the county-level average property tax payment in year t.

This approach for valuing houses using the individual-level property tax payments and the
county-level home value to property tax ratio uses an assumption that even if different counties
assess properties in different ways, within a county there is general uniformity in the relationship
between property taxes and home value. There are two notable ways in which this assumption
could fail. The first is if counties offer tiered property tax rates, such as exempting a fixed dollar
amount of property values from taxation. This would result in low-priced homes paying lower
property taxes than would be seen if all homes were taxed at the mean rate for the county. As a
result, our approach will underestimate the value of low-cost homes in these areas and
overestimate the value of high-cost homes in these areas. The second way in which this
assumption could fail is when counties fail to have horizontal equity in their property tax rates.
The most notable example of this occurs in California, where Proposition 13 limits the
magnitude of reassessments except when a sale or construction occurs. As a result, a long-
tenured homeowner will typically have a lower tax bill than one who purchased their home more
recently – even if the market value of the two homes is identical. Our approach for valuing
homes using property taxes in this case will result in an overestimate of the value of homes of
new homeowners (whose property taxes are above the mean for a home with their value) and
will underestimate the value of homes for long-term homeowners.
Each of these limitations will not affect the total estimated home value in a county, but will
impact who is estimated to have higher value homes. To the extent that it results in an
underestimate or overestimate of home values of taxpayers in the top 1% of the distribution, our
method could therefore result in an underestimate or overestimate of our top income shares.
However, despite this limitation, we believe that this approach—and the potential error that it
introduces—is superior to the alternative approach for estimating home values based purely on
  33
       See, https://www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/usps_crosswalk.html.



                                                                       44
one’s position in the income distribution, which can similarly result in an underestimate or
overestimate of top income shares. Estimated home values are capped at $100 million. Although
advertised prices for homes for sale sometimes exceeds this amount, in most case such large
values likely reflect multiple homes which may be in areas with different tax rates. In addition,
such large homes may be unique or idiosyncratic homes that reflect the tastes of the current
owner. The values of such homes may not change in the same way as average homes in the area.
B. Housing Values, non-itemizers
Whereas nearly all taxpayers in the top centile of the income distribution who own a home
itemize their taxes, many lower-income taxpayers do not. As a result, property tax payments are
not available for these non-itemizers to compute their estimated home value.
Since the non-itemizers are assumed to be outside of the top centile of the income distribution, it
is not necessary to know precisely who the non-itemizing homeowners are in order to calculate
top income shares, only the total amount of their real estate assets. In each year, we calculate the
total home values that are assigned to itemizing taxpayers from section 3.A above and compare it
to the total value of real estate owned by households and non-profits serving households from the
Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts. The residual home values that are not assigned to itemizers
are then assigned to non-itemizers. The assignment of this home value is done quasi-randomly,
but ensuring that the estimated home values do not push any non-itemizers into the top 1% of the
distribution.
C. Equities and business assets
The value of equities and business assets are computed using data from the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF) using a statistical match based on their receipt of dividends, business ownership,
and income. First, since the SCF aggregates individuals to the Primary Economic Unit (PEU)
rather than the tax unit, it is necessary to map PEUs into tax units—which we do by assuming
that the PEUs that contain multiple tax units are evenly distributed through the distribution.
Tax units in both the SCF and IRS data are then categorized into four groups based on whether
they have 1) at least $100 of dividend income, 2) at least $500 of rental and/or small business
income or losses, 3) both dividend and rental/small business income above these thresholds, or 4)
neither dividend nor rental/small business income above these thresholds. These categories of
separation were chosen to reflect that tax units with dividends and/or small business income are
more likely to have capital asset holdings than those who do not. Within these four categories,
tax units are then arrayed based on their total tax return income, excluding capital gains, and
assigned a centile based on their position in the income distribution within their category group.
For each centile of the income distributions within the four groups outlined above, we compute
the average value of all equity assets (including stocks and mutual funds in both taxable and non-
taxable accounts) and the average value of all privately held businesses based on the reported
values from the SCF. Since the SCF is only conducted every three years, for years between the
SCF years, the asset values for each centile are set as the weighted average of the two nearest
SCF years. Tax units in the IRS data are then imputed to have equity and business asset values

                                                 45
from this SCF data based on their dividend/business income characteristics and based on their
centile of the income distribution of those with these characteristics.
5. Determining rates of return for use in accrued capital gains calculations
A. Housing rate of return
Among taxpayers who own a home and itemize their deductions, the rate of return on the real
estate assets are based on year-over-year change in the CoreLogic Home Price Index for their
county of residence (based on the zip-county crosswalk described in section 3.A above). For
counties where CoreLogic produces a county-level home price index, the yearly change in this
county-level value represents the rate of return for housing assets. For counties where a county-
level home price index is not available, the state-level value is used. County-level rates of return
are available and used for approximately two-thirds of all zip codes.
Among non-itemizing homeowners, since we are unable to determine precisely which non-
itemizers are homeowners and the home values are assigned to the non-itemizers collectively, the
rate of return on housing in each year is determined using the national-level change in the
CoreLogic Home Price Index.
B. Equities and private business assets rate of return
 The rate of return for equities and private business assets are both assumed to be uniform for all
individuals in each year. This approach is consistent with the assumption made by Saez and
Zucman (2016) when estimating asset values using information from tax return data. For all
equity holdings, the rate of return in each year is estimated to be the year-over-year change in
value of the S&P 500 index. For private business assets, the rate of return in each year is
estimated to be the implied rate of return on non-corporate business holdings of households and
non-profits serving households from the Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts. This implied rate
of return is computed as the revaluation of equity in non-corporate business in the calendar year
divided by the prior year end-of-year value of non-corporate business holdings. The annual rates
of return on publicly traded investments and non-corporate business investments are available in
Appendix Table A1.
6. Computing accrued capital gains
Accrued capital gains for each asset type are determined based on:


Where         is the capital gains from an asset type for the taxpayer,                is the total
value of the type of asset by the taxpayer from section 3 above, and          is the rate of return
that the asset receives from section 4. The total capital gains and losses observed through this
approach from equities, privately held business assets, and housing can be seen in Appendix
Table A2.




                                                  46
Appendix Table A1: Annual rate of return on selected assets and percentage change in
realized capital gains, 1989-2013

                 Annual
              change in
          realized gains                 Non-corporate CoreLogic House
                  in AGI     S&P 500     business (IMA)     Price Index
  1989               -5.3       27.3                 5.4             8.6
  1990             -19.6         -6.6                1.2             2.8
  1991               -9.8       26.3                -2.2            -1.2
  1992              13.5          4.5               -1.4             0.0
  1993              20.2          7.1                3.2             1.5
  1994                0.3        -1.5                5.4             2.2
  1995              17.9        34.1                 4.7             1.9
  1996              44.7        20.3                 3.5             2.9
  1997              39.9        31.0                11.0             3.3
  1998              24.8        26.7                 6.9             7.0
  1999              21.4        19.5                 7.1             7.3
  2000              16.6       -10.1                10.8             9.8
  2001             -45.8       -13.0                 4.1             9.5
  2002             -23.1       -23.4                 7.6             8.8
  2003              20.4        26.4                 9.5             9.8
  2004              54.4          9.0               18.8            14.7
  2005              38.3          3.0               16.3            16.7
  2006              15.7        13.6                 5.1             6.6
  2007              15.8          3.5                1.2            -4.9
  2008             -46.1       -38.5               -13.4           -13.2
  2009             -47.1        23.5               -15.1           -11.6
  2010              49.6        12.8                 7.3            -0.6
  2011                2.6         0.0                6.1            -3.8
  2012              60.0        13.4                 9.1             3.9
  2013             -21.1        29.6                11.8            11.1
Notes and Sources: The IMA returns to non-corporate business is from the Federal Reserve
Integrated Macro Accounts. The House Price Index is from the CoreLogic data. Realized capital
gains are positive capital gains in Adjusted Gross Income as reported in U.S. Treasury (2016).




                                              47
Appendix Table A2: Aggregate components of comprehensive income excluding capital
gains, by year (millions of dollars)

                         In-kind                     Cash                                 Total
                    benefits and                 transfers     Net federal      comprehensive
       Tax return        in-kind    Imputed     not on tax    income and     income, excluding
          income       transfers       rents        forms    payroll taxes        capital gains
1989   3,430,883        255,491      388,900       83,621        -612,939           3,545,956
1990   3,643,423        286,747      417,600       94,240        -637,819           3,804,191
1991   3,806,921        334,818      441,400      113,560        -646,301           4,050,398
1992   3,948,283        357,164      468,000      115,538        -681,323           4,207,662
1993   4,053,800        399,620      494,500      120,446        -717,112           4,351,255
1994   4,242,183        462,369      530,300      123,781        -756,903           4,601,730
1995   4,501,782        460,754      566,200      124,046        -816,400           4,836,383
1996   4,776,646        483,192      599,900      128,320        -897,004           5,091,054
1997   5,113,017        472,672      636,400      124,517        -983,471           5,363,134
1998   5,461,559        478,730      681,400      131,725      -1,054,782           5,698,632
1999   5,818,032        466,158      726,300      133,039      -1,161,347           5,982,182
2000   6,252,010        499,125      777,700      136,373      -1,287,993           6,377,216
2001   6,368,447        581,242      838,200      155,858      -1,193,537           6,750,209
2002   6,375,469        623,170      878,500      147,114      -1,105,856           6,918,398
2003   6,544,863        711,293      922,900      160,261      -1,065,843           7,273,475
2004   6,980,430        822,567      980,300      169,055      -1,163,490           7,788,862
2005   7,430,291        888,182    1,057,900      179,450      -1,276,025           8,279,798
2006   7,949,609        934,543    1,123,100      167,348      -1,390,209           8,784,390
2007   8,313,861        815,181    1,156,100      174,187      -1,499,614           8,959,715
2008   8,565,351        925,889    1,199,300      187,358      -1,326,720           9,551,177
2009   8,200,689        952,798    1,223,700      193,966      -1,196,391           9,374,762
2010   8,581,932      1,087,330    1,228,700      212,092      -1,290,200           9,819,854
2011   8,891,446      1,150,446    1,249,200      220,647      -1,304,001          10,207,738
2012   9,460,494      1,208,549    1,278,800      237,488      -1,457,248          10,728,082
2013   9,564,954      1,210,827    1,316,500      244,343      -1,605,376          10,731,247




                                               48
Appendix Table A3: Aggregate taxable realized capital gains and accrued capital gains, by
year (millions of dollars)

                                            Accrued gains
                 Taxable                     from private
         realized capital   Accrued gains        business   Accrued gains   Total accrued
                   gains    from equities        holdings   from housing     capital gains
1989            143,375           374,817         158,720         558,103       1,091,640
1990            112,318          -102,226          34,848         192,230         124,852
1991              99,990          459,260         -64,910        -125,863         268,487
1992            116,684            86,942         -41,992          43,837          88,787
1993            141,959           164,528          98,325         102,654         365,507
1994            140,510           -36,547         178,482         185,366         327,301
1995            168,519         1,085,854         157,076         150,466       1,393,396
1996            247,524           868,991         135,003         267,678       1,271,672
1997            349,244         1,688,884         474,103         342,906       2,505,892
1998            439,097         1,754,015         321,355         724,461       2,799,830
1999            533,461         1,481,983         379,167         858,777       2,719,926
2000            625,335          -873,777         646,774       1,309,376       1,082,373
2001            308,381        -1,260,669         268,978       1,343,613         351,922
2002            237,392        -2,281,133         540,071       1,351,524        -389,538
2003            294,469         2,584,675         723,634       1,749,096       5,057,405
2004            480,882           878,429       1,525,546       2,937,706       5,341,681
2005            659,782           316,078       1,541,127       3,796,336       5,653,542
2006            783,769         1,547,306         550,784       1,746,824       3,844,914
2007            913,321           432,130         150,922        -757,618        -174,566
2008            432,703        -4,469,765      -1,543,132      -2,139,661      -8,152,558
2009            221,068         2,575,485      -1,615,769      -1,874,638        -914,921
2010            358,822         1,323,223         721,629        -225,141       1,819,711
2011            376,560              -360         627,954        -651,420         -23,826
2012            617,324         1,641,379         962,233         445,349       3,048,961
2013            475,326         3,916,562       1,301,911       2,128,191       7,346,664




                                              49
