NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACTS OF NEIGHBORHOODS ON INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY II:
COUNTY-LEVEL ESTIMATES
Raj Chetty
Nathaniel Hendren
Working Paper 23002
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23002

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016, Revised May 2017

An earlier version of this paper was circulated as the second part of the paper, “The Impacts of
Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County Level
Estimates.” The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Internal Revenue Service or the U.S. Treasury Department.
This work is a component of a larger project examining the effects of tax expenditures on the
budget deficit and economic activity. All results based on tax data in this paper are constructed
using statistics originally reported in the SOI Working Paper “The Economic Impacts of Tax
Expenditures: Evidence from Spatial Variation across the U.S.,” approved under IRS contract
TIRNO-12-P-00374. We thank Gary Chamberlain, Maximilian Kasy, Lawrence Katz, Jesse
Shapiro, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. Sarah
Abraham, Alex Bell, Augustin Bergeron, Michael Droste, Niklas Flamang, Jamie Fogel, Robert
Fluegge, Nikolaus Hildebrand, Alex Olssen, Jordan Richmond, Benjamin Scuderi, Priyanka
Shende, and our other pre-doctoral fellows provided outstanding research assistance. This
research was funded by the National Science Foundation, the Lab for Economic Applications and
Policy at Harvard, Stanford University, and Laura and John Arnold Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-Level Estimates
Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren
NBER Working Paper No. 23002
December 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. H0,J0,R0
ABSTRACT
We estimate the causal effect of each county in the U.S. on children's incomes in adulthood. We
first estimate a fixed effects model that is identified by analyzing families who move across
counties with children of different ages. We then use these fixed effect estimates to (a) quantify
how much places matter for intergenerational mobility, (b) construct forecasts of the causal effect
of growing up in each county that can be used to guide families seeking to move to opportunity,
and (c) characterize which types of areas produce better outcomes. For children growing up in
low-income families, each year of childhood exposure to a one standard deviation (SD) better
county increases income in adulthood by 0.5%. Hence, growing up in a one SD better county
from birth increases a child's income by approximately 10%. There is substantial local area
variation in children's outcomes: for example, growing up in the western suburbs of Chicago
(DuPage County) would increase a given child's income by approximately 30% relative to
growing up in Cook County. Areas with less concentrated poverty, less income inequality, better
schools, a larger share of two-parent families, and lower crime rates tend to produce better
outcomes for children in poor families. Boys' outcomes vary more across areas than girls'
outcomes, and boys have especially negative outcomes in highly segregated areas. One-fifth of
the black-white income gap can be explained by differences in the counties in which black and
white children grow up. Areas that generate better outcomes have higher house prices on average,
but our approach uncovers many “opportunity bargains” – places that generate good outcomes
but are not very expensive.

Raj Chetty
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
chetty@stanford.edu
Nathaniel Hendren
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center Room 235
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nhendren@gmail.com

I

Introduction

How are children’s economic opportunities shaped by the neighborhoods in which they grow up?
In the first paper in this series (Chetty and Hendren 2017), we showed that neighborhoods have
significant childhood exposure effects on children’s life outcomes. Although those results establish
that place matters for intergenerational mobility, they do not tell us which areas produce the best
outcomes, nor do they identify the characteristics of neighborhoods that generate good outcomes
– two key inputs necessary for developing place-focused policies to improve children’s outcomes.
In this paper, we build on the exposure-time design developed in our first paper to estimate the
causal effect of each county in the U.S. on children’s incomes in adulthood. Formally, our first paper
identified one treatment effect – the average impact of exposure to an area where children have
better outcomes – while this paper pursues the more ambitious goal of identifying (approximately)
3,000 treatment effects, one for each county in the country.1
We estimate counties’ causal effects on children’s ranks in the income distribution at age 26
using data from de-identified tax returns for all children born between 1980 and 1986.2 We estimate
each county’s effect using a fixed effects regression model identified by analyzing families who move
across counties, exploiting variation in children’s ages when families move. To understand how the
model is identified, consider families in the New York area. If children who move from Manhattan to
Queens at younger ages earn more as adults, we can infer that growing up in Queens has a positive
causal effect relative to growing up in Manhattan under the assumption that other determinants of
children’s outcomes are unrelated to the age at which they move. Building on this logic, we use our
sample of cross-county movers to regress children’s income ranks at age 26 on fixed effects for each
county interacted with the fraction of childhood spent in that county. We estimate the county fixed
effects separately by parent income level, permitting the effects of each area to vary with parent
income. We include origin-by-destination fixed effects when estimating this model, so that each
county’s effect is identified purely from variation in the age of children when families make a given
move rather than variation in where families move.
The key assumption required to identify counties’ causal effects using this research design is
1

We estimate county-level effects here as a step towards characterizing the causal effects of places across the
U.S. In the presence of heterogeneity across local areas within counties, the county-level effects we estimate can be
interpreted as weighted averages of the local area effects. Once more finely geocoded data are available, the methods
we develop here could be applied to estimate place effects at smaller geographies, such as Census tracts.
2
We measure incomes at age 26 because children’s mean ranks in each area stabilize by age 26. The (populationweighted) correlation between mean income ranks at age 26 and age 32 across commuting zones is 0.93 for children
growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families.

1

that children’s potential outcomes are orthogonal to the age at which they move to a given county.
This assumption is motivated by the evidence in our first paper showing that the age at which
children move to an area where permanent residents (non-movers) have better or worse outcomes
on average is orthogonal to their potential outcomes. However, it is a stronger requirement than
the condition required to identify average exposure effects in our first paper because it imposes
3,000 orthogonality conditions – one for each county – rather than a single orthogonality condition
that must hold on average.
We assess the validity of this stronger identification assumption using two approaches. First, we
show that controlling for parental income levels and marital status in the years before and after the
move – which are strong predictors of children’s outcomes – does not affect the estimates, supporting
the view that our estimates are not confounded by selection on other determinants of children’s
outcomes. Second, we implement placebo tests by (a) estimating each area’s fixed effect on teenage
labor force participation rates at age 16 (a strong predictor of incomes in adulthood), using the
subsample of families who move after age 16 and (b) estimating each area’s effect on income at
age 26 using parents who move after their children turn 23, the point at which neighborhood
exposure no longer appears to affect children’s outcomes based on the evidence in our first paper.
These placebo fixed effect estimates are uncorrelated with our baseline estimates, supporting the
assumption that the time at which parents move to a given county is orthogonal to their children’s
potential outcomes.
We use the estimates of counties’ causal effects for three purposes. First, we quantify how
much neighborhoods matter for children’s incomes. We model the estimated county effects as the
sum of a latent causal effect and noise due to sampling error, and estimate the signal variance of
the latent causal effects. For a child with parents at the 25th percentile of the national income
distribution, we find that spending one additional year of childhood in a one SD better county
(population-weighted) increases household income at age 26 by 0.17 percentile points, equivalent
to an increase in mean income of approximately 0.5%. Extrapolating over 20 years of childhood,
growing up in a 1 SD better county from birth would increase a child’s income in adulthood by
approximately 10%.
Neighborhoods have similar effects in percentile rank or dollar terms for children of higherincome parents, but matter less in percentage terms because children in high-income families have
higher mean incomes. For children with parents at the 75th percentile of the income distribution,
the signal SD of annual exposure effects across counties is 0.16 percentiles, which is approximately
2

0.3% of mean income. Importantly, areas that generate better outcomes for children in low-income
families generate slightly better outcomes on average for children in high-income families as well.
This result suggests that the success of the poor does not have to come at the expense of the rich.
In the second part of the paper, we construct forecasts of the causal effect of growing up in each
county that can be used to guide families seeking to move to better areas. Formally, we construct
forecasts that minimize the mean-squared-error (MSE) of the predicted impact of growing up in
a given neighborhood relative to the true impact. Although the raw county fixed effects provide
unbiased estimates of counties’ causal effects, they do not themselves provide good forecasts because
many of the estimates have substantial noise, leading to high MSE. In highly populated counties,
such as Cook County (the city of Chicago), nearly 75% of the variance in the fixed effect estimates
is signal; however, in most counties, more than half of the variance in the fixed effect estimates is
due to noise from sampling variation.
To obtain forecasts that have lower MSE, we use a shrinkage estimator that incorporates data
on the permanent residents’ (non-movers) outcomes in each area.3 The permanent residents’ mean
outcomes have very little sampling error, but are imperfect forecasts of a county’s causal effect
because they combine causal effects with sorting. The best MSE-minimizing linear forecast of each
county’s causal effect is therefore a weighted average of the fixed effect estimate based on the movers
and a prediction based on permanent residents’ outcomes, with greater weight on the fixed effect
estimate when it is more precisely estimated (i.e., in large counties).
Among the 100 most populated counties in the country, DuPage County, IL is forecasted to
generate the highest incomes for children growing up in low-income (25th percentile) families. Each
additional year that a child in a low-income family spends in DuPage County, IL instead of the
average county in the U.S. raises his or her household income in adulthood by 0.80%. Growing
up in DuPage County from birth – i.e., having about 20 years of exposure to that environment –
would raise such a child’s income by 16%. In contrast, growing up in Cook County – one of the
lowest-ranking counties in the U.S. – from birth reduces a child’s income by approximately 13%.
Hence, moving from Cook County (the city of Chicago) to DuPage County (the western suburbs)
3

Our methodology contributes to a recent literature that uses shrinkage estimators to reduce mean-squared-error
(risk) when estimating a large number of parameters. Angrist et al. (2017) combine experimental and observational
estimates to improve forecasts of school value-added. Our methodology differs from theirs because we have unbiased
(quasi-experimental) estimates of causal effects for every area, whereas Angrist et al. have unbiased (experimental)
estimates of causal effects for a subset of schools. Hull (2017) develops methods to forecast hospital quality, permitting
nonlinear and heterogeneous causal effects. Abadie and Kasy (2017) show how machine learning methods can be
used to reduce risk, using the fixed effect estimates constructed in this paper as an application.

3

at birth would increase a child’s income by about 30% on average.4
We find that neighborhoods matter more for boys than girls: the signal standard deviation of
county-level effects is roughly 60% larger for boys than girls in low-income (25th percentile) families.
The distribution has an especially thick lower tail for boys, as counties with high concentrations
of urban poverty such as Baltimore City and Wayne County (Detroit) produce especially negative
outcomes for boys.5
Our estimates of the causal effects of counties and commuting zones (CZs) are highly correlated
with the observational statistics on intergenerational mobility reported in Chetty et al. (2014) –
as expected given the findings in Chetty and Hendren (2017) – but there are many significant
differences. For example, children who grow up in low-income families in New York City have
outcomes comparable to the national mean, but the causal effect of growing up in New York City
– as revealed by analyzing individuals who move into and out of New York – is well below the
national mean. One potential explanation for this pattern is that New York has a large share
of immigrants, who tend to have high rates of upward mobility (Hilger 2016). More generally,
this example illustrates the importance of estimating the causal effect of each area directly using
movers (as we do in this paper) rather than predicting neighborhood effects purely from permanent
residents’ outcomes.
In the third part of this paper, we characterize the properties of CZs and counties that produce
good outcomes for low-income children (i.e., generate high rates of upward mobility). Prior work has
shown that in observational data, upward mobility is highly correlated with area characteristics
such as residential segregation, income inequality, social capital, and school quality as well as
demographic characteristics such as the fraction of children being raised by single mothers and racial
shares (Wilson 1987, Sampson et al. 2002, Chetty et al. 2014). However, it is unclear whether these
correlations are driven by the causal effects of place or selection effects. For instance, is growing
up in a less segregated area beneficial for a given child or do families who choose to live in less
segregated areas simply have better unobservable characteristics?
We decompose the correlations documented in prior work into causal vs. sorting components
by correlating each characteristic with both our causal effect estimates and permanent residents’
4

Interestingly, many families involved in the well-known Gautreaux housing desegregation project moved from
Cook County to DuPage County. Our results support the view that much of the gains experienced by the children of
the families who moved as part of Gautreaux (Rosenbaum 1995) was due to the causal effect of exposure to better
neighborhoods.
5
These gender differences are partly related to differences in rates of marriage. For example, the San Francisco
area generates high individual incomes but relatively low household incomes for girls because growing up in San
Francisco reduces the probability that a child gets married.

4

outcomes, which combine both causal and selection effects. We find that many of the correlations
between area-level characteristics and upward mobility are driven almost entirely by causal effects
of place. For example, 80% of the association between segregation and upward mobility across CZs
in observational data is driven by the causal effect of place; only 20% is due to sorting. Growing
up in a CZ with a one standard deviation higher level of segregation from birth reduces the income
of a child in a low-income (25th percentile) family by 5.2%.6 Urban areas, particularly those
with concentrated poverty, generate particularly negative outcomes for low-income children. These
findings support the view that growing up in an urban “ghetto” reduces children’s prospects for
upward mobility (Massey and Denton 1993, Cutler and Glaeser 1997).
Areas with greater income inequality – as measured by the Gini coefficient or top 1% income
shares – also generate significantly worse outcomes for children in low-income families. Hence, the
negative correlation between inequality and intergenerational mobility documented in prior work
– coined the “Great Gatsby curve” by Krueger (2012) – is not simply driven by differences in
genetics or other characteristics of populations in areas with different levels of inequality. Rather,
putting a given child in an area with higher levels of inequality makes that child less likely to rise
up in the income distribution. The negative correlation between the causal effects and top 1%
shares contrasts with the findings of Chetty et al. (2014), who find no correlation between top 1%
shares (upper-tail inequality) and rates of upward mobility in observational data. Our analysis of
movers reveals that low-income families who live in areas with large top 1% shares (such as New
York City) are positively selected, masking the negative association between top 1% shares and the
causal effect of places of upward mobility in observational data.
We find strong correlations between areas’ causal effects and output-based measures of school
quality, such as test scores adjusted for parent income levels. We also find strong correlations
between the causal effects and proxies for social capital, such as crime rates and Rupasingha and
Goetz’s (2008) summary index.
Selection plays a bigger role in explaining correlations between demographic characteristics and
upward mobility in observational data. For example, the fraction of single mothers is the single
strongest predictor of differences in upward mobility for permanent residents across areas. However,
the fraction of single mothers – although still a significant predictor – is less highly correlated with
CZs’ causal effects on upward mobility than other factors such as segregation. This is because nearly
6
This result does not necessarily imply that reducing segregation in a given area will improve children’s outcomes.
Other factors associated with less segregation (e.g., better schools) could potentially be responsible for the gain a
child obtains from moving to a less segregated area.

5

half of the association between permanent residents’ outcomes and the fraction of single mothers is
due to selection. Similarly, areas with a larger African-American population have significantly lower
rates of upward mobility in observational data. Roughly half of this association is also unrelated to
causal effect of place, consistent with Rothbaum (2016). Nevertheless, the correlation between the
causal effects of place and the African-American share remains substantial (-0.51 across CZs and
-0.37 across counties within CZs). Place effects therefore amplify racial inequality: black children
have worse economic outcomes because they grow up in worse neighborhoods. Indeed, our estimates
imply that one-fifth of the black-white income gap can be explained by differences in the counties
where blacks and whites grow up.
Finally, we examine how much more one has to pay for housing to live in an area that generates
better outcomes for one’s children. Within CZs, counties that produce better outcomes for children
have slightly higher rents, especially in highly segregated cities. However, rents explain less than
5% of the variance in counties’ causal effects for families at the 25th percentile. This result suggests
that current “small area” fair market rent proposals in housing voucher programs – which condition
voucher payments on local neighborhood rents – may not maximize vouchers’ effects on upward
mobility, as many areas that are more expensive do not produce better outcomes. Moreover, it
shows that some areas are “opportunity bargains” – counties within a labor market that offer good
outcomes for children without higher rents.7 For example, in the New York metro area, Hudson
County, NJ offers much higher levels of upward mobility than Manhattan or Queens despite having
comparable rents during the period we study.
To understand the source of these opportunity bargains, we divide our causal county effects
into the component that projects onto observable area-level factors, such as poverty rates and
school expenditures, and a residual “unobservable” component. We find that only the observable
component is capitalized in rents, suggesting that the opportunity bargains may partly exist because
families do not know which neighborhoods have the highest value-added. This result underscores
the importance of measuring neighborhood quality directly using children’s observed outcomes
instead of using traditional proxies such as poverty rates.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we summarize the data, focusing on
differences relative to the sample used in our first paper. In Section III, we formalize our empirical
objectives using a statistical model. Section IV reports the baseline fixed effect estimates and
7
Of course, the areas that are “opportunity bargains” in rents may come with other disamenities – such as longer
commutes to work – that might make them less desirable. Our point is simply that housing costs themselves are not
necessarily a barrier to moving to opportunity.

6

evaluates the validity of the key identification assumptions. Section V quantifies the magnitude of
place effects, Section VI presents the CZ- and county-level MSE-minimizing forecasts, and Section
VII examines the characteristics of places that generate better outcomes. Section VIII presents the
results on housing costs and opportunity bargains. Section IX concludes. Estimates of CZs’ and
counties’ causal effects are available on the Equality of Opportunity Project website.

II

Data and Sample Definitions

We use data from federal income tax records spanning 1996-2012. Our primary analysis sample is
the same as the sample of movers in Chetty and Hendren (2017, Section II), with three exceptions.
First, we limit the sample to children in the 1980-86 birth cohorts because we measure children’s
incomes at age 26. Measuring children’s incomes at age 26 strikes a balance between the competing
goals of minimizing lifecycle bias by measuring income at a sufficiently old age and having an
adequate number of birth cohorts to implement our research design. Among permanent residents
(parents who stay in the same CZ from 1996-2012) at the 25th percentile of the income distribution,
the population-weighted correlation between children’s mean ranks at age 26 and age 32 across CZs
is 0.93.8 This suggests that measuring children’s incomes at later ages would not affect our estimates
of places’ causal effects substantially.
Second, we focus on the subset of families who move across CZs or counties when their child is
23 or younger, motivated by our finding that childhood exposure effects persist until age 23. To
simplify estimation, we focus on families who move exactly once during the sample period, dropping
those who move multiple times. We divide the sample of one-time movers into two groups – those
who move across CZs and those who move across counties within CZs – and analyze these two sets
of movers separately.
Third, to maximize precision, we include all movers – not just those who move between large
CZs – in our analysis sample. However, we only report estimates of causal effects for CZs with
populations above 25,000 and counties with populations above 10,000 in the 2000 Census (excluding
0.36% of the population).9
8
The key point here is that children’s average ranks in each area stabilize by age 26. At the individual level,
children’s incomes stabilize later, around age 32 (Haider and Solon 2006, Figure 2a). Intuitively, children’s ranks
change rapidly in their late 20s, but these idiosyncratic individual-level changes average out at the area level, so that
areas where children have high ranks at 26 tend to have high ranks at age 32 as well.
9
In Chetty and Hendren (2017), we limited our primary sample to CZs with populations above 250,000 to minimize
attenuation bias in exposure effect estimates resulting from noise in permanent residents’ outcomes. This attenuation
bias does not arise here because we identify causal effects purely from the sample of movers, without projecting their
outcomes onto permanent residents. This is why we impose lower population restrictions here, providing estimates

7

We measure children’s and parents’ incomes at the household level using data from 1040 forms
(for those who file tax returns) and W-2 forms (for non-filers), which we label family (or household)
income. We identify individuals’ locations in each year using the ZIP code from which they filed
their tax returns or to which their W-2 forms were mailed. We also measure a set of additional
outcomes for children, such as college attendance and marriage. All of these variables are defined
in the same way as described in Section II of Chetty and Hendren (2017).
Table I presents summary statistics for children in our primary sample who move across CZs
(Panel A) and counties within CZs (Panel B). There are 1,397,260 children whose parents move
once across CZs and 931,138 children whose parents move across counties within CZs in our primary
sample. The sample characteristics are generally very similar to those reported in Table I of Chetty
and Hendren (2017), with a median family income of $24,253 at age 26 for children in the CZ
movers sample and $24,993 in the county-within-CZ movers sample (in 2012 dollars).

III

Empirical Framework

In this section, we first define the estimands we seek to identify using a statistical model of neighborhood effects. We then describe the research design we use to identify these parameters and the key
identification assumptions underlying our analysis. Finally, we discuss the empirical specification
and estimation procedures we use to implement this research design.

III.A

Statistical Model

We estimate place effects using a statistical model motivated by the childhood exposure effects
documented in Chetty and Hendren (2017). Let yi denote a child’s income (or other outcome) in
adulthood, measured at age T . We model yi as a function of three factors: the neighborhoods
in which the child grows up, disruption costs of moving across neighborhoods, and all other nonneighborhood inputs, such as family environment and genetics.
Let c (i, a) denote the place in which child i lives at age a = 1, ..., A of his childhood, where
A < T . Let µc denote the causal effect of one additional year of exposure to place c on the child’s
outcome yi .10 Given the linear childhood exposure effects documented in Chetty and Hendren
(2017, Figure IV), we assume that the exposure effect µc is constant for ages a ≤ A and is zero
for a larger set of CZs. Because our goal is to provide estimates of place effects at the county (rather than CZ) level,
we also do not impose any restrictions on the distance of moves we examine.
10
In our empirical application, we permit place effects µpc to vary with parental income rank p(i), but we suppress
the parental income index in this section to simplify notation.

8

thereafter. Let κ denote the cost of moving from one neighborhood to another during childhood
(e.g., due to a loss of connections to friends or other fixed costs of moving). Finally, let θi denote
the impact of other factors, such as family inputs. The parameter θi captures both time-invariant
inputs, such as genetic endowments, and the total amount of time-varying inputs, such as parental
investments during childhood.
Combining the effects of neighborhoods, disruption effects of moving, and other factors, the
child’s outcome is given by
yi =

A
X


µc(i,a) − κ1 {c (i, a) 6= c (i, a − 1)} + θi

(1)

a=1

The production function for yi in (1) imposes three substantive restrictions that are relevant for
our empirical analysis. First, it assumes that neighborhood effects µc do not vary across children
(conditional on parent income).11 Second, it assumes that place effects are additive and constant
across ages, i.e., that there are no complementarities between neighborhood effects across years.
Third, it assumes that the disruption costs of moving κ do not vary across neighborhoods or the age
of the child at the time of the move.12 We believe these restrictions are reasonable approximations
given the findings of our first paper, which show that childhood exposure effects are constant
throughout childhood and symmetric when children move to areas with better or worse permanent
resident outcomes (conditional on parent income). Nevertheless, we view estimating models that
permit richer forms of heterogeneity in place effects as an important direction for future research.13
Our objective in this paper is to identify µ
~ = {µc }, the causal exposure effect of spending a year
of one’s childhood in a given area (CZ or county) of the U.S. One way to identify µ
~ would be to
randomly assign children of different ages to different places and compare their outcomes, as in the
Moving to Opportunity experiment (Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016). Since conducting such an
experiment in all areas of the country is infeasible, we develop methods of identifying place effects
11

This constant treatment effects assumption is a common simplification in the literature. For instance, in work on
firm effects and teacher effects (Abowd et al. 1999, Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014a), analogous restrictions rule
out worker-firm or teacher-student match effects. In our application, the fixed effect estimates can be interpreted as
average place effects in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity if transition rates across areas are balanced across
individuals of all types.
12
The model can be extended to allow the disruption cost to vary with the neighborhood to which the child moves,
or to allow the disruption cost to vary with the age of the child at the time of the move. Neither of these extensions
would affect our estimates. The key requirement for approach to identifying {µc } is that the disruption costs do not
vary in an age-dependent manner across neighborhoods.
13
We do not estimate such models here primarily because of a lack of adequate statistical power. As we will see
below, obtaining precise estimates of 6,000 treatment effects (one per county, interacted with parent income) with
our sample of approximately 3 million movers is itself challenging. Estimating higher-dimensional models may be
feasible as additional years of tax data become available in the U.S. or using longer administrative panels in other
countries.

9

in observational data.

III.B

Identifying Place Effects in Observational Data

Building upon the approach in Chetty and Hendren (2017), we identify µ
~ by exploiting variation
in the timing of when children move across areas. To understand the intuition underlying our
approach, consider a set of children who move from a given origin o (e.g., New York) to a given
destination d (e.g., Boston). Suppose that children who make this move at different ages have
comparable other inputs, θi . Then one can infer the causal effect of growing up in Boston relative
to New York (µd − µo ) by comparing the outcomes of children who move at different ages; for
instance, if those who move at younger ages have better outcomes, we learn that µd > µo .
Under the model in (1), we can combine information from all such pairwise comparisons to
estimate each place’s causal effect using the following fixed effects specification:
~ + i ,
yi = αod + ~ei ·µ

(2)

where αod denotes an origin-by-destination fixed effect and ~ei = {eic } is a vector whose entries
denote the number of years of exposure that child i has to place c before age A. In a sample of
children who move exactly once before age A, eic is given by


A − mi if d (i) = c
eic =
mi
if o (i) = c


0
otherwise
where mi denotes the age of the child at the time of the move.
Equation (2) is a reduced form of the model in (1) for one-time movers, where αod = θ̄od − κ
captures the sum of the disruption effect and the mean value of other inputs θi for children who
move from o to d, while i = θi − θ̄od captures idiosyncratic variation in other inputs. By including
origin-by-destination (αod ) fixed effects in (2), we identify µ
~ purely from variation in the timing
of moves, rather than comparing outcomes across families that moved to or from different areas.14
The identification assumption required to obtain consistent estimates of µ
~ when estimating (2)
using OLS is the following standard orthogonality condition.
Assumption 2. Conditional on αod , exposure time to each place, ~ei , is orthogonal to other
determinants of children’s outcomes:
Cov(eic , i ) = 0 ∀c.
14

(3)

The fixed effects µ
~ are identified up to the normalization that the average place effect is zero, E [µc ] = 0, because
the matrix E = {~ei }i does not have full rank. Intuitively, using movers to identify place effects allows us to identify
the effect of each place relative to the national average.

10

Assumption 2 requires that children with different exposure times to a set of places do not systematically differ in other inputs, i = θi − θ̄od , conditional on origin-by-destination fixed effects. This
assumption is a stronger version of Assumption 1 in Chetty and Hendren (2017), which required
that exposure to better places – as measured by the outcomes of permanent residents – is not correlated with i on average. Assumption 2 extends that assumption to require that the amount of
exposure to every place satisfies such an orthogonality condition. This stronger assumption allows
us to go beyond establishing that neighborhoods have causal effects on average and characterize
precisely which areas produce the best outcomes. We provide evidence supporting Assumption 2
in Section IV.B after presenting our baseline results.

III.C

Empirical Implementation

In our empirical analysis, we generalize (2) to account for two features of the data that we omitted
from the stylized model in Section III.A for simplicity.
First, we allow for the possibility that places may have different effects across parent income
levels, as suggested by the maps of permanent residents’ outcomes in Chetty and Hendren (2017,
Figure II). To do so, we first measure the percentile rank of the parents of child i, p(i), based on their
positions in the national distribution of parental household income for child i’s birth cohort. Chetty
et al. (2014) show that within each area, children’s expected income ranks are well approximated
by a linear function of their parents’ income rank p(i). We therefore generalize (2) to allow place
effects µc to vary linearly with parent income rank, p (i). We denote the causal effect of place c at
parent rank p by
µpc = µ0c + µ1c p

(4)

where µ0c , the intercept, represents the causal effect of the place for children in the lowest-income
families and µ1c , the slope, captures how the causal effect varies with parent rank. For symmetry,
we also allow the origin-by-destination fixed effect αod in (2) to vary linearly with parent rank p in
order to capture potential heterogeneity in selection effects by parent income.
Second, because we measure children’s incomes at a fixed age, we measure their incomes in
different calendar years. In particular, incomes at age 26 are measured between 2006-2012 for
children in our primary sample (the 1980-86 birth cohorts), a period with rapidly changing labor
market conditions. We account for these fluctuations – allowing for differential shocks across areas
and income groups – by including a control function
0
1 2
2
3 2
god (p, s) = ψod
s + ψod
s + ψod
sp + ψod
s p

11

(5)

when estimating (2), where s denotes the child’s birth cohort (or, equivalently, the year in which
the child’s income is measured). We show in Online Appendix A that alternative parameterizations
of the g(p, s) control function yield very similar results.
Incorporating these two extensions of (2), our baseline estimating equation is
P
~ p + god (pi , si ) + εi ,
yi = αod + αod
p + ~ei ·µ

(6)

P p is an origin-by-destination fixed effect interwhere αod is an origin-by-destination fixed effect, αod

acted with parent rank, and µ
~ p = {µpc } denotes the vector of causal place effects parameterized as
in (4).
Estimation: Hierarchical Structure. Our goal is to use (6) to identify the causal effects of places
at two geographic levels: commuting zones – aggregations of counties that represent local labor
markets – and counties. Directly estimating the 741 CZ-level and 3,138 county-level fixed effects
along with the incidental parameters in (6) is not feasible because of computational constraints.
We therefore estimate µ
~ p using a hierarchical structure, separately estimating the causal effects of
CZs and counties within CZs.
We begin by estimating CZ effects using our sample of cross-CZ movers. For computational
tractability, we use a two-step estimator, described in detail in Online Appendix A. In the first
step, we estimate (6) separately for each origin-destination (o, d) pair, which yields an estimate
of the exposure effect for each origin relative to each destination, µod = µd − µo .15 We then
regress these pairwise effects {µod } on a matrix of indicator variables for origin and destination
CZs, weighting each observation by the precision of the pairwise estimate, to obtain an estimate
of each CZ’s fixed effect. Finally, we normalize these estimates to have a population-weighted
mean of zero across CZs (using populations from the 2000 Census), so that the fixed effects can be
interpreted as the causal effect of the CZ relative to the average CZ in the country. In our baseline
specifications, we estimate the standard errors of µ̂pc using bootstrap resampling of the microdata
(see Online Appendix B for details). For alternative specifications, we report analytical standard
errors obtained from the regression in the second step of the estimation procedure – which are very
similar to the bootstrapped estimates in the baseline case – to simplify computation.
Identifying CZ effects using this two-step approach requires that moves into and out of each CZ
are balanced across counties. Intuitively, if all movers into a CZ moved to one particular county,
15

We restrict attention to the 11,216 o − d pairs that have at least 25 observations, which account for 75% of moves
across CZs in our sample. We have made the pairwise o − d estimates publicly available in Online Data Table 5 to
facilitate future research using alternative models of neighborhood effects (e.g., models that permit heterogeneous
match effects).

12

one would effectively identify the sum of the CZ and that county’s effect rather than the mean
effect across all counties within the CZ. In practice, moves are generally balanced relative to county
populations: the correlation between gross flows into and out of counties within each CZ and county
populations recorded in the 2000 Census is 0.90.
Having identified the CZ-level effects, we estimate county effects within each CZ purely from
moves across counties within CZs. Because there are only four counties on average within each CZ,
we can directly estimate (6) separately for each CZ using movers across counties within that CZ.16
We normalize these estimates to have a population-weighted mean of zero across counties within
each CZ, so that the estimates can be interpreted as the causal effect of each county relative to
the CZ mean. We obtain standard errors for these county-within-CZ fixed effects directly from the
OLS regression in (6).
Finally, we construct county-level estimates by adding the CZ-level fixed effect estimate to
the county-within-CZ fixed effect estimate. We use similar methods to estimate fixed effects for
subgroups (e.g., for boys vs. girls) and other outcomes (e.g., rates of marriage).

IV

Fixed Effect Estimates

This section presents fixed effect estimates of CZ- and county-level causal effects. We first present
baseline estimates using (6) and then discuss a set of alternative specifications and placebo tests to
evaluate the key identification assumption (Assumption 2) underlying our design.

IV.A

Baseline Estimates

As in our first paper, we measure children’s incomes based on their percentile ranks in the income
distribution. We define child i’s percentile rank yi based on his or her position in the national
distribution of incomes relative to all others in his or her birth cohort. We focus on children
growing up with parents at either the 25th or 75th percentiles of the parent income distribution
(p = 25 or p = 75). Given the linearity of the relationship between children’s expected ranks
and parent ranks, these estimates correspond to the mean rank outcomes of children in belowmedian (p < 50) and above-median (p ≥ 50) income families, and fully summarize the conditional
distribution of children’s outcomes given parents’ incomes in each area.
Figure Ia plots the CZ fixed effect estimates at p = 25, µ̂25,c , vs. the outcomes of children of
16

Because the counties in each CZ are all in the same labor market, we do not permit the {ψ} coefficients in the
g(p, s) cohort control function to vary with origin and destination when estimating the county-within-CZ models.
This simplification reduces the number of parameters to be estimated significantly without affecting the results.

13

permanent residents in each CZ, ȳ25,c . CZs with more than 2.5 million residents are labeled, with
the dashed vertical bars showing 95% confidence intervals for these estimates. We first discuss the
variation in the fixed effects plotted on the y-axis and then turn to the relationship between this
variation and the permanent residents’ outcomes shown on the x-axis. As an example, we estimate
that every year of exposure to Los Angeles decreases the expected income rank of a child growing
up in a low-income family (p = 25) by 0.17 percentiles (s.e. = 0.04) relative to the average CZ in
the U.S. In contrast, every year of exposure to Cleveland, OH increases a child’s income rank by
0.12 percentiles (s.e. = 0.10) relative to the average CZ.
To interpret the magnitude of these effects, it is helpful to translate these percentile changes
into dollar values.17 To do so, we regress the mean income levels of children of permanent residents
$ , on their mean income ranks, ȳ , separately at each parent income percentile p,
in each CZ, ȳpc
pc

weighting by population. This regression yields a coefficient of $818 for p = 25, implying that a
1 percentile increase in income translates to an additional $818 at age 26 on average. The mean
income of children with below-median income parents is $26,091; therefore, a 1 percentile increase
corresponds to approximately a 818/26, 091 = 3.14% increase in income. The point estimates in
Figure Ia therefore imply that one year of exposure to Cleveland instead of the average CZ would
raise a child’s income by 0.12 × 3.14% = 0.38%, while an additional year of exposure to LA instead
of the average CZ would reduce a child’s income by 0.17 × 3.14% = 0.53%. Spending one’s entire
childhood – aggregating over 20 years of exposure – in Cleveland instead of the average CZ would
increase a child’s income by about 20 × 0.38% = 7.5%, while spending one’s entire childhood in LA
instead of the average CZ would reduce a child’s income by about 10.7%.18
Figure Ib presents analogous estimates for each county in the US, highlighting estimates for
counties in the New York and Newark CZs that have populations above 500,000. For example,
µ̂25,c = −0.23 percentiles (s.e. = 0.10) in the Bronx, implying that growing up in the Bronx causes
an income loss of approximately 0.72% per year of childhood exposure relative to the average county
17

A more direct method of estimating place effects on the level of income (in dollars) would be to estimate µ̂pc using
income levels instead of ranks as the outcome. The estimates of σµpc obtained using income levels as the outcome
are highly correlated with our baseline estimates using ranks (Online Appendix Table I, row 4), but have many more
outliers because of outliers in income levels at the individual level. This is why we use rank outcomes, which yield
more precise and stable results across specifications, for our primary analysis.
18
The estimates of the impact of growing up in a given area from birth rely on additional extrapolations beyond
those used to estimate the annual exposure effects and should therefore be interpreted as approximate values. Chetty
and Hendren (2017, Figure IV) show that the effect of each additional year of exposure to a better area is roughly
constant starting at age 9, the earliest age at which we are able to observe families who move, until age 23. To
predict the causal impacts of growing up in an area from birth, we use a linear extrapolation, assuming that the
annual exposure effects µ̂25,c remain constant even prior to age 9. We multiply our annual exposure effect estimates
by 20 (rather than 23) to be conservative when extrapolating.

14

in the U.S. In contrast, µ̂25,c = 0.25 percentiles (s.e. = 0.19) in Hudson County, NJ, equivalent to
an income gain of 0.79% per year of exposure.
The dispersion in the estimates on the y-axes on Figures Ia and Ib suggests that there may be
substantial variation in the causal effects of places µpc , although part of the observed dispersion is
driven simply by sampling error in our estimates µ̂pc . We quantify the magnitude of the variation
in µpc after accounting for the variation in µ̂pc that is due to sampling error in Section V.
Comparison to Permanent Residents’ Outcomes. It is instructive to compare the fixed effect
estimates of µpc based on movers to the outcomes of children of permanent residents (non-movers)
in each area. Under the model in equation (1), permanent residents’ outcomes combine the causal
effect of growing up in a given area with selection effects reflecting differences in family inputs
across areas:
ȳpc = Aµpc + θ̄pc ,

(7)

where Aµpc is the cumulative effect of childhood exposure to place c and
θ̄pc = E [θi |p (i) = p, c (i, t) = c ∀t]
is the average of the other inputs θi obtained by children of permanent residents in location c.19
Figure I shows that the causal effect estimates µ̂25,c based on the sample of movers are highly
correlated with permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c , consistent with the findings in Chetty and
Hendren (2017). At the CZ level, regressing µ̂25,c on ȳ25,c yields a slope of γ25 =

dE[µ25,c |ȳ25,c ]
dȳ25,c

= 0.032

(s.e. 0.003), illustrated by the best-fit line in Figure Ia. That is, a year of exposure to a CZ where
permanent residents’ outcomes are 1 percentile higher increases a given child’s outcomes by 0.032
percentiles.20 We find similar estimates at the county level and for children in high income families
(p = 75) (Appendix Figure I).
Although ȳpc is highly predictive of µpc on average, there are many differences between the
causal effect estimates and permanent residents’ outcomes in certain cases. For example, children
19

If neighborhood effects vary across areas within CZs or counties, as is likely to be the case, then differences in
the geographical distribution of permanent residents relative to movers within an area c would also be incorporated
into the selection term θ̄pc .
20
This estimate of γ25 = 0.032 differs from the estimate of γ ' 0.04 reported in our first paper because we impose less
stringent population restrictions (requiring populations above 25,000 instead of 250,000), do not impose restrictions
on the distance of moves, and focus on families at p = 25 rather than aggregating across all percentiles. In addition,
we estimated γ in our first paper by directly projecting movers’ outcomes onto the outcomes of permanent residents.
The advantage of that approach relative to the analysis in Figure I is that it directly uses permanent residents’
outcomes as “goal posts” for movers’ expected outcomes in each place. This allows us to implement placebo tests
exploiting heterogeneity across subgroups and increases statistical power, allowing us to estimate exposure effects
non-parametrically by age and estimate specifications that control for family fixed effects or are identified from
displacement shocks.

15

of permanent residents in Cleveland have worse outcomes than those in Los Angeles. The causal
effect estimates based on movers, however, imply that Cleveland produces better outcomes for a
given child than Los Angeles. We present a more systematic comparison between causal effects and
permanent residents’ outcomes in Section VI.B below.
Alternative Specifications. In Online Appendix A, we assess the sensitivity of our estimates
of µ̂25,c to several alternative specifications: (1) modeling heterogeneity in the impact of places
across parental income levels using a quadratic function of parental income rank p instead of the
linear specification used in (6); (2) controlling for fluctuations across cohorts using alternative
parametrizations relative to the specification in (5); (3) measuring children’s outcomes in levels
instead of percentile ranks; and (4) using income measures that adjust for local costs of living. All
of these specifications yield fixed effect estimates that are very highly correlated with our baseline
estimates (Online Appendix Table I).

IV.B

Validation of Research Design

The fixed effect estimates µpc obtained from (6) can only be interpreted as causal effects of areas
under the identification assumption in (3), which requires that children’s exposure to each area
eic is orthogonal to other inputs θi , conditional on origin-by-destination fixed effects and parental
income levels. In this section, we present a set of robustness checks and placebo tests to evaluate
the validity of this key assumption.
As in Section V of our first paper (Chetty and Hendren 2017), we organize this evaluation by
partitioning the unobserved determinant of children’s outcomes θi into two components: a component θ̄i that reflects inputs that are fixed within families, such as parent genetics and education,
and a residual component θ̃i = θi − θ̄i that may vary over time within families, such as parents’
jobs. Each of these components can create different forms of selection and omitted variable biases,
and we therefore use different methods to assess their relevance. In each case, we first discuss the
set of biases that are already ruled out by the tests conducted in Section V of Chetty and Hendren
(2017) and then present tests to evaluate potential remaining biases.
Fixed Factors. Fixed factors θ̄i can create selection bias in estimates of µpc if θ̄i is correlated
with the age at which child i moves to a given area c. The most plausible source of such sorting
is selection on areas’ treatment effects µpc . For example, families who move to areas that produce
better outcomes (higher µpc ) when their children are younger may also invest more in their children
in other respects (higher θ̄i ), which would bias our exposure effect estimates. In our first paper, we

16

showed that children who move to areas with better permanent resident outcomes ȳpc at younger
ages do not have significantly different levels of θ̄i using specifications with family fixed effects
identified from sibling comparisons.21 Since ȳpc is very highly correlated with the causal effects of
place µpc (as shown in Figure I above), this finding indicates that direct selection on treatment
effects is unlikely to be prevalent. Intuitively, if children with better potential outcomes (higher θ̄i )
systematically move to better areas (higher µpc ) at younger ages, we would expect such families to
sort to areas where permanent residents have better outcomes ȳpc . The fact that they do not do
so suggests that families are not directly sorting on µpc .
The results in our first paper therefore imply that any selection biases in our estimates µ̂pc
must arise from heterogeneity in θ̄i that is correlated with the timing of moves to a given area c
for reasons unrelated to a place’s causal effect µpc . Intuitively, the concern that remains is that
the deviations of µ̂pc from the permanent resident predictions γp (ȳpc − ȳp ) in Figure I might reflect
selection bias rather than causal effects. For example, one may be concerned that Los Angeles
has a particularly negative estimate of µ̂25,c relative to its permanent residents’ outcomes because
families who move into LA at earlier points in their lifecycle happen to have worse unobservables
θ̄i , for reasons that are unrelated to LA’s causal effect µpc . We test for this form of selection bias
using two placebo tests.
First, we examine the incomes (at age 26) of children who are older than 23 when their parents
move. These children provide a natural “placebo group” because they are less likely to move with
their parents and because our first paper shows that neighborhoods no longer have exposure effects
after age 23. If families who move at earlier times to a given area have different latent characteristics
θ̄i , they would be manifested in the outcomes of this placebo group and would generate fixed effect
estimates similar to the actual causal effects µpc . If in contrast our identification assumption holds,
we should find no correlation between these placebo effects and the true effects µpc .22 We replicate
our baseline specification on this group of older children – defining their “exposure” to each area
as the number of years in which their parents lived in the new area – to estimate a set of placebo
fixed effects {µ̂23+
pc }. The correlation between these placebo fixed effects and µpc is 0.04 (s.e. =
0.08) at p = 25 across CZs and is similarly small and insignificant at p = 75 and at the county level
21
Unfortunately, we have insufficient precision to estimate the fixed effects model in (6) with family fixed effects.
Conceptually, there is insufficient variance in children’s ages within families to identify the 6,000 parameters in (6).
Regressing the point estimates obtained from such a specification on our baseline estimates yields a point estimate
close to 1, but the confidence interval includes 0 as well.
22
If families were sorting directly on places’ causal effects on children µpc , we would expect different selection
patterns for parents with children below vs. above age 23, in which case this placebo test would be uninformative.
However, that form of selection is already ruled out by the evidence in Chetty and Hendren (2017) discussed above.

17

(Appendix Table I, row 7).23
Second, we implement a placebo test using teenage labor force participation at age 16. Teenage
labor force participation (LFP) rates provide an informative “pre-treatment” indicator because they
are significantly positively correlated with differences in children’s incomes in adulthood across
CZs.24 We estimate a set of fixed effects {µ̂TpcL } by replicating our baseline specification using
an indicator for working at age 16 (defined as receiving a W-2 form) as the outcome, restricting
attention to families who move when their child was between ages 17 and 23.25 Since moves after age
16 cannot affect outcomes at age 16, µ̂TpcL are placebos: if families’ unobservables θ̄i vary with the
time at which they move, we would expect µ̂TpcL to be correlated with our baseline estimates µpc , but
if our identification assumption holds, we would expect to find no such correlation. Empirically, the
correlation between µ̂TpcL and µpc is small and statistically insignificant; for instance, the correlation
is 0.00 (s.e. = 0.08) at p = 25 across CZs (Appendix Table I, row 8). In sum, the two placebo tests
uncover no evidence that families who move to a given area at an earlier time differ systematically
in their children’s potential outcomes.
Time-Varying Factors. The second potential source of bias is time-varying factors θ̃i that are
correlated with families’ decisions to move. For example, families may move to a given area c when
their income has gone up. Growing up in a higher-income family might itself improve children’s
outcomes in proportion to their age, which would create bias in estimates of µpc using our exposure
time design.
In our first paper, we showed that the changes in children’s incomes when families move to
areas with better permanent resident outcomes ȳpc are not driven by time-varying confounds using
a set of placebo tests exploiting heterogeneity across subgroups. As above, these findings rule out
what is perhaps the most plausible form of omitted variable bias – namely that families who move
to areas where children do better (higher µpc ) may have experienced a positive shock that directly
affects their children’s outcomes irrespective of where they live. Hence, any remaining bias must
arise from time-varying factors that vary across areas in a manner that is uncorrelated with their
23

These correlations are adjusted for attenuation due to noise in the estimates of µ̂pc by estimating
SD(µ̂pc )
SD(µ̂ )
23+
Corr(µ̂23+
, where SD(µpc is the ratio of the raw standard deviation of the fixed effect
pc , µpc )=Corr(µ̂pc , µ̂pc ) SD(µ
pc)
pc)
estimates to the signal standard deviation, computed as described in Section V below.
24
The population-weighted correlation between LFP rates at age 16 and income ranks at age 26 across CZs for
children with parents at p = 25 is 0.27. We use children in the 1983-86 birth cohorts when analyzing LFP at age 16
because W-2 information is available starting in 1999, so labor force participation at age 16 is observed only starting
with the 1983 birth cohort.
25
To eliminate spurious correlations due to correlated sampling errors, we randomly split the data into two halves
to estimate µ̂TpcL and µ̂pc on independent samples.

18

causal effects on average.
To assess the potential bias from such time-varying factors, we focus on two observable variables
that are among the most important determinants of children’s outcomes: parents’ income and
marital status (Jencks and Mayer 1990). We control for the effects of changes in income around the
move when estimating (6) by including controls for the change in the parent’s income rank from
the year before to the year after the move interacted with the child’s age at move. Similarly, we
control for the impact of changes in marital status by interacting indicators for each of the four
possible changes in marital status of the mother in the year before vs. after the move (married
to unmarried, unmarried to married, unmarried to unmarried, and married to married) with the
child’s age at move.26
Figure II presents a scatter plot of the estimates of µ̂25,c with these controls vs. our baseline
estimates µ̂25,c across CZs (Panel A) and counties (Panel B). The estimates obtained with controls
for changes in income and marital status are nearly identical to the baseline estimates, with correlations above 0.97. These results imply that the estimates of place effects are not biased by changes
in income or family structure around the point of the move. While these findings do not definitively
establish the validity of the identification condition in Assumption 2, they imply that any violation of that assumption would have to arise from time-varying unobservables that are uncorrelated
with both permanent residents’ outcomes ȳpc (in the origin and destination) and uncorrelated with
changes in income and marital status. We believe such violations of the identification condition
are unlikely to be prevalent and therefore interpret our baseline fixed effects {µ̂pc } as unbiased
estimates of place effects.
In the next four sections, we use these estimates to (1) quantify the magnitude of place effects,
(2) construct mean-squared-error-minimizing forecasts of the causal effect of growing up in each
county, (3) characterize the properties of areas that produce higher levels of upward mobility, and
(4) identify areas that produce good outcomes with low housing costs. The fixed effect estimates
{µ̂pc } are provided in Online Data Tables 3 and 4, and hence all of the results that follow can be
reproduced using publicly available data.
26

For computational reasons, we use a two-step residualization procedure to incorporate these controls; see Online
Appendix A for details.

19

V

Magnitude of Place Effects

How much does the neighborhood in which a child grows up influence his or her outcomes in adulthood? In this section, we estimate the standard deviation of place effects (σµpc ) by decomposing
the variation in the fixed effect estimates µ̂pc into the portion due to signal (differences in latent
causal effects) vs. noise (sampling error).

V.A

Methods

The raw standard deviation of place effect estimates σµ̂pc overstates the true (signal) standard
deviation of place effects σµpc because part of the variation in the estimates µ̂pc is due to sampling
error. To estimate σµpc , we decompose the place effect estimates µ̂pc into the (latent) place effect
µpc and sampling error ηpc :
µ̂pc = µpc + ηpc ,

(8)

where ηpc is orthogonal to µpc (E [ηpc |µpc ] = 0). This decomposition implies that we can estimate
σµ2 pc by subtracting the variance induced by sampling error, ση2pc , from the variance in the observed
estimates, σµ̂2 pc :
σ̂µ2 pc = σµ̂2 pc − ση2pc .

(9)

We estimate the noise variance ση2pc as the average squared standard error,
 
ση2pc = E s2pc ,
where spc denotes the standard error of µ̂pc , estimated using the methods discussed in Section III.C,
and the expectation is taken across areas. We compute the standard error of the signal SD estimate
σ̂µpc using an asymptotic approximation described in Online Appendix B. We use precision weights
(1/s2pc ) when estimating all of these parameters to maximize efficiency.

V.B

Results

Table II reports the standard deviation (SD) of the raw fixed effects σµ̂pc , the noise component σηpc ,
and the latent causal effects σµpc . We report estimates at the CZ level, county level, and across
counties within CZs for children whose parents are at p = 25 and p = 75. In Panel A, we report
estimates of the standard deviation of annual exposure effects on children’s income ranks at age
26. Panel B rescales these estimates to present other metrics for the size of place effects.
Low-Income Families. We begin by discussing the magnitude of neighborhood effects for children who grow up in low-income families (p = 25). At the CZ level, the (precision-weighted) SD
20

of the raw fixed effects at p = 25 is σµ̂25,c = 0.25, as reported in the first row in Table II. A large
q  
fraction of this variation is due to noise: σηpc = E s2pc = 0.21. Subtracting the variance of the
sampling error using (9) yields a signal SD across CZs of σµpc = 0.13. That is, living in a one SD
better CZ based on children’s realized outcomes increases a given low-income child’s expected rank
by 0.13 per year of exposure.
Across counties at p = 25, we estimate σµ̂25,c = 0.43, ση25,c = 0.40, and σµpc = 0.17. The
county-level estimates exhibit more noise than the CZ-level estimates because sample sizes are
smaller at the county level. The SD of causal effects across counties σµpc is larger than that across
CZs, which is expected because CZs are aggregations of counties. The estimates imply that the
SD of counties’ causal effects within a given CZ is 0.10 on average, showing that there is nearly as
much variation in children’s outcomes across counties within CZs as there is across CZs.
To interpret the magnitude of these standard deviations, in Panel B, we rescale the annual
exposure effects in three steps analogous to those used in Section IV.A. First, we multiply the
annual exposure effect estimates by 20 to obtain an estimate of the causal effect of growing up in a
given area from birth. Second, we translate the percentile changes into dollar values by multiplying
the estimates by $818, given our estimate above that each additional income rank translates to an
additional $818 of income at age 26 on average for children with parents at p = 25. Third, we
translate the estimates to percentage impacts on income by dividing by the mean level of income
at age 26 for children with below-median income parents ($26,091).
Using these rescalings, our estimates imply that for a child with parents at p = 25, growing up in
a one SD better county from birth would increase his or her income at age 26 by 3.3 percentiles. This
translates to an increase in income of $2,700, which is a 10.4% increase in income (about 0.5% per
year of childhood exposure). For comparison, a one SD increase in parent income ranks is associated
with an 7.1 percentile increase in children’s ranks at age 26 in our sample. The causal effects of
neighborhoods are thus nearly half as large as the association between parent and child income. As
another benchmark, Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014b) estimate that being assigned to a 1 SD
better teacher (based on the teacher’s test-score value-added) for a single school year raises income
by 1.3%. Hence, growing up in 1 SD better county is roughly equivalent to having 8 consecutive
years of a 1 SD higher value-added teacher. These comparisons show that neighborhood effects
are an important determinant of children’s outcomes, with an order of magnitude comparable to
other potential interventions, such as changes in educational quality or family resources. However,
like these other factors, the area in which a child grows up explains only a small portion of the
21

total variance in children’s outcomes: the SD of county effects (3.3 percentiles) is only 11.4% of the
unconditional SD of children’s ranks (which is 28.9 percentiles).27
The SD of the causal effects of places µ25,c is smaller than the SD of permanent residents’
outcomes ȳpc , implying that the variation in permanent residents’ outcomes across areas is partly
due to selection. At the CZ level, σȳ25,c = 3.3 percentiles, while the causal effect of growing up in
a 1 SD better CZ from birth is 2.7 percentiles. The corresponding values at the county level are
4.2 and 3.3 percentiles. The correlation between ȳ25,c and µ25,c is 0.80 across CZs and 0.58 across
counties within CZs.28 Hence, permanent residents’ outcomes are quite informative about places’
causal effects, but there are significant differences between µ25,c and ȳ25,c , especially at the county
level. These results demonstrate that the differences betweenµ̂25,c and ȳ25,c in Figure I reflect not
just sampling error, but differences between places’ causal effects µ25,c and permanent residents’
outcomes that are driven by selection.
High-Income Families. Neighborhoods have similar effects in percentile rank and dollar terms
for children of high-income (p = 75) parents, but matter less in percentage terms because children
in high-income families have higher mean incomes. For children with parents at the 75th percentile
of the income distribution, the signal SD of place effects at the county level is 3.1 percentiles, which
translates to a dollar change of $2,600, or a 6.4% change in income. The place where a child grows
up may matter less for children with higher-income parents because high-income families are able
to insulate themselves from local conditions more effectively (e.g., by switching to private schools
if public schools are weak).
For high-income families, the causal effects µ75,c are highly correlated with permanent residents’
outcomes ȳ75,c across CZs (correlation = 0.91). However, across counties within CZs, the correlation between µ75,c and ȳ75,c falls to 0.04, suggesting that the observational variation in children’s
outcomes across areas within a given CZ is driven primarily by sorting rather than causal effects
for affluent families.
Are the places that generate good outcomes for the poor the same as those that generate good
27

In this sense, our estimates are consistent with the upper bound on neighborhood effects constructed by Solon,
Page, and Duncan (2000) based on the correlation between neighbors’ outcomes within an area. Solon et al. (2000,
p390) estimate that a 1 SD increase in neighborhood (defined as a PSID sampling cluster) quality is associated with
at most a 0.32 SD increase in years of education. Our estimates imply that a 1 SD increase in county quality causes
a 3.3/28.9 = 0.11 SD increase in children’s ranks.
SD(µ̂25,c )
28
We estimate these correlations as Corr(µ25,c , ȳ25,c ) = Corr(µ̂25,c , ȳ25,c ) SD(µ25,c
, where the ratio of standard
)
deviations is obtained from Table II and adjusts for the attenuation in Corr(µ̂25,c , ȳ25,c ) due to sampling error in
µ̂25,c .

22

outcomes for the rich? Across CZs, the signal correlation between µ25,c and µ75,c is 0.72.29 Across
counties within CZs, the correlation is 0.08. In short, there is no evidence that places which
generate better outcomes for the poor generate worse outcomes for the rich; if anything, at broad
geographies, places that are better for the poor are better for the rich too.30
Heterogeneity by Gender. Estimating fixed effects µ̂pc separately for male and female children,
we find that the place where a child grows up matters more for boys than girls, especially in lowincome families (Appendix Table II). Growing up in a 1 SD better county from birth in a family at
the 25th percentile increases boys’ household income ranks by 5.5 percentiles (16.4%), compared
with 3.5 percentiles (11.4%) for girls. The correlation between boys’ and girls’ place effects is 0.85
across counties, indicating that the places that are good for boys and generally good for girls as
well. However, the variance of outcomes across areas is larger for boys, in particular because there
are some areas with very negative outcomes for boys in poor families. We discuss these differences
by gender in further detail in Section VI.

VI

Forecasts of Place Effects

Given that neighborhoods have substantial causal effects on children’s outcomes, where should
a family who wants to maximize their children’s incomes live? In this section, we address this
question by constructing forecasts of place effects that minimize the mean-squared error of the true
impact of growing up in a given area relative to the predicted impact.

VI.A

Methods

The fixed effect estimates based on movers µ̂pc provide unbiased but imprecise estimates of place
effects, as illustrated by the wide confidence intervals for some of the estimates in Figure I. To obtain
more precise forecasts of places’ causal effects, we combine µ̂pc with information on permanent
residents’ outcomes ȳpc . Permanent residents’ outcomes are estimated with essentially no sampling
error, but are biased predictors of µpc because they combine causal effects with sorting. By shrinking
29

When computing these correlations, we estimate µ25,c using families with below-median income (p < 50) and
µ75,c using families with above-median income (p > 50) in order to obtain estimates from independent samples that
Cov (µ25,c ,µ75,c )
are not spuriously correlated due to sampling error. We compute the signal correlation as ρ = σµ σµ
=
25,c

cov (µ̂25,c ,µ̂75,c )
.
σµ25,c σµ75,c

We use precision weights

sum of the standard errors squared,
30

s2
µ

25,c

(1/s2µpc )
1
+s2
µ

75,c

to estimate the signal SDs σµpc and weight by the inverse of the

when estimating Cov (µ̂25,c , µ̂75,c ).
75,c

This cross-sectional correlation does not imply that policies that improve the outcomes of the poor will not affect
the rich. Moreover, these correlations only show that better outcomes for the poor in a given CZ or county c are
not associated with worse outcomes for the rich within the same CZ or county; they do not shed light on potential
spillover effects on the outcomes of the rich in other areas.

23

our estimates of µ̂pc towards predictions based on ȳpc , we substantially reduce prediction errors,
decreasing the estimator’s variance at the expense of introducing some bias.31
Formally, we construct forecasts µfpc of each area’s true causal effect µpc that minimize the mean
P
squared prediction error c (µpc − µfpc )2 .32 For simplicity, we restrict attention to linear predictors:
µfpc = α + ρ1,pc µ̂pc + ρ2,pc ȳpc

(10)

and allow the coefficients ρ1,pc and ρ2,pc to vary with the degree of sampling error spc in µ̂pc .
We make two additional simplifying assumptions in constructing forecasts using (10). First, we
assume that ȳpc is measured without error. Second, we model the true variance of place effects as
homoskedastic, i.e. we assume V ar(µpc ) does not vary with c. The first assumption is purely an
expositional simplification; incorporating sampling error in ȳpc yields forecasts that are correlated
more than 0.99 with the baseline estimates. The second assumption is more substantive. We have
found that permitting some heteroskedasticity in µpc (e.g., by population size) does not affect our
estimates appreciably. Nevertheless, in future work, it would be useful to study whether more
flexible models can yield further reductions in prediction errors using the estimates of µ̂pc , spc , and
ȳpc that are publicly available in Online Data Tables 3 and 4.
Best Linear Predictors. The MSE-minimizing coefficients ρ1,pc and ρ2,pc in (10) are equivalent
to those that would be obtained from a (hypothetical) ordinary least squares regression of µpc on
µ̂pc and ȳpc , allowing the coefficients to vary with spc . We derive these coefficients using a partial
regression approach in Online Appendix C. The resulting MSE-minimizing forecast is given by

µfpc =

χ2p
s2pc
µ̂
+
γp (ȳpc − ȳp )
pc
χ2p + s2pc
χ2p + s2pc

(11)

where ȳp = E [ȳpc ] is the mean of ȳpc across areas, γp = Cov(µ̂pc , ȳpc )/V ar(ȳpc ) is the coefficient
obtained from regressing µ̂pc on ȳpc , χ2p = V ar (µpc − γp (ȳpc − ȳp )) = σµ2 pc (1−ρ2µpc ,ȳpc ) is the residual
variance of place effects (across places c) after subtracting out the component explained by ȳpc ,
and s2pc is the noise variance (squared standard error) of µ̂pc .
Equation (11) shows that the best linear prediction of each county’s causal effect is a weighted
average of µ̂pc and γp (ȳpc − ȳp ), where the weights depend on the degree of signal (measured by χ2p )
31

Including other predictors – such as racial demographics, poverty rates, or other observable neighborhood characteristics – in addition to permanent residents’ outcomes yields very similar forecasts and does not reduce the MSE
of the forecasts appreciably (Online Appendix C and Appendix Figure II).
32
We use a quadratic loss function as an analytically tractable specification that penalizes large errors more heavily,
based on the reasoning that large errors in predicting place’s effects are likely to have much larger utility costs to
families seeking to move than small errors.

24

vs. noise (measured by s2pc ) in the fixed effect estimate. The weight on ȳpc falls as the variance in
the latent causal effects that cannot be captured by permanent residents’ outcomes (χ2p ) rises.33 We
 
estimate χ2p by subtracting the average sampling variance across places (E s2pc ) from the variance
of the residuals obtained from regressing µ̂pc on ȳpc :
 
χ2p = V ar (µ̂pc − γp (ȳpc − ȳp )) − E s2pc .

(12)

We estimate χ2p , γp , and ȳp weighting by the precision of the fixed effect estimates (1/s2pc ) to
maximize efficiency.
Graphical Representation of Optimal Forecasts. Figure III presents graphical intuition for the
construction of these optimal forecasts for a subset of the CZs shown in Figure Ia. The circles plot
the point estimates of each CZ’s causal effect µ̂25,c at p = 25 vs. the permanent residents’ mean
ranks ȳ25,c . The predicted values from a regression of µ̂25,c on ȳ25,c in the full sample of all CZs,
γ25 (ȳ25,c − ȳ25 ), are shown by the solid line. The optimal forecasts (shown by the diamonds) are a
weighted average of µ̂25,c and γ25 (ȳ25,c − ȳ25 ).
The dashed vertical lines on this figure show one-standard-error confidence intervals (spc ) for
µ̂25,c . In CZs where the standard error spc is smaller, the optimal forecast is closer to the estimate
from movers µ̂25,c than the permanent resident prediction. For example, in Los Angeles, the optimal
forecast µf25,c = −0.13 percentiles per year of exposure is obtained by placing 78% of the weight on
µ̂25,c and 22% on γ25 (ȳ25,c − ȳ25 ). In smaller CZs, where the fixed effects estimates are less precise,
the optimal forecast puts more weight on the predicted outcome based on the permanent residents.
For example, in Providence, RI, the optimal forecast puts 70% of the weight on the permanent
resident prediction.
Magnitude of Prediction Errors. The optimal forecasts differ from the true causal effect because
of sampling error in µ̂pc and bias in permanent resident predictions, γp (ȳpc − ȳp ). The mean-squared
error of the prediction in (11) for place c with standard error spc is
e2pc = E[µpc − µfpc ]2 =

1
χ2p

1
+

1
s2pc

.

If either the sampling error or sorting bias goes to 0, the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) epc
converges to 0 because the optimal forecast puts weight purely on the measure that provides the
most accurate prediction. At the other extreme, if the sampling error spc gets very large, epc
33

For CZs with populations below 25,000 and counties with populations below 10,000 in the 2000 Census, we do
not have an estimate of the causal effect µ̂pc given our sample restrictions. In these areas, we define the optimal
forecast as γp (ȳpc − ȳp ), the forecast based purely on permanent residents’ outcomes.

25

is bounded above by χp , the error in the permanent resident prediction. As a result, one obtains
forecasts that have much lower RMSE than forecasts based purely on µ̂pc (which would have RMSE
= spc ) especially in smaller CZs.34
In addition to having much lower MSE than the raw fixed effects µ̂pc , an attractive feature of
µfpc is that it is forecast unbiased: moving a child to a county with a one percentile higher forecasted
effect increases that child’s income in adulthood by one percentile on average. In this sense, the
forecasts µfpc provide unbiased predictions of the expected impacts of moving to a different area on
children’s outcomes.

VI.B

Forecasts for Commuting Zones

Figure IV presents maps of the forecasted place effects µfpc across CZs for children in below-median
(p = 25) and above-median (p = 75) income families, with lighter colors depicting areas that
produce better outcomes.35 Table III lists the forecasts for the 50 most highly populated CZs
(which accounted for 55.5% of the U.S. population in 2000), sorted in descending order based on
µf25,c , the forecasted effect for low-income families.
Estimates for Low-Income Families. Among the 50 largest CZs, Salt Lake City, Utah has the
most positive forecasted causal effect for children in below-median income families. We predict
that every additional year spent growing up in Salt Lake City will increase a child’s income by
0.17 percentiles (RMSE = 0.07) relative to an average CZ. Rescaling the estimates as described in
Section V.B into dollar impacts, this estimate implies that growing up in Salt Lake City from birth
(20 years of exposure) would increase children’s incomes at age 26 by 10.4% relative to growing up
in the average CZ. Conversely, at the bottom of the list, every additional year spent growing up in
New Orleans is predicted to reduce a child’s income by 0.21 percentiles (RMSE = 0.07) relative to
an average CZ. This estimate implies that growing up in New Orleans from birth would reduce a
child’s income by 13.4% relative to the average CZ and 23.8% relative to Salt Lake City.
Figure IV shows that many of the places that produce the highest incomes at p = 25 are in the
rural Midwest, which generate income gains (from birth) exceeding 23.8% relative to the average
area. Certain parts of the Northeast and West coast also generate very good outcomes, with gains
34

From a Bayesian perspective, under the simplifying assumption that the µ̂pc estimates are drawn independently
across places, µfpc = E [µpc |µ̂pc , ȳpc , spc ] is the posterior expectation of each place’s causal effect given a Normal prior
and likelihood function. The standard deviation of the posterior distribution is epc and the true parameter µpc lies
within the credible interval µfpc ± 1.96epc with 95% probability.
35
The maps are colored by grouping CZs into (unweighted) deciles. The deciles are not symmetric around zero
because µfpc is normalized to have a population-weighted mean of zero and population density is negatively correlated
with µfpc .

26

above 10.6%. The Southeast produces some of the worst outcomes for children in low-income
families, with income losses exceeding 9.4% relative to the average place. Parts of the industrial
Midwest and other areas such as the large Native American reservations in South Dakota and
Arizona generate very negative outcomes as well.
Causal Effects vs. Permanent Residents’ Outcomes. The geographical patterns of forecasted
causal effects µf25,c in Figure IV are broadly similar to the geographical patterns of permanent
residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c in observational data (Chetty and Hendren 2017, Figure II), but there are
several notable differences. For instance, Los Angeles is above the national average in terms of its
permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c , but it is among the worst cities in terms of its causal effect
on low-income children µf25,c (Table III).
To quantify these differences more systematically, in the fourth column of Table III we show
the forecast γ25 (ȳ25,c − ȳ25 ) that one would obtain if one were to use data only on permanent
residents (rescaled into percentage impacts). In LA, µf25,c = −8.1, whereas the prediction based on
permanent residents is +0.8%. Similarly, in New York, the causal impact is much more negative
than one would predict based on permanent residents’ outcomes. In Washington DC, the pattern is
reversed: permanent residents’ outcomes are close to the national mean, but the forecasted causal
effect is +6.6%, among the highest for large CZs. These differences between the causal forecasts µfpc
and the permanent residents’ outcomes ȳpc can be interpreted as selection effects among permanent
residents under our modeling assumptions, as shown in equation (7). We present a comprehensive
analysis of the factors that drive the differences between µfpc and ȳpc in Section VII.
Overall, the (population-weighted) correlation between µf25,c and ȳ25,c is 0.69 among the 50
largest CZs shown in Table III and 0.89 across all CZs. The correlation between µf25,c and ȳ25,c is
higher in smaller CZs because the MSE-minimizing forecast in (11) puts more weight on ȳ25,c when
the causal effect is estimated with less precision. In short, Table III shows that the permanent
residents’ outcomes used in our first paper provide a very good starting point to predict places’
causal effects, but combining that data with information on movers’ outcomes as we do here yields
much better predictions, especially in highly populated areas.
Estimates for High-Income Families. The right half of Table III and lower panel of Figure IV
show forecasts of place effects for children in above-median income (p = 75) families, µf75,c . As
discussed in Section V, the variation in causal effects as a percentage of income is much smaller for
families at p = 75 than p = 25. The predicted impact of moving from the worst CZ (Los Angeles)
to the best CZ (Salt Lake City) is 13.7% for children in above-median income families, roughly half
27

the corresponding range for children in below-median income families.
The geographical variation in causal effects at p = 75 is weakly positively correlated with the
variation at p = 25. Rural areas produce better outcomes at p = 75, particularly in the Midwest.
The Southeast tends to produce worse outcomes, although parts of the South such as Louisiana and
Arkansas generate considerably better outcomes for the rich than for the poor, thereby amplifying
inequality across generations. Perhaps most strikingly, much of the West coast and parts of the
Northeast have the lowest values of µf75,c . This result turns out to be driven by measuring children’s
incomes at the household rather than individual level, as we discuss next.
Individual Income and Marriage Rates. In our baseline analysis, we measure children’s outcomes at the household level, summing the incomes of spouses for married couples and using own
income for single individuals. Appendix Figure IV and Table III replicate Figure IV and Table III,
measuring children’s income at the individual level instead. The geographical patterns are broadly
similar, with a (population-weighted) correlation between the household-income and individualincome estimates of 0.75 at p = 25 and 0.59 at p = 75. However, in certain areas – most notably
in Coastal California and the Northeast at p = 75 – the patterns differ sharply. These areas generate relatively high levels of individual income even though they have among the lowest levels
of household income. For example, growing up in the San Francisco CZ from birth in a p = 75
family is predicted to increase individual income at age 26 by 0.7% but reduce household income
by 4.9% relative to the average CZ. Conversely, Salt Lake City has much more positive impacts on
household income than individual income.
Places’ causal effects on individual and household income differ largely because they have different causal effects on children’s rates of marriage. As shown in Chetty and Hendren (2017, Figure
VIIIb), places have linear childhood exposure effects on rates of marriage as well. We can therefore
forecast each area’s causal effect on marriage rates using the same approach as above, defining the
outcome as an indicator for being married at age 26 instead of a child’s income rank at age 26. The
estimates are presented in Appendix Table V. Growing up in Salt Lake City from birth increases a
given child’s probability of being married by 10.8 percentage points (pp) at p = 25 and 15.8 pp at
p = 75; the corresponding forecasts in San Francisco are -2.3 pp and -8.0 pp. More generally, the
areas that produce the highest rates of marriage tend to produce higher levels of household income
than individual income.

28

VI.C

Forecasts for Counties

Table IV presents forecasts of causal effects (on household income) for the 100 most populous
counties, focusing on those in the top and bottom 25 based on µf25,c . Analogous estimates for all
counties in the U.S. are available in Online Data Table 2.36
Estimates for Low-Income Families. DuPage County, IL (the western suburbs of Chicago)
produces the best outcomes for children from below-median income families among the 100 largest
counties. Growing up from birth in DuPage County would increase a child’s income by 16.0%
relative to the average county. The counties that produce the best outcomes are dispersed across the
country: they include Fairfax County in Virginia, Snohomish County in Washington, and Bergen
County in New Jersey. At the bottom of the list, Mecklenburg County (the city of Charlotte
in North Carolina) generates the most negative outcomes, reducing children’s incomes by 14.5%.
Baltimore City in Maryland, Hillsborough County in Florida, and Fresno County in California also
produce large income losses for children in low-income families.
Counties’ causal effects vary substantially even within metro areas. Figure V illustrates this
variation by mapping µf25,c for counties in the New York City and Boston Combined Statistical
Areas (CSAs). The estimates imply that growing up in a low-income family in Manhattan from
birth reduces children’s incomes by 10.8% relative to the mean, whereas growing up across the
Hudson river in Hudson County, NJ increases children’s incomes by 4.2% relative to the mean.
Hence, moving from Manhattan to Hudson County at birth would increase children’s incomes by
15.0%. Likewise, moving at birth from the city of Boston (Suffolk County) across the Charles river
to Middlesex County would increase children’s incomes by 13.8%. These maps illustrate a pattern
observed in many cities, which is that city centers tend to produce worse outcomes, particularly
for children in low-income families, than suburbs.
One of the most striking examples of local area variation is the difference between DuPage
County, the best county in the U.S., and Cook County (the city of Chicago), which is 8th worst
county in the U.S. among the 100 largest counties. Moving from Chicago proper to the western
suburbs of Chicago at birth would increase a child’s household income by $7,510 per year on
average, a 28.8% increase. This comparison is of particular interest in light of a well-known 1976
36

We construct these forecasts by applying (11) directly to the county fixed effect estimates µ̂pc , defined as the
sum of the CZ and county-within-CZ fixed effect estimates as discussed in Section III.C. An alternative approach –
which permits different shrinkage factors at the county-within-CZ and CZ levels – is to forecast the effect of each
county relative to the average county within each CZ and then add these county-within-CZ forecasts to the CZ-level
forecasts. In practice, these two methods deliver very similar results.

29

U.S. Supreme Court ruling, Hills v. Gautreaux, which required that the Chicago Housing Authority
(CHA) provide residents living in high-poverty housing projects in Cook County an opportunity
to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods in the suburbs, many of which were in DuPage County.
Observational studies comparing the outcomes of families who accepted offers to move to the
suburbs to those who chose to remain in the city (e.g., Rosenbaum 1995) have found that children
whose families moved to the suburbs had significantly better economic outcomes. The interpretation
of these findings have been debated because the families who chose to move may have had better
unobservables (θi in (1)). Our findings support the view that the gains observed for families who
moved as part of Gautreaux reflect the causal impact of growing up in DuPage County instead of
Cook County.
Estimates for High-Income Families. For children in above-median income (p = 75) families,
the best county in the U.S. is Fairfax, VA, which produces an income gain of 11.0% and the worst
county is Palm Beach, FL, which produces an income loss of 13.0%. Mirroring the CZ-level results,
the degree of variation in outcomes across counties is generally smaller at p = 75 than p = 25,
and there is a weak positive correlation between µf25,c and µf75,c . For example, in Figure V, the
city of Boston produces worse outcomes even for children in rich families than Middlesex County;
similarly, in New York, Manhattan produces worse outcomes than Hudson County.
Heterogeneity by Gender. The places that generate the best outcomes for boys generally generate the best outcomes for girls as well, but there is a thick lower tail of counties that produce
particularly negative outcomes for boys in low-income families (Online Appendix Figure VI). For
instance, growing up in Baltimore City from birth reduces household income by 27.9% for boys
relative to the mean, but only 5.4% for girls (Online Appendix Tables VII and VIII). One explanation for why certain areas produce extremely low incomes for boys is that males in these areas
are particularly likely to be incarcerated, and individuals who are incarcerated are included in our
sample with zero or very low incomes.37

VII

Characteristics of High-Opportunity Areas

What are the characteristics of places that produce high levels of upward mobility? Prior work
has shown that in observational data, upward mobility is highly correlated with several factors:
residential segregation, income inequality, the fraction of single mothers, social capital, school
37
Chetty et al. (2016) further explore heterogeneity in intergenerational mobility by gender and show that areas
with concentrated poverty and crime have particularly negative impacts on the incomes and employment rates of
boys growing up in low-income families.

30

quality, and racial shares (Sampson et al. 2002, Chetty et al. 2014). These correlations could
reflect two very different phenomena. One possibility is that they are predictive of places’ causal
effects: for instance, growing up in a more segregated area may cause worse economic outcomes for
a given child (lower µpc ) (Wilson 1987, Sampson 2012). Another possibility is that they capture
sorting: the types of people who live in more segregated places may have different characteristics
θi . Distinguishing between these two explanations is critical for understanding what types of
areas produce the greatest economic opportunity, as opposed to simply attracting upwardly-mobile
people.
In this section, we decompose the correlations documented in prior work into causal vs. sorting
components by correlating local area characteristics with both our causal effect estimates µ̂pc based
on movers and permanent residents’ outcomes ȳpc , which combine both causal effects and selection
effects. This analysis identifies the factors associated with the production of upward mobility;
however, we caution that it does not show that these factors themselves have a direct causal effect
on upward mobility.38
We organize our analysis into three parts. First, we analyze correlations between the incomes of
children in low-income families (µ25,c ) and area characteristics that are defined at the group level:
segregation, inequality, school quality, social capital. We then examine correlations between µ25,c
and demographic characteristics that are aggregates of variables defined at individual level: the
fraction of single mothers, immigrant shares, and racial shares. We find that correlations between
the group-level characteristics and upward mobility are driven almost entirely by causal effects of
place, whereas a substantial portion of the correlations between the individual-level demographic
aggregates and upward mobility is due to selection. Finally, we examine correlations between these
factors and outcomes for children growing up in high-income families (µ75,c ). In the interest of
space, we focus on a subset of correlations that illustrate the key results, shown in Figures VI
(p = 25) and VII (p = 75). A comprehensive set of correlations with 40 area-level characteristics is
presented in Appendix Tables XI-XIV.

VII.A

Group-Level Characteristics

Segregation. We measure racial segregation across Census tracts within each CZ using a Theil index
Hc , which quantifies the extent to which the racial distribution in each Census tract differs from
38

For instance, we show below that more segregated places produce worse outcomes for low-income children.
This does not necessarily imply that policies which reduce segregation will increase upward mobility, because more
segregated places may have other characteristics that lead to worse outcomes (such as weaker schools).

31

the overall racial distribution in the CZ (Chetty et al. 2014, equation 4).39 We begin by examining
the association between permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c and Hc , as in prior observational
studies. The vertical tick mark in the first row of Figure VIa shows that growing up in a CZ with 1
standard deviation (SD) higher segregation is associated with a 5.2% reduction in children’s incomes
for families at p = 25 (ȳ25,c ).40 We estimate this 5.2% effect in three steps. First, we normalize
Hc into standard deviation units by dividing the raw value of the index by its population-weighted
standard deviation across CZs. Next, we regress ȳ25,c on the standardized value of Hc , weighting
by CZ population. Finally, we multiply the regression coefficient by 3.14 to translate the percentile
impact into percentage impacts on incomes, as in Section V.B.
To determine how much of this 5.2% effect is due to causal effects of place vs. sorting, we repeat
the preceding exercise using the causal effect of growing up in an area from birth (20 × µ̂25,c ) as
the outcome.41 We estimate that growing up in a 1 SD more segregated CZ from birth reduces a
given child’s income by 4.2%, depicted by the solid bar in Figure VIa. Hence, 4.2/5.2 = 80.8% of
the association between segregation and permanent residents’ outcomes reflects the causal effect
of place. Under our modeling assumption that place effects µpc do not vary between movers and
permanent residents, the remaining 19.2% of the association – depicted by the dashed line in Figure
VIa – reflects sorting, i.e. the association between θ̄25,c = ȳ25,c − 20µ̂25,c and Hc .42
This analysis shows that the majority of the association between segregation and upward mobility across CZs documented in prior work can be explained by the causal effect of place rather
than sorting. The (population-weighted) correlation between the latent causal effect µ25,c and Hc
is -0.51 (shown on the right side of Figure VIa), implying that segregation explains a significant
portion of the variation in children’s outcomes across CZs.43 We find similar results using measures
of income segregation. The correlation between a Theil index of income segregation and µ25,c is
-0.57 (Appendix Table XI).
39

The characteristics analyzed in this section are taken primarily from Chetty et al. (2014, Online Data Table 8);
we provide detailed definitions and sources for all of the variables we use in Online Appendix Table XV of this paper.
40
Standard errors for all of the estimates shown in Figures VI and VII are given in Appendix Tables XI and XII.
All of the estimates discussed below are statistically significant with p < 0.05 unless otherwise noted.
41
We multiply the annual exposure effect estimates by 20 to obtain impacts from birth for the reasons described
in footnote 18; using other plausible scaling factors (e.g., 15 or 23) yields qualitatively similar results.
42
If the underlying causal effects µpc vary across movers and permanent residents – for example, because movers
tend to live in different neighborhoods within CZs relative to permanent residents – then 20µ̂25,c would not capture
the causal effect of place for permanent residents. In this case, the “selection” term ȳ25,c − 20µ̂25,c would also capture
the difference between place effects for permanent residents and movers.
SD(µ̂
)
43
, where the ratio of standard deviations
We estimate this correlation as Corr(µ25,c , Hc ) = Corr(µ̂25,c , Hc ) SD(µ25,c
25,c )
is obtained from Table II and adjusts for the attenuation in Corr(µ̂25,c , Hc ) due to sampling error in the raw fixed
effect estimates µ̂25,c .

32

We also find a strong negative correlation with measures of sprawl, which is strongly associated
with segregation. The correlation between the fraction of people with a commute time less than
15 minutes and µ25,c is 0.88. This is the single largest correlation we find across all 40 covariates
we analyzed. Growing up in a CZ that is 1 SD lower in the distribution of sprawl (as measured by
commute times) would increase a given child’s income by more than 7% on average.
In Figure VIb, we replicate the analysis in Figure VIa across counties within CZs. We obtain
these county-within-CZ estimates by estimating regressions analogous to those described above at
the county level, including CZ fixed effects and normalizing each covariate to have a SD of 1 across
counties within CZs. Segregation remains a strong predictor of causal effects at the county level:
the correlation between racial segregation and µ25,c is -0.37 across counties within CZs. However,
the sorting component is larger at the county level: more than two-thirds of the association between
segregation and permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c is due to sorting. This finding is consistent
with the intuition that families seeking better opportunities for their children are more likely to
sort within rather than between labor markets.
In sum, our analysis strongly supports the hypothesis that growing up in a more segregated area
– that is, in a neighborhood with concentrated poverty – is detrimental for disadvantaged youth.
However, the mechanisms underlying our findings diverge from some of the theories posited in prior
work. For instance, some studies have proposed that segregation is associated with worse outcomes
for the poor because of spatial mismatch in access to jobs (Kain 1968, Kasarda 1989, Wilson 1996),
an explanation that may appear particularly plausible given the strong correlation between upward
mobility and commute times. However, the fact that our causal effect estimates µ̂25,c are identified
from differences in childhood exposure is inconsistent with this theory. Our analysis shows that
moving to a more sprawling, segregated city at an earlier age (e.g., 10 instead of 12) reduces a
child’s income in adulthood, demonstrating that these effects cannot be directly driven by a lack
of access to jobs in adulthood. Moreover, we find a strong negative association between population
density and µ25,c , showing that urban areas – which have more jobs – tend to be worse for upward
mobility. Overall, these findings are more consistent with theories that emphasize peer effects or a
lack of resources as an explanation for why growing up in a more segregated area reduces upward
mobility.
Income Inequality. CZs and counties with greater income inequality produce significantly worse
outcomes for children in low-income families. At the CZ level, the correlation between µ25,c and the
Gini coefficient is -0.76. Growing up from birth in an area with a 1 SD higher Gini coefficient reduces
33

a given child’s income by 6.4%. Interestingly, this effect is larger than the -4.2% effect observed
for permanent residents. Under the assumption that the causal effect µpc is the same for movers
and permanent residents, it follows that the sorting component θ̄25,c offsets the causal component
µ25,c in observational data. That is, residents of areas with high levels of income inequality tend
to have better unobservables θ̄25,c , leading prior observational studies (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014) to
understate the association between inequality and upward mobility.
This offsetting pattern of selection and causal effects is particularly stark when we focus on
upper-tail inequality, measured by the share of households in each CZ who are in the top 1% of
the national income distribution. Growing up in an area with 1 SD greater upper-tail inequality
reduces the incomes of children in low-income families by 4.1%, an estimate that is significant with
p < 0.01 (Appendix Table XI). In contrast, the effect on ȳ25,c is only 1.0% and is not statistically
significant. These findings are inconsistent with Chetty et al.’s (2014) hypothesis that “the factors
that erode the middle class may hamper intergenerational mobility more than the factors that
lead to income growth in the upper tail” based on their analysis of observational data. On the
contrary, both upper-tail inequality and middle-class inequality are strongly negatively associated
with causal effects on upward mobility; it is just that the effect of upper-tail inequality is masked
by selection in observational data.
These results shed light on the determinants of the “Great Gatsby” curve, the widely noted
negative correlation between inequality and intergenerational mobility (Krueger 2012, Corak 2013).
The fact that inequality is negatively correlated with µ25,c implies that the Great Gatsby curve is
not driven by differences in genetics or other characteristics of populations in areas with different
levels of inequality. Rather, placing a given child in an area with higher levels of inequality makes
that child less likely to rise up in the income distribution, showing that areas with greater income
inequality generate less upward mobility.44
Education. At both the CZ- and county-level, we find strong correlations between µ25,c and
output-based proxies for K-12 school quality, such as test scores and high school dropout rates
controlling for parent income. We find weaker correlations with input-based measures of school
quality, such as class size and expenditures per student. As with the other factors analyzed above,
most of the association between proxies for school quality and permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c
is due to the causal component µ25,c rather than the sorting component θ̄25,c .
44

Moreover, the gap in causal effects between children from low and high income families (µ75,c − µ25,c ) is larger
in areas with greater inequality, especially among smaller CZs. That is, areas with greater inequality also produce
greater intergenerational persistence of income.

34

Turning to higher education, we find that CZs with more colleges per capita tend to produce
better outcomes µ25,c , with a correlation of 0.60. As with upper-tail inequality, this association is
masked when one compares permanent residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c across areas because of selection
effects.
Social Capital. Growing up in a CZ with more social capital, as measured by the social capital
index of Rupasingha and Goetz (2008), improves children’s outcomes significantly (correlation =
0.70). This causal component accounts for virtually all of the correlation between social capital
and permanent residents’ outcomes observed in prior work (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014). We also find a
significant negative association between µ25,c and violent crime rates across CZs (Appendix Table
XI). At the county-within-CZ level, we do not find a significant association between µ25,c and the
social capital index, but continue to find a significant relationship with violent crime rates.
Together, the factors discussed above explain 58% of the variance in µ25,c across CZs and 24%
of the variance across counties within CZs. These results imply that the places that produce
good outcomes share a common set of traits, increasing the likelihood that their successes may be
replicable in other areas.45

VII.B

Individual-Level Demographic Characteristics

We now turn to a set of characteristics that are aggregates of individual-level demographics.
Family Structure. In observational data, the strongest predictor of differences in rates of upward
mobility across CZs is the fraction of single mothers (Chetty et al. 2014). A 1 SD increase in
the fraction of single mothers is associated with an 7.6% reduction in the incomes of children of
permanent residents at p = 25 (ȳ25,c ). However, when we examine areas’ causal effects on upward
mobility, we find that a 1 SD increase in the fraction of single mothers reduces a given child’s income
(µ25,c ) by only 4.7%. Hence, 38% of the association between single parenthood rates and upward
mobility in observational data is explained by selection. Across counties within CZs, selection
accounts for nearly 70% of the association between the fraction of single mothers and ȳ25,c .
Selection may play a larger role in explaining the correlation between the fraction of single
mothers and ȳ25,c than factors such as school quality and social capital because the fraction of
single mothers is simply an aggregation of a household-level demographic characteristic. Insofar
as such characteristics have direct effects on children’s outcomes, they must mechanically capture
45

The fact that much of the variance in places’ causal effects can be explained by observables is noteworthy because
efforts to explain causal effects in other settings based on ex-ante observables, such as teachers’ value-added, have
been much less successful (e.g., Chetty et al. 2014a).

35

selection effects, i.e., differences in the types of families living in different areas. In contrast, school
quality and the other area-level factors analyzed in the previous subsection do not have such a
mechanical selection component.
Despite the importance of selection, the fraction of single mothers remains a strong predictor
of the causal effect µ25,c , with a correlation of -0.57 across CZs and -0.38 across counties within
CZs. However, it is no longer the strongest predictor of differences in upward mobility, as measures
of segregation, inequality, and social capital are as or more highly correlated with µ25,c than the
fraction of single mothers.
Immigrant Shares. Another important demographic characteristic that is strongly associated
with upward mobility is immigrant status. The children of certain immigrant groups, such as
Asians, have higher rates of upward mobility than the children of natives, perhaps because immigrant parents tend to have lower observed incomes relative to their latent ability. Consistent
with this intuition, we find a strong positive association between the fraction of immigrants in an
area (measured using Census data) and the sorting component (θ̄25,c = ȳ25,c − 20µ̂25,c ). That is,
permanent residents in areas with large immigrant populations do better than one would expect
based on our estimates of the causal effects of those places, consistent with the results for Los
Angeles and New York shown in Figure I.
Areas with larger immigrant shares also have more negative causal effects µ25,c on average
(correlation = -0.45), perhaps because they have other attributes (such as higher population density
or greater inequality) that are negatively associated with µ25,c . Because the causal and selection
effects work in opposite directions, immigrant shares are not significantly associated with permanent
residents’ outcomes ȳ25,c , matching the observational findings of Chetty et al. (2014). These results
echo the findings for single mothers in the sense that selection plays a key role in understanding
the relationship between immigrant shares and upward mobility in observational data.
Racial Shares. The last demographic factor we consider is race. Areas with a larger share of
black residents have much lower rates of upward mobility in observational data (Chetty et al. 2014).
Across CZs, a 1 SD increase in the black share is associated with a 7.5% reduction in ȳ25,c and a
4.3% reduction in µ25,c . As with the fraction of single mothers, this implies that about half of the
association between black shares and upward mobility across CZs in observational data is driven
by factors unrelated to the causal effects of CZs. These could include other factors that cause
lower rates of upward mobility for blacks than whites, such as racial discrimination in the labor
market, or differences in the types of low-income white families who live in CZs with large black
36

populations.46
Despite these points, the black share remains a strong predictor of the causal effect µ25,c , with
a correlation of -0.51 across CZs and -0.32 across counties within CZs. An important implication of
this result is that African American children grow up in areas that tend to produce worse economic
outcomes. Under our maintained assumption that place effects are not heterogeneous by race or
other characteristics, our estimates of µ25,c imply that black children grow up in counties that
produce 5.3% lower incomes than non-blacks on average. Noting that the black-white income gap
is approximately 25% (Fryer 2010), we conclude that one-fifth of the black-white income gap is
explained solely by the differences in the counties in which these children grow up. That is, if black
families were to live in the same counties as white families, the black-white income gap would fall
by 20%. Residential segregation by race thus amplifies racial inequality across generations.

VII.C

Predictors of Place Effects for High-Income Families

We turn now to the characteristics of areas that produce good outcomes for children in high-income
families (µ75,c ). Since µ25,c and µ75,c are highly positively correlated across CZs (Table II), one
might expect the strongest correlates of µ25,c to be highly correlated with µ75,c as well. Indeed, we
find that CZs with less residential segregation, higher quality education (as measured by test scores
as well as class sizes), greater social capital, and less income inequality produce better outcomes
for high-income children (Figure VIIa). However, µ75,c is not significantly correlated with black
shares and single parent shares, perhaps because these demographic factors are more reflective of
the characteristics of low-income populations in each area.
While µ25,c and µ75,c are positively correlated across CZs, µ25,c and µ75,c are essentially uncorrelated across counties within CZs. Correspondingly, the factors that strongly predict µ25,c at the
county level do not predict µ75,c . In general, the correlations between the causal effect µ75,c and the
factors we examine are quite small in magnitude and statistically insignificant at the county level
(Figure VIIb, Appendix Table XIV). There are, however, significant correlations between permanent residents’ outcomes in high-income families ȳ75,c and county-level characteristics, which are
driven primarily by selection effects. For example, a 1 SD increase in test scores (controlling for
income) is associated with an 2.1% increase in permanent residents’ incomes. However, the causal
effect of growing up in a county with 1 SD higher test scores is only 0.15%, implying that 93% of
46

Lacking data on race at the individual level, we cannot distinguish between these two explanations. Rothbaum
(2016) uses SIPP-SSA linked data to show that upward mobility varies across racial groups within CZs and that
controlling for race at the individual level reduces the degree of variation in intergenerational mobility across CZs.

37

the correlation observed for permanent residents is driven by selection. This finding suggests that
for high-income families, places that have schools that are ostensibly of higher quality (as measured
by test score performance) may not in fact produce better outcomes; they only appear to be better
because they have a positively selected group of children.
Comparing the correlations at p = 25 and p = 75 shown in Figures VI and VII, it is clear that the
types of areas that produce better outcomes for the poor generally produce better – or at least no
worse – outcomes for the rich. Most notably, there is no evidence that more residentially integrated
areas are harmful for children in high-income families. Segregation is negatively correlated with
µ75,c across CZs and uncorrelated with µ75,c across counties within CZs.

VIII

Housing Costs and Opportunity Bargains

How much more does a family have to pay to live in an area that produces better outcomes for
their children? In this section, we examine how opportunity for children is priced in the housing
market.

VIII.A

Methods

Letting rpc denote the average rent paid by families at percentile p in area c, we characterize the
relationship between rpc and µpc in two ways. First, we measure how much it costs on average to live
in a place that produces higher incomes for children by estimating the conditional expectation of
rents given an area’s causal effect, E[rpc |µpc ]. Second, we measure the extent to which a family could
find a place that produces better outcomes for their children without paying more rent by estimating
the variance in rents explained by places’ causal effects, R2 = V ar(E[rpc |µpc ])/V ar(rpc ).47
If areas’ causal effects µpc were directly observed, these parameters could be estimated (under
a linear approximation) using the following OLS regression:
rpc = α + βp µpc + ζpc

(13)

Since µpc is not observed, we estimate the conditional expectation βp by replacing µpc with
µrpc =

2
σµ
pc
2
σµpc +s2pc

µ̂pc , the MSE-minimizing forecast of each place’s causal effect using data purely

47

We use rents in our baseline specifications instead of house prices because most low-income families rent and
because it is more straightforward to compare income gains for children to flow rental costs than house prices. We
find qualitatively similar results using house prices, with a negative correlation between house prices and µpc across
CZs and very small correlations across counties within CZs (Appendix Tables XI and XII).

38

on movers.48 This regression yields a unbiased estimate of βp under the identification assumption
in (3).49 Intuitively, the shrinkage factor

2
σµ
pc
2 +s2
σµ
pc
pc

adjusts for the fact that the raw causal effects

µ̂pc are noisy estimates of µpc , leading to attenuation bias in βp in a regression of rpc on µ̂pc .
Similarly, we estimate the variance in rents explained by µpc (R2 ) using
R = Corr(rpc , µpc ) =
where

SD(µ̂pc )
SD(µpc )

Cov(rpc , µpc )
Cov(rpc , µ̂pc ) SD(µ̂pc )
=
,
SD(rpc )SD(µpc )
SD(rpc )SD(µ̂pc ) SD(µpc )

is computed using the total and signal standard deviations reported in Table II.

Intuitively, the signal R2 can be computed from the correlation between rents and µ̂pc , again
adjusting for attenuation due to noise in the causal effect estimates.
We scale µrpc in terms of the percentage change in income per year of childhood exposure, as
in Section V.B. We measure monthly rents using data from the 2000 Census, defining the rent in
each CZ or county as the mean of the median rent in each Census tract, weighting by the number
of families with children who have below-median income for p = 25 and above-median income for
p = 75 (see Online Appendix Table XV). We weight all regressions and correlations by population
in the 2000 Census.

VIII.B

Relationship Between Rents and Children’s Outcomes

Column 1 of Table V reports estimates of (13) at the CZ level at p = 25; results at p = 75 are
qualitatively similar and are presented in Online Appendix Table XVI. CZs that produce 1% higher
incomes for children have $103 lower monthly rents on average. This is consistent with our finding
that rural areas, such as the Great Plains, tend to produce better outcomes than urban areas. Of
course, rural areas also tend to have fewer job opportunities and lower wage rates, so moving to
such CZs may not be a plausible margin of choice for most families. Therefore, in the remainder of
this section, we focus on variation across counties within a given CZ. Because CZs are constructed
to approximate local labor markets (Tolbert and Sizer 1996), a household’s location decision within
a CZ aligns more closely with the conceptual exercise of determining the price of better outcomes
for children while holding parents’ job opportunities and wage rates fixed.
48

When estimating (13) at the CZ level, we construct the shrinkage factor

2
σµ
pc
2
σµ
+s2
pc
pc

using the estimates of σµpc of

0.13 at p = 25 and 0.11 at p = 75 (Table II, Columns 1 and 2). When estimating (13) at the county-within-CZ level,
we construct the shrinkage factor using the county-within-CZ signal SD of 0.10 at p = 25 and and 0.11 at p = 75
(Table II, Columns 5 and 6).
49
Formally, Cov(rpc , µrpc )/V ar(µrpc ) = β because Cov(µpc , µrpc )/V ar(µrpc ) = 1 and Cov(ζpc , µrpc ) = 0. Unlike in
Section VI, we do not use data on permanent residents when constructing the forecasts here because rents may be
correlated with the selection component of permanent resident outcomes θ̄pc , leading to a biased estimate of βp .
Indeed, we find that the association between rents and ȳ25,c is larger than the association between rents and µ̂25,c
(Appendix Table XI), implying that families with positive unobservables tend to select into high-priced areas.

39

In Column 2, we estimate the relationship between rents and children’s outcomes across counties
within a CZ by estimating (13) at the county level, including CZ fixed effects. On average, moving
to a county that produces 1% higher income per year of exposure for children costs $177 more in
monthly rent. To interpret the magnitude of this coefficient, note that a 1% increase in income
translates to approximately a $4,900 increase in lifetime income for a child with parents at p = 25
in present value at age 10 (the middle of childhood) using a 3% discount rate (see Online Appendix
D). Hence, a family with two children stands to gain approximately $10,000 in the present value of
future income by moving to a county that produces 1% better outcomes. This is four times larger
than the 12 × $177 = $2, 124 mean increase in annual rent associated with moving to a county that
increases children’s incomes by 1%.
The fraction of the variance in rents explained by µ25.c (or, equivalently, the fraction of the
variance in µ25,c explained by rents) is R2 < 2% across counties within a CZ. Even among the
100 most highly-populated CZs (population > 590,000), where housing supply is likely to be most
constrained, β25 = $202 and R2 = 5% (Column 3 of Table V).50
The relatively weak relationship between rents and children’s outcomes suggests that policies
that encourage low-income families to move to more expensive areas may not be sufficient to improve
their children’s outcomes. For example, current “small area” fair market rent proposals in housing
voucher programs vary voucher payments with neighborhoods’ rents rather than their impacts
on economic outcomes. Such policies may not maximize vouchers’ effects on upward mobility, as
many expensive areas do not have high levels of µ25,c . Indeed, our results imply that there are many
“opportunity bargains” – counties within a labor market that offer good outcomes for children with
relatively low rents.
Figure VIII illustrates these findings by plotting our optimal forecasts µf25,c – scaled as the
percentage impact of growing up in a given county from birth relative to the national mean – vs.
rents for counties in the New York City Combined Statistical Area. The substantial dispersion
in this scatter plot around the mildly upward sloping best-fit line illustrates the key empirical
results of this section: on average, moving to a better area does not cost much more, and there
is considerable residual variation in children’s outcomes that is orthogonal to rents. For example,
Hudson County, NJ offers much better outcomes for low-income children than Manhattan despite
50

Among these large CZs, the rent gradient is steeper in more sprawling, residentially segregated areas. In CZs
with above-median commute times, β25 = $255, compared with β25 = −$66 in CZs with below-median commute
times. The greater price of access to high-opportunity neighborhoods could potentially explain why more segregated,
sprawling cities tend to generate worse outcomes for children in low-income families.

40

having comparable rents. More generally, there are many counties – in the upper left of the figure
– that offer “opportunity bargains” within the New York area.
The existence of these opportunity bargains may be encouraging for families seeking to improve
their children’s prospects for upward mobility as well as for policy makers looking for affordable
areas that produce good outcomes as models to emulate. However, the existence of such areas
demands further explanation from the perspective of economic models of spatial equilibrium, as
these areas seemingly offer arbitrage opportunities that have been left unexploited. We turn to
explaining these empirical results in the next subsection.

VIII.C

Explaining Opportunity Bargains

Why are places’ effects on children’s future incomes not capitalized more fully into housing prices?
We discuss three potential explanations for this result in this subsection.
First, the areas that appear to be opportunity bargains may have other disamenities that make
them less desirable places to live. Our data suggest that such disamenities explain at least part of
the residual variation in children’s opportunities conditional on rents. The areas that generate the
best outcomes for children in most cities are typically in the suburbs – which tend to have longer
commutes and offer fewer urban amenities – as illustrated by the maps for New York and Boston
in Figure V. However, data from the Moving to Opportunity (MTO) experiment suggest that such
disamenities do not fully explain the existence of opportunity bargains. MTO families who received
housing vouchers to move to low-poverty Census tracts exhibited gains in both children’s long-term
outcomes and parents’ subjective well-being and neighborhood satisfaction (Ludwig et al. 2012,
Chetty et al. 2016). These findings suggest that affordable neighborhoods that produce better
outcomes for children in low-income families are not necessarily less desirable to parents because
of other disamenities.
A second potential explanation for why children’s opportunities are not fully priced in the
housing market is a lack of information. Families may not know which areas produce the best
outcomes for children, particularly because there is a long delay in observing these outcomes. To
evaluate this hypothesis, we divide place effects µ25,c into an “observable” component that is related
to attributes families can observe, such as school quality and poverty rates, and an “unobservable”
component unrelated to these factors. We estimate these components by regressing µ̂25,c (at the
county level) on the fraction of African American residents, the Theil index of racial segregation,
the Gini index, the fraction of single mothers, the social capital index, and expenditures on public

41

schools per student.51 We then define the observable component as the predicted value from this
regression and the unobservable component as the residual, which we shrink by its signal-to-noise
ratio as above to adjust for attenuation bias. 30% of the signal variance in µ25,c is captured by the
observable component; the remaining 70% is “unobservable” given these predictors.
In Columns 4 and 5 of Table V, we replicate the specification in Column 3, regressing rents on
the observed and unobserved components of place effects. We obtain an estimate of β25 = $430
for the observed component. Hence, moving to a CZ that generates a 1% ($4,900) increase in
lifetime income for a child along the “observed” dimension – for instance, an area with betterfunded schools and more two-parent families – costs $5,160 in terms of annual rent on average.
In contrast, there is no significant relationship between prices and the “unobservable” component
(Column 5). These findings suggest that the causal effects µ25,c may be under-priced partly because
of a lack of information.52
A third explanation for the existence of opportunity bargains is failures in optimization due
to cognitive constraints or behavioral biases. Recent ethnographic studies show that low-income
families frequently move under time pressure, either because they have been evicted (Desmond
2016) or because they are making a “reactive” move responding to a financial or health shock
(DeLuca et al. 2013). In such circumstances, families often seek shelter as quickly as possible rather
than weighing the benefits that may accrue to their children several years later if they choose a
different neighborhood (DeLuca et al. 2013). Moreover, the decision of where to live has several
features that may trigger well-established behavioral biases and induce suboptimal choice: delayed
payoffs coupled with large initial up-front costs that compound present bias, a need to predict one’s
preferences in a very different environment that may induce projection bias, and complex planning
with scarce mental bandwidth (Chetty 2015, Section IV.B).
We believe that each of these explanations – disamenities, a lack of information, and behavioral
biases – is likely to play a role in explaining the existence of opportunity bargains. Understanding
the relative importance of these theories is an important area for future research.
51

We use these factors because they are highly predictive of children’s outcomes, as shown in Figure VI, and are in
principle easily observed by families. However, including additional variables from the set in Figure VI does not affect
the results. We estimate the regression at the county level with CZ fixed effects, restricting the sample to counties
in the 100 most highly populated CZs and weighting by the county population.
52
One may be concerned that the unobservable component is highly transitory, in which case “opportunity bargains”
could only be identified ex-post after children become adults rather than when families are deciding where to live.
Empirically, this does not turn out to be the case. The unobservable component has a precision-weighted signal
correlation of 0.42 with permanent residents’ mean ranks at p = 25. Permanent residents’ mean ranks in turn have a
serial correlation exceeding 0.93 across cohorts, implying that one could reliably predict the unobservable component
even while children are growing up based on observed outcomes for earlier cohorts.

42

IX

Conclusion

This paper has estimated the causal effect of each county in the U.S. on children’s outcomes
in adulthood. Overall, the findings provide support for place-focused approaches to improving
economic opportunity, both by helping families move to opportunity and through place-based
investments. The estimates show that there is substantial scope for households to move to areas
within their labor market (CZ) that are opportunity bargains – places that produce better outcomes
for children without paying higher rents. In addition, the areas that produce high levels of upward
mobility share a common set of characteristics – such as less residential segregation and greater
social capital – suggesting that their successes might be replicable in other areas.
There are two key areas for further research before one can apply these findings to make policy
changes that improve children’s outcomes. First, it would be useful to estimate places’ causal effects
at narrower geographies (e.g., ZIP codes or Census tracts) and for specific subgroups (e.g., by race
and ethnicity) using the methods developed here. Such estimates would provide more granular data
for families seeking to move to opportunity within their cities and for policymakers seeking to make
targeted investments in neighborhoods that currently produce lower levels of upward mobility.
Second, it would be useful to understand the mechanisms through which some places produce
better outcomes than others by isolating exogenous variation in the predictors of upward mobility
identified here. For example, studying changes in local policies that have reduced residential segregation could shed light on whether segregation directly harms children in low-income families.
To facilitate further investigation of these mechanisms, we have made all of the county- and CZlevel estimates of causal effects constructed in this study available on the Equality of Opportunity
Project website.53
53
In addition to the estimates discussed in this paper, we also provide estimates for other outcomes and subgroups,
such as college attendance rates and estimates for children in one vs. two-parent households. For all outcomes, we
provide estimates of both the raw fixed effect estimates µ̂pc and optimal forecasts µfpc , as the appropriate measure of
place effects will vary across applications. As a rule of thumb, those seeking to use the causal effect as a dependent
variable should use µ̂pc , while those seeking to use the causal effect as an independent variable should use µfpc .

43

References
Abadie, A. and M. Kasy (2017). The risk of machine learning. Working Paper .
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High wage workers and high wage firms.
Econometrica 67 (2), 251–333.
Angrist, J., P. Hull, P. Pathak, and C. Walters (2017). Leveraging lotteries for school value-added:
Testing and estimation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Chetty, R. (2015). Behavioral economics and public policy: A pragmatic perspective. The American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5), 1–33.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014a). Measuring the impacts of teachers I:
Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. The American Economic Review 104 (9),
2593–2632.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014b). Measuring the impacts of teachers II: Teacher
value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. The American Economic Review 104 (9), 2633–
2679.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2017). The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility i:
Childhood exposure effects. Working Paper .
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on
children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. The American Economic
Review 106 (4), 855–902.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4),
1553–1623.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, F. Lin, J. Majerovitz, and B. Scuderi (2016). Childhood environment
and gender gaps in adulthood. The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 106 (5),
282–288.
Corak, M. (2013). Income inequality, equality of opportunity, and intergenerational mobility. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (3), 79–102.

44

Cutler, D. M. and E. L. Glaeser (1997). Are ghettos good or bad?

The Quarterly Journal of

Economics 112 (3), 827–72.
DeLuca, S., P. Rosenblatt, and H. Wood (2013). Why poor people move (and where they go):
Residential mobility, selection and stratification. Working Paper .
Desmond, M. (2016). Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. New York, NY: Crown.
Fryer, R. G. (2010). Racial inequality in the 21st century: The declining significance of discrimination. Handbook of Labor Economics 4.
Haider, S. and G. Solon (2006). Life-cycle variation in the association between current and lifetime
earnings. American Economic Review 96 (4), 1308–1320.
Hilger, N. (2016). Upward mobility and discrimination: The case of asian americans. NBER
Working Paper No. 22748 .
Hull, P. (2017). Estimating hospital quality with quasi-experimental data. Working Paper .
Jencks, C. and S. E. Mayer (1990). The social consequences of growing up in a poor neighborhood.
In Inner-City Poverty in the United States, pp. 111–186. National Research Council, Division of
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education, Committee on National Urban Policy.
Kain, J. F. (1968). Housing segregation, negro employment, and metropolitan decentralization.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (2), 175–197.
Kasarda, J. D. (1989). Urban industrial transition and the underclass. Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 501, 26–47.
Krueger, A. (2012). The rise and consequences of inequality in the united states. Speech at the
Center for American Progress, Washington D.C. on January 12, 2012.
Ludwig, J., G. J. Duncan, L. A. Gennetian, L. F. Katz, R. C. Kessler, J. R. Kling, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). Neighborhood effects on the long-term well-being of low-income adults. Science 337 (6101), 1505–1510.
Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton (1993). American apartheid: segregation and the making of the
underclass. Harvard University Press.
45

Rosenbaum, J. E. (1995). Changing the geography of opportunity by expanding residential choice:
Lessons from the gautreaux program. Housing Policy Debate 6 (1), 231–69.
Rothbaum, J. (2016). Sorting and geographic variation in intergenerational mobility. SEHSD
Working Paper .
Rupasingha, A. and S. J. Goetz (2008). US county-level social capital data, 1990-2005. The
Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development.
Sampson, R. J. (2012). Great American City: Chicago and the Enduring Neighborhood Effect.
University of Chicago Press.
Sampson, R. J., J. D. Morenoff, and T. Gannon-Rowley (2002). Assessing neighborhood effects:
Social processes and new directions in research. Annual Review of Sociology 28 (1), 443–478.
Solon, G., M. E. Page, and G. J. Duncan (2000). Correlations between neighboring children in their
subsequent educational attainment. The Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (3), 383–392.
Tolbert, C. M. and M. Sizer (1996). U.S. commuting zones and labor market areas: A 1990 update.
Economic Research Service Staff Paper 9614.
Wilson, W. J. (1987). The truly disadvantaged: the inner city, the underclass, and public policy.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, W. J. (1996). When work disappears: the world of the new urban poor. New York, NY:
Knopf.

46

Online Appendix
A

Estimation Methods for Place Fixed Effects

In this appendix, we describe the methods we use to estimate CZ fixed effects and control for
changes in income and marital status in our baseline analysis. We then discuss estimates of fixed
effects using alternative specifications.
Two-Step Estimator for CZ Fixed Effects. Equation (6) has more than one thousand parameters

of interest – each CZ’s fixed effect µ0c c and the fixed effects interacted with parent income rank
 1
µc c – as well as a large number of incidental parameters. Estimating this model using a single
regression directly in the microdata is not feasible due to computational constraints. We therefore
use a two-step approach to estimate (6), which we describe in this appendix.54
In the first step, we estimate exposure effects separately for each origin-destination pair. In each
origin destination pair, we regress children’s income ranks yi on exposure time to the destination
relative to the origin, A − mi using the following specification:

yi = αodps + (A − mi ) µ0od + µ1od pi + i ,

(14)


3 2
2
1 2
0
P
0
s p
sp + ψod
s + ψod
s + ψod
p + ψod
+ αod
αodps = αod

(15)

where

In equation (14), µpod = µ0od + µ1od p represents the causal impact of spending an additional year of
one’s childhood in destination d relative to origin o for children with parental income rank p. This
step generates Nc2 sets of estimates, where Nc denotes the number of CZs. To minimize the impact
of outliers in small cells, we limit the sample to origin-destination cells with at least 25 children
who move.
In the second step, we use the pairwise exposure effects µpod to estimate the causal effect of
each CZ c at percentile p, µpc . Under our modeling assumptions, the exposure effect for a given
origin-destination pair µpod is the difference between the destination’s and origin’s fixed effects at
percentile p:
µpod = µp,d − µp,o .
To estimate µpc for a given parental income rank p (e.g., p = 25), we regress the Nc2 pairwise
estimates obtained from the first step (µpod ) on a matrix G that consists of positive and negative
54

We thank Gary Chamberlain for suggesting this approach to estimating equation (6).

47

indicators for each CZ. To construct this matrix G, we enumerate all Nc2 origin-destination pairs
as rows, and each of the Nc CZs as columns. In each origin-destination row o − d, the column
corresponding to the destination d is assigned a value of +1, the column corresponding to the
origin o is assigned value of −1, and all other columns are assigned a value of 0. The resulting
Nc2 × Nc matrix G has the form:


−1 0 +1
+1 0 −1

G=
+1 −1 0 
0 +1 −1
We then estimate each place’s effect µpc using the following OLS regression specification:
µ
~ pod = G~
µp + ηod ,

(16)

~ p = (µp1 , ..., µpNc )’ is a column
where µ
~ pod denotes a column vector of the pairwise effects µpod and µ
vector of the CZ effects at percentile p. We estimate (16) weighting by the precision ( (sp1 )2 ) of the
od

µpod

estimates, based on the standard errors

spod

obtained from equation (14) in the first step.

Controlling for Changes in Income and Marital Status. To control for other factors that may
change when families move, such as parent income and marital status (Xi ), we seek to estimate
specifications of the form:
P
~ p + god (pi , si ) + β0 Xi + β1 Xi mi + εi .
yi = αod + αod
p + ~ei ·µ

(17)

This specification generalizes the baseline specification in (6) by adding the terms β0 X + β1 Xmi ,
which control for Xi and its interaction with the age of the child at the time of the move, mi .
Again, estimating (17) directly is computationally infeasible. We therefore use a partial regression
approach, following Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014a, Section I.B).
We first regress yi on Xi and αodpsm (origin by destination by parent income decile by child
birth cohort by child age at move) fixed effects. The inclusion of the αodpsm fixed effects yields
estimates of β0 and β1 that are not biased by potential correlations between Xi and ~ei . Using the
estimates βˆ0 and βˆ1 , we construct residuals ỹi = yi − β̂0 Xi − β̂1 Xi mi . We then estimate (6) with
the residuals ỹi as the dependent variable to identify {µpc } using the two-step approach described
above at the CZ level and a single regression in the microdata at the county-within-CZ level.
Alternative Specifications. We assess the sensitivity of our estimates of µ
~ p to our baseline specification choices by estimating a range of alternative specifications. Appendix Table I reports the
(population-weighted) correlation between the baseline estimates obtained from (6) and estimates

48

using alternative specifications. The estimates of µ
~ p using these alternative specifications are available in Online Data Tables 3 and 4.
In our baseline specification, we model heterogeneity in the impact of places across parental
income levels using a linear function of parental income rank. To assess the importance of this
functional form, we include a quadratic term in parent rank p when defining µpc in (4). The
correlation between the fixed effect estimates obtained from this quadratic specification with our
baseline estimates exceeds 0.88 at p = 25 and 0.78 at p = 75 at the CZ and county levels.
Next, we assess the sensitivity of the results to the functional form used to control for fluctuations
across cohorts in (5). Using a linear function of s and p yields estimates that are correlated above
0.98 with the baseline quadratic specification. Similarly, including a cubic term in cohort (s) in (5)
also does not affect the estimates appreciably.
In our baseline analysis, we use percentile ranks to measure children’s incomes. Measuring
children’s outcomes in levels (2012 dollars) yields estimates that have correlations of between 0.78
and 0.92 with our rank-based estimates. The correlations are below 1 largely because of noise in
the level estimates. As discussed in Section IV, the level estimates are much less precise than the
rank estimates because they are sensitive to outliers in incomes.
Finally, our baseline estimates do not adjust for differences in price levels across areas. Following
Chetty et al. (2014), we construct cost-of-living-adjusted income ranks for parents and children by
dividing income in each year t by a local price index (based on the ACCRA survey and local house
prices) for the CZ where the individual lived in year t. We then re-rank parents based on their mean
real income from 1996-2000 and re-rank children based on their real incomes at age 26. Estimates
of place effects based on real incomes are highly correlated (ρ > 0.74) with our baseline measures,
indicating that the variation in the causal effects of places we document is largely unrelated to
differences in cost of living.

B

Standard Errors

In this appendix, we describe how we compute standard errors for the fixed effect estimates (µ̂pc )
and the signal standard deviations (σµ̂2 pc ) reported in the text.
Standard Errors for Fixed Effect Estimates. At the CZ level, we use bootstrap resampling to
compute standard errors for our baseline estimates of µ̂pc because the two-step estimation procedure
discussed in Section A does not yield analytical standard errors. We construct 100 samples (with
replacement) from the microdata and repeat the two-step estimation procedure above, generating
49

bs
100 estimates µ̂bs
pc for each CZ c. We define the standard error spc = SD(µ̂pc ) as the standard

deviation of these bootstrap estimates. Empirically, these bootstrapped standard errors are very
similar to the analytical standard errors directly obtained from the second-stage regression in
equation (16).55 We provide both the bootstrapped and analytical standard errors for our baseline
specification in Online Data Tables 3 and 4. For computational simplicity, we report the analytical
standard errors obtained from estimating equation (16) for all other specifications.
At the county-within-CZ level, we obtain standard errors directly from the regression in equation
(6) for each county within each CZ. Recall that we define each county’s causal effect (relative to
the average county in the country) as the sum of the county-within-CZ effect and the CZ’s effect.
To obtain standard errors for these county estimates, note that the CZ and county-within-CZ
estimates are independent because the CZ effects are estimated from a sample of one-time movers
across CZs, while the county-within-CZ effects are estimated from an sample of one-time movers
within CZs. Therefore, we calculate the standard error of the estimate of each county’s effect as
s2p,cty = s2p,CZ +s2p,ctyincz , where s2p,ctyincz is the square of the standard error for the county-within-CZ
estimate for county cty and sp,CZ is the square of the standard error for the CZ estimate.
Standard Errors for Signal Standard Deviations. We use a closed-form approximation to construct standard errors for our estimate of the signal standard deviation (σµ̂pc ) defined in equation
(9). Fixing a parental income level p and suppressing the p subscript from equation (8) for simplicity, we write the fixed effect estimate of each place’s causal effect as
µ̂c = µc + ηc ,


where µc is drawn from a distribution N 0, σµ2 pc . Using a Normal approximation to the distribu
tion of sampling errors, ηc ∼ N 0, s2c , where s2c is the standard error of the fixed effect estimate
defined above.
As discussed in the text, we use the following plug-in estimator for σµ2 pc , the signal variance, at
a given percentile p (again suppressing the p index to simplify notation):
σ̂ 2 = V ar(µ̂c ) − E[s2c ],
where we compute the variance and expectation across areas (c) using precision weights (1/s2c ) to
maximize efficiency. In this appendix, we describe how we estimate the sampling variance of this
55

For example, the analytical standard errors from equation (16) have an unweighted correlation of 0.93 with the
baseline standard errors (and a population-weighted correlation of 0.96). Using the analytical standard errors for our
baseline CZ estimates, we would obtain a signal SD of CZs’ causal effects at p = 25 on children’s income ranks of
0.156 instead of our baseline estimate of 0.132 based on the bootstrapped standard errors reported in Table II.

50

estimate of the signal standard deviation σ̂.
Noting that E[µ̂c ] = 0, we can write
σ̂ 2 =

1
P

=

1
P

1
c s2c

1
c s2c

X 1
1 X 1 2
(µ̂c )2 − P 1
(s )
2
2 c
sc
c s2c c sc
c
"
#
X 1 

2
2
2
µc + 2µc ηc + ηc − sc
2
s
c
c

Since the place effect, µc is uncorrelated with the sampling error ηc ,
X µc ηc

lim

Nc →∞

s2c

c

=0

Therefore, as the number of areas Nc grows large,
"
#
X 1
1
2
2
2
2
(µ + ηc − sc ) .
σ̂ ' P 1
s2c c
c s2
c
c

Since E(ηc2 ) = V ar(ηc ) = s2c by definition, it follows that E(σ̂ 2 ) =
σ̂ 2 − E(σ̂ 2 ) '

1
P

=

1
P

1
c s2c

1
c s2c

P

1
c s2c

(µc )2 /

1
c s2c .

P

Hence,

#
"
X 1
(η 2 − s2c )
2 c
s
c
c
"
#
X 1  
ηc2 − Nc
2
s
c
c

To obtain a simple analytical estimator for the standard error, we assume that the sampling errors
ηc are uncorrelated across places (we discuss the empirical validity of this assumption at the end of
 
P
this appendix). Under this assumption, c s12 ηc2 is a sum of Nc i.i.d. standard Normal variables,
c

which has a Chi-squared distribution with Nc degrees of freedom. It follows that
!
X 1 

σ̂ 2 − E[σ̂ 2 ] + Nc ∼ χ2 (Nc )
2
sc
c
As Nc grows large, χ2 (Nc ) → N (Nc , 2Nc ) by the central limit theorem, implying:
X 1
s2c
c

!



σ̂ 2 − E[σ̂ 2 ] ∼ N (0, 2Nc ) .

Therefore we can write the sampling distribution of σ̂ 2 as
2Nc
σ̂ 2 ∼ N (E[σ̂ 2 ], P 1 2 ),
( c s2 )
c

i.e. the standard error of the signal variance σ̂ 2 is
51

√

2Nc /

1
c s2c .

P

Finally, we derive the standard error for the estimated signal standard deviation σ̂ instead of

√
1
σ̂ 2 . Applying the delta method with f (x) = x, we have f 0 σ̂ 2 = 2σ̂
, implying
p
p
1
1
2Nc
σ̂ ∼ N ( E[σ̂ 2 ], ( )2 P 1 2 ) = N ( E[σ̂ 2 ],
P
σ̂
2σ̂ ( c s2 )
2Nc ( N
c
c

c

1 2
)
s2c

).

Thus, the standard deviation of the sampling distribution ofσ̂, i.e. the standard error of σ̂, is
se (σ̂) ≈ √

1
2Nc



σ̂
Nc

P

1
c s2c

.

(18)

Intuitively, the standard error falls with the square root of the number of places,
P 1
.
precision of the estimates relative to the point estimate Nσ̂c
s2

√1
Nc

and the mean

c

Equation (18) provides an approximate estimate of the standard error because it relies on (1)
P
the approximation that c µsc2ηc converges to zero as Nc grows large, (2) the central limit theorems
c

used to approximate the distribution of sampling errors ηc using Normal distributions and the
Chi-squared distribution by a Normal distribution, and (3) the first-order approximation used to
implement the delta method. Monte Carlo simulations show that approximations are quite accurate
when we use parameter values corresponding to our point estimates with Nc > 100. For example,
with Nc = 741 CZs and the signal and noise variances for p = 25 reported in Table II, we find that
our approximations yield estimates of the standard error of σ̂ that differ from the true standard
error of σ̂ by less than 5% of the point estimate σ̂.
More importantly, the estimator for the standard error in (18) relies on the assumption that
the estimation errors ηc are uncorrelated across places c. In practice, estimates of µ̂c using (6)
have correlated sampling errors because a given mover’s outcome enters the estimate of both the
origin and destination area. To evaluate the bias created by this assumption, we compare the analytical estimates obtained from (18) to bootstrapped standard errors for the baseline specification
in subsamples of the data (implementing the bootstrap in the full sample was computationally
infeasible). The approximate standard errors are qualitatively similar to the true standard errors,
and we therefore proceed to use (18) to compute standard errors for the signal SD estimates.

C

Optimal Forecasts

This appendix derives the coefficients ρ1,pc and ρ2,pc in (10) for our baseline forecasts that use
information on permanent residents’ outcomes ȳpc and then discusses alternative forecasts that
incorporate additional predictors.

52

Derivation of Baseline Optimal Forecast. Consider a hypothetical OLS regression of µpc on µ̂pc
and ȳpc :

µpc = α + ρ1,pc µ̂pc + ρ2,pc ȳpc + φpc .

(19)

To obtain the coefficients ρ1,pc and ρ2,pc , we first orthogonalize the right hand side variables in
this regression by projecting µ̂pc onto ỹpc = ȳpc − ȳp . Let γp = Cov(µ̂pc , ỹpc )/V ar(ỹpc ) denote the
coefficient from regressing µ̂pc on ȳpc . With this orthogonalization, we can rewrite the regression
specification in (19) as

µpc = α̃ + ρ̃1,pc (µ̂pc − γp (ȳpc − ȳp )) + ρ̃2,pc ỹpc + φpc .

(20)

Since Cov(µ̂pc − γp ỹpc , ỹpc ) = 0, the coefficients ρ̃1,pc and ρ̃2,pc are given by the standard univariate
OLS regression formulas:
ρ̃1,pc =

χ2p
Cov(µpc , µ̂pc − γp ỹpc )
Cov(µpc − γp ỹpc , µ̂pc − γp ỹpc )
=
= 2
V ar(µ̂pc − γp ỹpc )
V ar(µ̂pc − γp ỹpc )
χp + s2pc

and
ρ̃2,pc =

Cov(µpc , ỹpc )
Cov(µpc , ȳpc )
=
= γp .
V ar(ỹpc )
V ar(ȳpc )

The intercept α̃ = 0 because all the variables in (20) have mean zero. Hence, the best linear
predictor is given by
µfpc = γp (ȳpc − ȳp ) +

χ2p
(µ̂pc − γp (ȳpc − ȳp )).
χ2p + s2pc

Intuitively, the optimal forecast is given by the best prediction based on permanent residents’
outcomes γp (ȳpc − ȳp ), adjusted based on the difference between that prediction and µ̂pc with a
weight proportional to the signal to noise ratio in µ̂pc . Re-arranging terms yields the expression in
(11).
Forecasts Using Additional Predictors. Our baseline forecasts use only one variable – permanent
residents’ mean ranks ȳpc – to reduce the prediction error in our raw fixed effect estimates µ̂25,c .
Can we further reduce the MSE of our forecasts using additional observable characteristics?
We showed in Section VII that µ̂25,c is highly correlated with several observable characteristics
of areas, including the following: the fraction of black residents, the Theil index of racial segregation, the Gini index of income equality, the fraction of single mothers, the social capital index,
and expenditures on public schools per student. We construct forecasts that incorporate these
53

characteristics (Xpc ) by first regressing µ̂pc on ȳpc and Xpc to construct predicted values (µX
pc ) and
X
residuals (εX
pc ). We then take a weighted average of µpc and µ̂pc , with weights that are a function

of the signal variance in εX
pc and spc , as in (11).
The correlation between our baseline forecasts µf25,c and these augmented forecasts is 0.93
weighted by population and 0.94 unweighted. The estimates are very similar throughout the distribution, and shown by the scatter plot in Online Appendix Figure II. This is because the observable
characteristics Xpc explain very little residual variation in the causal effects µ̂pc conditional on
permanent residents’ observed outcomes ȳpc . The simple approach of shrinking µ̂pc towards predictions based on ȳpc thus provides nearly as accurate a forecast of µpc as models that incorporate
additional factors.

D

Present Value of Lifetime Income Gains

This appendix explains how we calculate the present discounted value (PDV) of a 1% increase in
income used in Section VIII.B.
We begin by tabulating mean individual incomes by age for a random sample of the U.S.
population in 2012 from ages 26-65 in the tax data. We apply a 0.5% real wage growth rate (the
rate of real wage growth in the U.S. over the past decade) and a 3% annual discount rate (the
current 30-year Treasury bond rate), to this profile to obtain an undiscounted sum of lifetime
income for the average American of $1.7 million and a PDV at age 10 of $600,000. Children with
parents at p = 25 have mean incomes that are 81% of the mean individual incomes in our sample
of county movers at age 26. Assuming that their incomes follow a similar lifecycle trajectory, the
PDV of income for children with parents at p = 25 is $486,000.
Finally, assuming that the 1% increase in income at age 26 from moving to a better area persists
throughout life, this implies that a PDV gain of $4,860. Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
experiment indicates that the impacts of moving to a better neighborhood on income grow in
percentage terms with age (Chetty, Hendren, and Katz 2016), suggesting that this calculation
likely understates the total income gains.
Note that this calculation approximates the impacts of moving to a better neighborhood on
individual lifetime income based on our baseline estimates of neighborhoods’ causal effects µpc ,
which measure income at the household level (in percentage terms). Because neighborhood effects
on individual and household income are very similar (Appendix Table IIb), this approximation is
unlikely to introduce significant error in our calculations.
54

TABLE I
Summary Statistics for Movers Analysis Samples
Variable

Mean
(1)

Std. Dev.
(2)

Median
(3)

Sample Size
(4)

A. Between CZ Movers
Parent family income ($)
Child family income at 26 ($)
Child family income at 30 ($)
Child individual income at 26 ($)
Child married at 26 (%)

89,029
31,706
45,890
23,731
26.5%

353,465
88,503
99,172
79,083
44.1%

56,700
24,300
33,100
19,900
0.0%

1,397,260
1,397,260
459,952
1,397,260
1,270,634

B. County within CZ Movers
Parent family income ($)
Child family income at 26 ($)
Child family income at 30 ($)
Child individual income at 26 ($)
Child married at 26 (%)

82,627
32,304
46,477
24,260
25.9%

300,952
62,314
86,911
49,620
43.8%

57,000
25,000
33,800
20,700
0.0%

931,138
931,138
316,106
931,138
842,547

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for the primary analysis samples used to estimate the causal effects
of counties and CZs. The sample consists of individuals who (1) have a valid Social Security Number or Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number, (2) were born between 1980-1986, (3) are U.S. citizens as of 2013, and (4) were
claimed as a child dependent at some point between 1996-2012. Panel A includes the subset of children satisfying
these restrictions whose families moved exactly once across commuting zones between 1996 and 2012 before
they turned 23. Panel B includes children whose families moved across counties within a CZ exactly once between
1996 and 2012 before they turned 23. Parent family income is the average pre-tax household income from 19962000, measured as AGI for tax filers and using information returns for non-filers. Child family income is measured
analogously at various ages, while child individual income is defined as the sum of individual W-2 wage earnings,
UI benefits, SSDI payments, and half of household self-employment income. See Section II of Chetty and Hendren
(2017) for additional details on sample and variable definitions. All dollar values are reported in 2012 dollars,
deflated using the CPI-U.

TABLE II
Magnitudes of Place Effects
Commuting Zones
Below
Above
Median Median
p = 25
p = 75
(1)
(2)
A. Annual Exposure Effect Estimates
SD of Raw Exposure Effects
SD of Noise Component
Signal SD of Exposure Effects
Standard Error of Signal SD

0.248
0.210
0.132
0.010

0.243
0.218
0.107
0.013

Counties
Below
Above
Median Median
p = 25
p = 75
(3)
(4)

Counties within CZs
Below
Above
Median
Median
p = 25
p = 75
(5)
(6)

0.434
0.402
0.165
0.014

0.435
0.407
0.155
0.016

0.357
0.343
0.099
0.008

0.361
0.344
0.112
0.008

B. Signal SD of Causal Effects from Birth: 20 Years of Exposure
Percentile Rank
Income in Dollars
Percentage Change in Income
C. Correlations with Other Outcomes
Signal Correlation of Causal Effects and
Permanent Resident Outcomes
Correlation between Causal Effects at
p = 25 and p = 75

2.65
2165
8.3%

2.14
1796
4.4%

3.31
2706
10.4%

3.09
2596
6.4%

1.98
1623
6.2%

2.23
1875
4.6%

0.799

0.909

0.698

0.492

0.577

0.044

0.724

0.287

0.080

Notes: This table quantifies the magnitude of place effects on children's household (i.e., family) incomes. The first pair of
columns reports estimates of the variation in place effects across CZs, estimated using movers across CZs. The second pair
reports estimates across counties, summing the fixed effect estimates obtained from the county-within-CZ movers sample
and the CZ estimates; and the third pair reports the implied county-within-CZ estimates based on the difference between the
estimates in the first two pairs of columns. In each case, we report estimates for families with below-median (p = 25) and
above-median (p=75) income. In Panel A, the first row presents the raw standard deviation (SD) of the fixed effect estimates
across areas, weighting by precision (1/SE2), where SE is the estimated standard error of the fixed effect. The second row
presents standard deviation of the sampling noise component (again weighted by precision, 1/SE2). The third row presents
the estimated signal standard deviation, computed as the square root of the difference between the raw variance and the
noise variance. The fourth row shows the standard error of the signal SD estimate, computed using the asymptotic
approximation in Online Appendix B. Panel B quantifies the size of the effects of growing up in a 1 SD better area from birth
(20 years of childhood exposure). The first row shows the impact on a child's percentile rank, multiplying the signal SD
estimate in Panel A by 20. The next two rows rescale these percentile rank impacts into dollar increases and percentage
increases in children's incomes using the methods described in Section V.B. In Panel C, the first row reports the correlation
between the causal effect estimates and the permanent resident outcomes (weighted by the precision of the fixed effect
estimates), multiplied by the ratio of the raw SD to the signal SD to adjust for noise. The second row presents the correlation
between the 25th and 75th percentile fixed effect estimates, weighting by the inverse of the sum of the variances of these
estimates. These estimates are constructed by splitting the sample at the median family income to obtain estimates of the p =
25 and p = 75 fixed effects from independent samples, adjusting for noise by rescaling the raw correlation using the ratio of
the raw SDs to the signal SDs.

TABLE III
MSE-Minimizing Forecasts of Causal Effects for 50 Largest Commuting Zones
Rank Commuting
(p = 25) Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Salt Lake City
Seattle
Washington DC
Minneapolis
Fort Worth
San Diego
Boston
Manchester
San Jose
Las Vegas
Denver
Portland
San Francisco
Pittsburgh
Newark
Providence
Sacramento
Phoenix
Buffalo
Kansas City
Houston
Miami
Philadelphia
Grand Rapids
Dallas
Cleveland
Bridgeport
Jacksonville
Milwaukee
Dayton
Cincinnati
Columbus
Nashville
St. Louis
Austin
Baltimore
San Antonio
Tampa
New York
Indianapolis
Atlanta
Los Angeles
Detroit
Orlando
Chicago
Fresno
Port St. Lucie
Raleigh
Charlotte
New Orleans

State

UT
WA
DC
MN
TX
CA
MA
NH
CA
NV
CO
OR
CA
PA
NJ
RI
CA
AZ
NY
MO
TX
FL
PA
MI
TX
OH
CT
FL
WI
OH
OH
OH
TN
MO
TX
MD
TX
FL
NY
IN
GA
CA
MI
FL
IL
CA
FL
NC
NC
LA

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.17
0.14
0.10
0.10
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.05
-0.05
-0.05
-0.06
-0.08
-0.09
-0.09
-0.09
-0.10
-0.10
-0.11
-0.11
-0.12
-0.12
-0.12
-0.13
-0.14
-0.14
-0.15
-0.16
-0.17
-0.19
-0.20
-0.21

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

10.4
8.8
6.6
6.4
3.6
3.5
3.5
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.6
2.4
1.8
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.2
-0.2
-0.4
-1.6
-1.6
-1.8
-2.0
-2.4
-2.7
-2.9
-3.0
-3.0
-3.9
-5.2
-5.4
-5.5
-5.6
-6.1
-6.4
-6.9
-7.1
-7.3
-7.4
-7.8
-8.1
-8.5
-8.5
-9.7
-10.3
-10.9
-12.2
-12.8
-13.4

13.2
4.3
1.4
6.0
0.8
3.7
4.3
5.9
4.8
-0.1
2.6
0.7
2.3
3.0
1.1
2.0
1.3
0.6
-2.5
-2.3
-0.3
-2.3
-4.7
-3.0
-3.1
-9.2
0.7
-7.3
-5.4
-6.4
-7.4
-7.1
-6.4
-7.3
-4.0
-7.5
-3.5
-4.5
-0.9
-8.5
-12.5
0.8
-11.8
-4.6
-6.9
-1.8
-5.8
-9.6
-11.0
-7.8

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.11
-0.01
0.06
0.08
0.05
-0.13
0.03
0.02
-0.12
-0.08
-0.06
-0.09
-0.12
0.10
0.06
0.02
-0.14
-0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
-0.20
0.00
0.07
-0.01
-0.03
0.03
-0.07
0.04
0.02
0.06
0.01
-0.03
0.03
-0.10
0.07
-0.08
-0.13
-0.03
-0.02
-0.09
-0.23
-0.13
-0.14
-0.03
-0.12
-0.20
-0.11
-0.08
-0.06

0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

4.4
-0.4
2.5
3.2
2.0
-5.4
1.4
1.0
-4.9
-3.2
-2.5
-3.8
-4.9
4.3
2.4
0.9
-5.9
-0.7
0.4
0.8
0.3
-8.3
0.2
2.7
-0.4
-1.0
1.2
-2.9
1.8
0.6
2.6
0.3
-1.1
1.2
-4.1
2.8
-3.2
-5.3
-1.3
-0.8
-3.9
-9.3
-5.2
-5.7
-1.4
-5.0
-8.2
-4.7
-3.5
-2.5

4.8
-1.2
0.2
3.2
1.5
-5.1
1.3
1.0
-5.1
-2.7
-1.4
-4.6
-5.0
4.0
1.5
1.4
-4.7
-1.7
-0.2
1.1
-0.3
-7.8
0.9
2.2
-0.8
-1.7
1.5
-2.7
2.1
0.4
1.3
-1.1
-1.8
0.7
-3.4
2.1
-3.3
-4.2
-1.1
0.1
-7.4
-7.4
-6.7
-3.9
-1.3
-4.3
-6.2
-3.3
-2.2
-2.6

Notes: This table presents MSE-minimizing forecasts of causal effects on children's incomes in adulthood for the 50 most populous CZs.
Columns 1-4 present estimates for children growing up in below-median income (p = 25) families. Column 1 reports estimates of the causal
impact of spending an additional year of childhood in a given CZ relative to the (population-weighted) average CZ in the country on a child's
household income rank at age 26. Column 2 reports the root mean squared error of this forecast. Column 3 rescales the estimates in Column 1 to
show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given CZ. Column 4 reports the
same statistic, but for a forecast that is constructed solely based on the outcomes of permanent residents, excluding the data on movers. Columns
5-8 report the analogous statistics for above-median income (p = 75) families. The table is sorted based on CZs' causal impacts at p = 25.

TABLE IV
MSE-Minimizing Forecasts of Causal Effects for 100 Largest Counties (Top and Bottom 25)
Rank
County
(p = 25)

State

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast
RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast
RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Dupage
Fairfax
Snohomish
Bergen
Bucks
Norfolk
Montgomery
Montgomery
King
Middlesex
Contra Costa
Middlesex
Macomb
Salt Lake
Ventura
San Mateo
Worcester
Monmouth
Honolulu
Hudson
Kern
Clark
San Diego
Providence
San Francisco

IL
VA
WA
NJ
PA
MA
PA
MD
WA
NJ
CA
MA
MI
UT
CA
CA
MA
NJ
HI
NJ
CA
NV
CA
RI
CA

0.26
0.24
0.22
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.05

0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.10
0.10

16.0
15.0
14.0
13.8
12.4
11.5
9.7
9.5
9.3
9.1
8.8
7.7
7.0
6.2
6.2
5.3
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.2
3.9
3.7
3.7
3.0
2.8

10.6
13.6
6.6
11.5
8.1
11.8
7.3
7.8
3.2
7.0
2.1
8.5
-1.0
9.7
5.0
6.2
2.6
2.4
2.1
-0.4
5.1
-0.7
2.6
-0.4
4.4

0.08
0.26
0.06
0.15
-0.02
0.15
0.07
0.00
0.08
0.01
-0.07
0.01
0.03
0.02
-0.05
-0.04
0.13
0.07
-0.13
0.16
-0.06
-0.05
-0.14
-0.04
-0.18

0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.06
0.11
0.10

3.1
11.0
2.4
6.3
-0.9
6.2
3.0
0.1
3.2
0.5
-2.9
0.5
1.1
0.7
-2.3
-1.5
5.4
3.0
-5.4
6.7
-2.5
-1.9
-5.6
-1.8
-7.6

1.8
2.5
0.3
2.4
2.1
2.0
1.8
0.0
-1.3
2.0
-2.7
1.0
-1.8
2.1
-3.1
-1.7
1.6
1.0
-3.8
-0.1
-0.1
-2.2
-3.4
0.5
-4.9

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Jefferson
Franklin
San Bernardino
Davidson
Pima
Montgomery
Travis
Essex
Bexar
Milwaukee
Riverside
Los Angeles
Wake
New York
Fulton
Bronx
Wayne
Orange
Cook
Palm Beach
Marion
Shelby
Fresno
Hillsborough
Baltimore City
Mecklenburg

KY
OH
CA
TN
AZ
OH
TX
NJ
TX
WI
CA
CA
NC
NY
GA
NY
MI
FL
IL
FL
IN
TN
CA
FL
MD
NC

-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.15
-0.15
-0.15
-0.16
-0.16
-0.16
-0.17
-0.17
-0.17
-0.17
-0.18
-0.19
-0.20
-0.21
-0.21
-0.21
-0.22
-0.22
-0.22
-0.23

0.10
0.09
0.06
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10

-8.6
-8.6
-8.8
-8.9
-8.9
-8.9
-9.2
-9.2
-9.6
-9.9
-10.1
-10.3
-10.7
-10.8
-10.9
-10.9
-11.4
-12.1
-12.8
-13.0
-13.1
-13.1
-13.5
-13.8
-14.0
-14.5

-11.4
-11.4
0.2
-13.9
-4.7
-11.7
-7.8
-8.4
-4.8
-12.0
1.2
-0.5
-6.7
-5.3
-15.8
-7.2
-14.3
-6.1
-9.7
-5.6
-13.3
-16.8
-3.7
-4.3
-15.5
-13.4

0.02
0.11
-0.25
-0.04
-0.14
-0.02
-0.16
0.07
-0.09
-0.03
-0.25
-0.25
-0.09
-0.27
0.02
-0.20
-0.07
-0.09
-0.03
-0.31
-0.10
0.03
-0.05
-0.19
-0.02
-0.09

0.11
0.10
0.07
0.11
0.10
0.12
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.08
0.09
0.05
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10

0.9
4.7
-10.1
-1.5
-5.7
-0.6
-6.6
3.0
-3.8
-1.1
-10.3
-10.5
-3.9
-11.4
1.0
-8.3
-3.0
-3.8
-1.2
-13.0
-4.2
1.2
-2.1
-7.9
-0.7
-3.7

-2.4
-2.4
-3.3
-4.5
-4.2
-1.9
-4.4
-2.1
-3.6
-1.7
-3.4
-6.0
-2.1
-6.9
-7.4
-6.1
-5.6
-3.6
-2.6
-4.6
-2.8
-4.9
-3.5
-2.4
-6.4
-3.8

Notes: This table presents MSE-minimizing forecasts of counties' causal effects on children's incomes in adulthood. The table reports estimates for
counties that are in the top or bottom 25 among the 100 most populous counties based on their impacts on below-median income families (p = 25).
Columns 1-4 present estimates for children growing up in below-median income (p = 25) families. Column 1 reports estimates of the causal impact of
spending an additional year of childhood in a given county relative to the (population-weighted) average county in the country on a child's household
income rank at age 26. Column 2 reports the root mean squared error of this forecast. Column 3 rescales the estimates in Column 1 to show the
percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county. Column 4 reports the same statistic,
but for a forecast that is constructed solely based on the outcomes of permanent residents, excluding the data on movers. Columns 5-8 report the
analogous statistics for above-median income (p = 75) families. The table is sorted based on counties' causal impacts at p = 25.

TABLE V
Association Between Rents and Places' Causal Effects on Children's Incomes for Low-Income Families
Dep. Var.: Mean Monthly Rent For Low-Income Families ($)
CZs

Causal Effect (1% Increase
in Child's Income)

(1)

All Counties
(2)

-102.9
(82.91)

176.8**
(65.50)

Counties within CZs
Counties in 100 Observable
Largest CZs
Component
(3)
(4)
202.4**
(64.93)

Observable Component

430.2***
(27.29)

Unobservable Component

Mean of Dependent Variable
Signal R-Squared
Number of Observations

Unobservable
Component
(5)

46.18
(42.65)
797.02
0.180
595

811.49
0.013
2367

884.67
0.051
694

876.94
0.301
673

876.94
0.000
673

Notes : This table shows estimates from OLS regressions of average monthly rents on areas' causal effects for children
in below-median income (p = 25) families. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Rents are measured using data
from the 2000 Census (in 2012 dollars), and are defined as the mean of median rents across Census tracts, weighting
by the number of below-median income families with children. Causal effects are MSE-minimizing forecasts constructed
purely using data on movers (excluding permanent residents) and scaled in terms of percentage changes in children's
incomes in adulthood per year of childhood exposure to a given CZ or county. All regressions are weighted by
population based on the 2000 Census. In Column 1, we regress rents on causal effects across CZs; the coefficient
implies that CZs that generate 1% higher earnings for a single year of exposure have $102.9 lower monthly rents on
average. Columns 2-5 report estimates of regressions at the county level, including CZ fixed effects. Column 2 includes
all CZs, while Columns 3-5 restrict the sample to the 100 most highly populated CZs (with populations above 590,000).
In Column 4, the independent variable is the "observable" component of causal effects, the predicted values from a
regression of the raw fixed effect estimates on the following area-level characteristics: the fraction of African American
residents, the Theil index of racial segregation, the Gini index, the fraction of single parents, the social capital index, and
expenditures on public schools per student. In Column 5, the independent variable is the residual from the preceding
regression, shrunk based on the signal-to-noise ratio as described in the text to account for sampling error. In each
column, we also report the mean of the dependent variable (monthly rent for low-income families) and the signal Rsquared, constructed as the square of the correlation between rents and the right-hand-side variable (after removing CZ
fixed effects in Columns 2-5). The R-squared estimates in Columns 1-3 and 5 are adjusted for noise using the signal to
noise ratio as described in the text.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE I
Fixed Effect Estimates: Sensitivity to Alternative Specifications
Below-Median Income
(p = 25)
Standard
Correlation
Error
(1)
(2)

Above-Median Income
(p = 75)
Standard
Correlation
Error
(3)
(4)

A. Commuting Zones
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Quadratic Income Specification
Linear Cohort Controls
Cubic Cohort Controls
Income Levels ($, not ranks)
COLI adjusted
Controls for Changes in Par. Inc. and Mar. Status
Placebo 1: Moves After Age 23
Placebo 2: Teen Labor Force Participation

0.940
0.989
0.989
0.921
0.748
0.970
0.036
0.000

0.014
0.006
0.006
0.016
0.027
0.010
0.077
0.081

0.932
0.988
0.987
0.888
0.797
0.978
0.012
-0.122

0.015
0.006
0.007
0.019
0.025
0.009
0.092
0.117

0.876
0.992
0.994
0.872
0.809
0.987
0.039
0.110

0.010
0.003
0.002
0.010
0.012
0.003
0.054
0.088

0.776
0.992
0.992
0.784
0.852
0.991
0.014
0.047

0.013
0.003
0.003
0.013
0.011
0.003
0.059
0.073

B. Counties
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Quadratic Income Specification
Linear Cohort Controls
Cubic Cohort Controls
Income Levels ($, not ranks)
COLI adjusted
Controls for Changes in Par. Inc. and Mar. Status
Placebo 1: Moves After Age 23
Placebo 2: Teen Labor Force Participation

Notes: This table reports correlations between estimates of places' causal effects using alternative specifications and
the baseline specification in equation (6). Columns 1 and 2 show point estimates and their standard errors for children
in below-median income families (p = 25), while columns 3 and 4 show estimates and their standard errors for children
in above-median income families (p = 75). Panel A shows correlations across CZs, while Panel B shows correlations
across counties. Correlations are weighted using 1/(se_base2+se_alt2), where se_base and se_alt denote the standard
errors of the fixed effect estimates from the baseline and alternative specifications. The alternative specifications used
2
in each of the eight rows are as follows: (1) including a quadratic term in parent income rank (p ) in equation 4 in the
2
main text when defining place effects; (2) excluding the quadratic cohort controls (s ) in equation 5 ; (3) including cubic
3
cohort controls (s ) in equation 5; (4) measuring children's incomes in dollars rather than percentile ranks; (5) deflating
both children's and parents' incomes by a local cost-of-living price index based on their residence when income is
measured before defining their income ranks; (6) including controls for changes in parent income and marital status in
equation (6); (7) restricting the sample to families who move after their child turns 23; and (8) defining the child's
outcome as an indicator for working at age 16, restricting the sample to families who move after the child turns 16. In
(8), we use data for the 1980-86 cohort to estimate baseline effects of children's ranks at age 26 and the 1983-86
cohorts to estimate effects on teenage labor force participation. We randomly split the overlapping 1983-86 cohorts into
two halves to estimate the two sets of fixed effects on independent samples. Since the "placebo" correlations in (7) and
(8) are estimated on samples that are non-overlapping by construction, we adjust these correlations for noise by
inflating them by the ratio of the raw standard deviation of the baseline fixed effect estimates to the signal standard
deviations reported in Table II.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE II
Magnitude of Place Effects: Heterogeneity by Gender
Commuting Zones
Below Median Above Median
p=25
p = 75
Child's Gender: Male
(1)

Female Male Female
(2)
(3)
(4)

Counties
Below Median Above Median
p = 25
p = 75
Male
(5)

Female
(6)

Male
(7)

Female
(8)

A. Household Income
Signal SD of Exposure Effects
Standard Error of Signal SD

0.213
0.014

0.160
0.017

0.104
0.030

0.127
0.024

0.275
0.019

0.174
0.029

0.275
0.019

0.202
0.025

Dollar Impact from Birth
Percentage Impact from Birth

3106
2889
12.7% 10.4%

1583
4.1%

2424
5.6%

4016
3148
16.4% 11.4%

4166
10.9%

3866
9.0%

Correlation with Baseline Specification

0.706

0.668

0.677

0.677

0.646

0.653

0.632

0.635

Signal SD of Exposure Effects
Standard Error of Signal SD

0.231
0.014

0.129
0.020

0.112
0.029

0.200
0.015

0.284
0.020

0.128
0.037

0.252
0.022

0.294
0.017

Dollar Impact from Birth
Percentage Impact from Birth

2851
13.3%

1678
9.1%

1646
5.1%

3247
11.6%

3509
16.4%

1673
9.0%

3685
4782
11.4% 17.2%

Correlation with Baseline Specification

0.663

0.425

0.596

0.494

0.588

0.403

0.547

B. Individual Income

0.431

Notes: This table quantifies the size of place effects for sons and daughters using fixed effect models that are estimated
separately by gender. Panel A shows estimates which use children's family income at age 26 as the outcome; Panel B
uses children's individual income (excluding spousal income) as the outcome. The first four columns report estimates of
variation across CZs, estimated using movers across CZs. The last four columns report estimates across counties,
summing the fixed effect estimates obtained from the county-within-CZ movers sample and the CZ estimates. In each
case, we report estimates for families with below-median (p = 25) and above-median (p = 75) income. In each panel, the
first row presents the estimated signal standard deviation, computed as described in the notes to Table II. The second row
shows the standard error of the signal SD estimate, computed using the analytical approximation in Online Appendix B.
The third and fourth rows rescale these percentile rank impacts into dollar increases and percentage increases in
children's incomes from growing up in a 1 SD better area from birth (20 years of exposure) using the method described in
Section V.B. The fifth row reports correlations between estimates of places' causal effects and the baseline specification in
equation (6), computed as described in the notes to Appendix Table I.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE III
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 50 Largest Commuting Zones on Individual Income

Rank Commuting
(p = 25) Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Minneapolis
Boston
Newark
Seattle
Washington DC
Buffalo
Philadelphia
San Francisco
Bridgeport
Las Vegas
Cleveland
Providence
San Jose
Manchester
Pittsburgh
Fort Worth
Milwaukee
Portland
New York
Phoenix
Sacramento
San Diego
Salt Lake City
Miami
Denver
Kansas City
Cincinnati
St. Louis
Jacksonville
Grand Rapids
Baltimore
Chicago
Dallas
Indianapolis
Dayton
Columbus
Houston
Nashville
Detroit
Austin
Tampa
Charlotte
Orlando
San Antonio
Los Angeles
Fresno
Port St. Lucie
Atlanta
New Orleans
Raleigh

State
MN
MA
NJ
WA
DC
NY
PA
CA
CT
NV
OH
RI
CA
NH
PA
TX
WI
OR
NY
AZ
CA
CA
UT
FL
CO
MO
OH
MO
FL
MI
MD
IL
TX
IN
OH
OH
TX
TN
MI
TX
FL
NC
FL
TX
CA
CA
FL
GA
LA
NC

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.12
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04
-0.04
-0.05
-0.06
-0.06
-0.06
-0.06
-0.07
-0.08
-0.09
-0.11
-0.11
-0.11
-0.12
-0.13
-0.13
-0.14
-0.14
-0.15
-0.15
-0.16
-0.20
-0.20

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.05
0.06
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.08
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.07
0.05
0.07
0.04
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.07
0.07

10.6
10.0
9.9
9.2
9.0
7.7
5.4
4.6
3.7
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.8
2.6
2.5
2.4
1.9
1.1
1.1
0.7
-0.3
-0.5
-0.6
-1.0
-1.0
-2.2
-2.4
-2.5
-2.7
-3.2
-3.7
-3.9
-4.1
-4.2
-4.5
-5.6
-5.7
-7.2
-7.4
-7.5
-7.6
-8.5
-8.5
-9.0
-9.1
-10.0
-10.0
-10.4
-13.0
-13.3

6.5
9.5
7.7
2.8
5.4
0.3
1.0
6.1
6.0
0.5
-6.3
5.8
7.2
5.0
2.8
-2.1
-2.0
-1.0
4.4
0.7
1.5
4.2
1.5
0.0
0.2
-3.4
-7.0
-5.3
-7.0
-6.2
-2.3
-1.6
-2.4
-7.4
-7.8
-7.1
-0.3
-8.0
-8.6
-4.1
-4.0
-8.5
-3.8
-3.3
3.3
-2.2
-3.5
-11.3
-4.9
-7.3

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.11
0.20
0.23
-0.02
0.14
0.09
0.14
0.01
0.18
-0.12
0.02
0.16
-0.02
0.10
0.15
-0.04
0.09
-0.12
0.13
-0.07
-0.11
-0.10
-0.20
-0.10
-0.10
-0.01
0.05
0.02
-0.09
-0.06
0.12
0.07
-0.03
-0.04
-0.05
-0.02
-0.01
-0.12
-0.11
-0.11
-0.09
-0.09
-0.12
-0.11
-0.18
-0.16
-0.13
-0.13
-0.06
-0.10

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

6.5
11.3
13.1
-1.3
8.0
5.1
7.9
0.7
10.5
-6.7
1.3
9.1
-1.2
6.0
8.4
-2.4
5.2
-6.8
7.7
-4.0
-6.3
-5.5
-11.5
-6.0
-5.9
-0.7
3.1
1.3
-5.3
-3.2
6.9
3.8
-1.8
-2.4
-2.7
-1.1
-0.4
-6.7
-6.4
-6.1
-5.4
-4.9
-6.6
-6.3
-10.2
-9.3
-7.2
-7.3
-3.5
-5.8

6.6
11.5
12.1
-1.3
6.0
4.1
8.5
0.5
10.5
-6.1
0.6
9.6
-0.9
5.6
8.2
-2.4
5.6
-7.5
7.2
-4.2
-5.0
-4.0
-12.2
-5.9
-4.8
-0.8
1.7
0.7
-5.1
-3.7
7.1
3.7
-1.9
-2.1
-2.8
-2.2
-1.4
-6.9
-7.3
-5.8
-4.8
-4.0
-5.1
-6.2
-6.1
-8.5
-5.3
-10.2
-4.1
-4.7

Notes: This table replicates Table III, measuring children's income at the individual rather than household level (i.e., excluding spousal income).
See notes to Table III for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE IV
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 100 Largest Counties (Top and Bottom 25) on Individual Income
Rank
County
(p = 25)

State

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Impact on Rank
% Impact from Birth
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Bergen
Norfolk
Fairfax
Dupage
Middlesex
King
Bucks
Middlesex
Hudson
Montgomery
Worcester
Monmouth
Snohomish
Contra Costa
Suffolk
Montgomery
San Mateo
Ventura
Westchester
San Francisco
Providence
Queens
Hartford
Nassau
Macomb

NJ
MA
VA
IL
NJ
WA
PA
MA
NJ
MD
MA
NJ
WA
CA
NY
PA
CA
CA
NY
CA
RI
NY
CT
NY
MI

0.29
0.27
0.23
0.22
0.22
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.09

19.0
18.0
15.1
14.3
14.3
14.2
13.2
11.8
11.1
11.1
10.0
9.8
9.8
9.3
9.0
8.5
8.0
8.0
7.4
7.2
5.6
5.6
5.3
5.3
4.7

15.8
16.0
14.0
10.0
11.6
3.9
9.1
12.2
5.5
10.6
5.4
7.2
4.4
3.9
8.3
8.5
9.3
5.5
7.1
9.9
3.6
7.1
2.9
12.7
-0.4

0.33
0.37
0.34
0.18
0.20
0.06
0.08
0.16
0.28
0.16
0.23
0.23
0.02
-0.01
0.18
0.18
0.08
-0.02
0.34
-0.01
0.07
0.13
0.18
0.21
0.03

0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.09

18.6
21.1
19.5
10.4
11.7
3.4
4.8
9.2
16.1
9.3
13.1
13.4
1.2
-0.3
10.5
10.5
4.6
-1.4
19.6
-0.7
4.2
7.2
10.3
12.2
1.6

13.4
13.1
10.0
7.3
12.7
0.0
9.5
10.3
9.4
5.9
9.6
10.3
0.1
0.0
9.5
9.1
4.8
-2.8
9.4
0.2
8.0
3.8
9.1
13.4
-1.4

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Cook
Milwaukee
Oklahoma
Bernalillo
Wayne
Davidson
Shelby
Pima
Marion
Orange
Hillsborough
Jefferson
Montgomery
Baltimore City
Los Angeles
Mecklenburg
Cobb
Palm Beach
Bexar
Fresno
Fulton
Travis
Jefferson
San Bernardino
Wake
Riverside

IL
WI
OK
NM
MI
TN
TN
AZ
IN
FL
FL
KY
OH
MD
CA
NC
GA
FL
TX
CA
GA
TX
AL
CA
NC
CA

-0.08
-0.08
-0.08
-0.09
-0.10
-0.10
-0.11
-0.11
-0.11
-0.12
-0.13
-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.14
-0.15
-0.15
-0.15
-0.15
-0.16
-0.17
-0.17
-0.17
-0.19
-0.19
-0.21

0.06
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.04
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.06
0.10
0.07

-5.4
-5.4
-5.5
-5.8
-6.7
-6.8
-7.0
-7.4
-7.5
-7.9
-8.4
-8.9
-9.0
-9.2
-9.5
-9.7
-10.0
-10.1
-10.2
-10.8
-11.1
-11.1
-11.4
-12.2
-12.5
-14.0

-4.4
-7.2
-5.9
-2.5
-10.4
-11.1
-12.4
-4.1
-9.7
-4.8
-3.9
-8.8
-10.6
-8.5
2.5
-9.0
-5.9
-3.4
-4.2
-3.4
-13.6
-5.9
-8.7
-0.6
-5.0
0.4

0.08
0.03
-0.01
-0.19
-0.06
-0.14
-0.10
-0.19
-0.09
-0.12
-0.18
0.01
-0.08
0.01
-0.24
-0.11
-0.02
-0.29
-0.13
-0.11
0.01
-0.16
-0.08
-0.26
-0.13
-0.30

0.06
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.08
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.05
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.12
0.11
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.07
0.10
0.08

4.8
2.0
-0.5
-11.0
-3.2
-8.0
-5.5
-11.0
-5.4
-7.0
-10.0
0.6
-4.7
0.4
-13.8
-6.1
-1.2
-16.4
-7.4
-6.1
0.4
-9.0
-4.3
-15.1
-7.3
-17.4

1.0
0.4
-5.0
-8.7
-7.6
-8.3
-9.4
-8.0
-4.8
-5.9
-3.8
-4.2
-4.3
-7.1
-5.9
-4.5
-4.9
-5.0
-7.3
-7.9
-10.2
-7.1
-6.2
-6.5
-3.7
-6.8

Notes: This table replicates Table IV, measuring children's income at the individual rather than household level (i.e., excluding spousal income).
See notes to Table IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE V
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 50 Largest Commuting Zones on Rates of Marriage at Age 26
Rank Commuting
(p = 25) Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Salt Lake City
Portland
Grand Rapids
Fort Worth
Sacramento
Dayton
San Diego
San Antonio
Nashville
Kansas City
Seattle
Houston
Austin
Columbus
Dallas
Fresno
Phoenix
Las Vegas
Denver
Indianapolis
Jacksonville
Cincinnati
Minneapolis
Pittsburgh
Tampa
San Jose
San Francisco
Manchester
Atlanta
Los Angeles
St. Louis
Orlando
Detroit
Buffalo
Charlotte
Providence
Milwaukee
Washington DC
Raleigh
Baltimore
Cleveland
Port St. Lucie
Philadelphia
Boston
Bridgeport
New Orleans
Miami
Chicago
Newark
New York

State
UT
OR
MI
TX
CA
OH
CA
TX
TN
MO
WA
TX
TX
OH
TX
CA
AZ
NV
CO
IN
FL
OH
MN
PA
FL
CA
CA
NH
GA
CA
MO
FL
MI
NY
NC
RI
WI
DC
NC
MD
OH
FL
PA
MA
CT
LA
FL
IL
NJ
NY

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Annual Impact (pp)
Impact from Birth (pp)
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.54
0.20
0.20
0.16
0.13
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
-0.02
-0.02
-0.04
-0.04
-0.05
-0.08
-0.08
-0.09
-0.10
-0.11
-0.11
-0.13
-0.13
-0.13
-0.14
-0.14
-0.15
-0.15
-0.16
-0.17
-0.18
-0.20
-0.21
-0.22
-0.24
-0.25
-0.26
-0.30
-0.32
-0.32
-0.33
-0.33
-0.38
-0.46

0.11
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.11
0.08
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.06

10.8
4.1
3.9
3.1
2.6
2.1
2.1
1.9
1.5
1.1
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.2
-0.3
-0.5
-0.7
-0.7
-1.1
-1.5
-1.5
-1.8
-2.0
-2.2
-2.3
-2.5
-2.6
-2.7
-2.7
-2.8
-2.9
-3.0
-3.2
-3.5
-3.6
-4.1
-4.2
-4.4
-4.7
-4.9
-5.1
-6.1
-6.3
-6.4
-6.5
-6.6
-7.6
-9.2

11.9
2.1
4.4
2.5
0.3
2.4
-0.1
1.2
1.5
1.1
0.9
-0.6
0.0
0.6
-1.7
1.6
0.1
-1.2
0.8
-0.6
-1.7
0.0
-0.7
0.2
-1.8
-2.2
-4.7
0.0
-5.6
-3.0
-2.4
-2.2
-3.9
-2.5
-2.5
-3.7
-4.1
-5.5
-2.5
-6.5
-3.5
-4.7
-6.7
-5.7
-5.4
-4.7
-6.1
-5.8
-6.2
-5.6

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Annual Impact (pp)
Impact from Birth (pp)
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.79
0.02
0.35
0.20
-0.07
0.22
-0.16
0.05
0.21
0.11
-0.05
-0.01
-0.01
0.08
0.04
0.09
0.09
0.07
-0.05
0.13
0.05
0.07
-0.05
-0.09
-0.08
-0.35
-0.40
-0.21
-0.08
-0.23
0.00
-0.06
-0.14
-0.19
0.05
-0.31
-0.06
-0.30
-0.02
-0.19
-0.13
-0.21
-0.33
-0.42
-0.38
-0.06
-0.34
-0.27
-0.45
-0.48

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

15.8
0.5
7.0
3.9
-1.3
4.4
-3.2
1.1
4.2
2.2
-1.0
-0.3
-0.2
1.6
0.7
1.9
1.8
1.5
-1.0
2.7
1.0
1.4
-1.0
-1.8
-1.6
-7.0
-8.0
-4.2
-1.7
-4.5
0.1
-1.1
-2.8
-3.7
1.1
-6.2
-1.3
-6.1
-0.5
-3.9
-2.6
-4.2
-6.5
-8.4
-7.7
-1.3
-6.8
-5.3
-9.0
-9.5

15.9
0.3
7.0
3.9
-1.5
4.5
-3.5
1.1
4.0
2.6
-1.2
0.1
-0.3
1.4
0.6
1.8
1.4
1.2
-0.9
2.7
1.1
1.5
-0.8
-1.6
-1.5
-7.0
-8.0
-4.2
-2.3
-5.2
0.2
-0.8
-2.9
-3.5
1.3
-6.4
-1.2
-6.0
-0.3
-3.8
-2.5
-4.5
-6.4
-8.7
-7.5
-1.1
-6.7
-5.5
-8.7
-9.0

Notes: This table replicates Table III, defining the outcome as an indicator for being married at age 26 instead of the child's income. All estimates
are scaled in terms of percentage point (pp) impacts on rates of marriage. See notes to Table III for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE VI
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 100 Largest Counties (Top and Bottom 25) on Rates of Marriage at Age 26

Rank
County
(p = 25)

State

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Annual Impact (pp)
Impact from Birth (pp)
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Annual Impact (pp)
Impact from Birth (pp)
Forecast RMSE
Forecast Perm. Res.
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Salt Lake
El Paso
Macomb
Kern
Hidalgo
Snohomish
Tulsa
Multnomah
Kent
Dupage
Contra Costa
Sacramento
Pierce
Harris
Riverside
Bexar
Oakland
Oklahoma
San Diego
San Bernardino
Bernalillo
Maricopa
Gwinnett
Tarrant
Cobb

UT
TX
MI
CA
TX
WA
OK
OR
MI
IL
CA
CA
WA
TX
CA
TX
MI
OK
CA
CA
NM
AZ
GA
TX
GA

0.43
0.19
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.01
-0.01

0.13
0.12
0.12
0.14
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.12
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.09
0.09
0.14
0.11
0.12
0.14
0.08
0.13
0.08
0.12
0.11
0.12

8.6
3.7
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.3
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.1
-0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.2

9.9
3.2
-0.8
3.2
2.0
1.2
3.1
-1.1
1.4
-0.5
-2.9
-1.2
1.3
-1.1
0.8
0.3
-1.1
1.9
0.0
0.7
-0.9
0.2
-0.6
-0.4
-0.5

0.48
-0.12
-0.10
0.17
-0.05
0.11
0.29
-0.06
0.34
-0.20
-0.19
0.04
0.16
-0.13
0.01
-0.03
-0.03
0.15
-0.16
0.01
0.05
0.23
0.29
0.12
-0.13

0.17
0.20
0.15
0.24
0.22
0.16
0.19
0.16
0.19
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.10
0.12
0.24
0.13
0.19
0.24
0.11
0.19
0.09
0.15
0.13
0.16

9.6
-2.4
-2.1
3.5
-0.9
2.2
5.7
-1.3
6.9
-4.0
-3.9
0.7
3.3
-2.5
0.2
-0.5
-0.7
3.0
-3.2
0.2
1.0
4.5
5.9
2.5
-2.5

12.9
-1.4
-2.0
3.5
-1.6
-0.2
4.9
-2.8
4.7
-3.8
-6.1
-2.7
0.9
-0.6
-0.1
-0.5
-3.5
4.4
-3.2
-0.1
-0.6
1.2
-0.2
1.9
-0.6

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Milwaukee
Norfolk
Bergen
Mecklenburg
Queens
Hudson
Shelby
Fulton
Wayne
Middlesex
San Francisco
Fairfield
DeKalb
Broward
Cook
Cuyahoga
Philadelphia
Prince Georges
Bronx
Suffolk
New York
Suffolk
Baltimore City
Essex Of
District
Columbia
Nassau

WI
MA
NJ
NC
NY
NJ
TN
GA
MI
MA
CA
CT
GA
FL
IL
OH
PA
MD
NY
NY
NY
MA
MD
NJ
DC
NY

-0.31
-0.31
-0.32
-0.33
-0.34
-0.34
-0.35
-0.35
-0.36
-0.36
-0.36
-0.38
-0.38
-0.39
-0.40
-0.41
-0.42
-0.42
-0.43
-0.45
-0.45
-0.46
-0.46
-0.46
-0.47
-0.52

0.13
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.08
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.08
0.12
0.10
0.12
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.10

-6.1
-6.1
-6.4
-6.7
-6.7
-6.8
-7.1
-7.1
-7.2
-7.2
-7.3
-7.5
-7.6
-7.8
-7.9
-8.3
-8.4
-8.4
-8.7
-9.0
-9.0
-9.2
-9.2
-9.3
-9.4
-10.3

-6.5
-5.6
-5.7
-6.8
-5.4
-6.5
-8.5
-9.5
-6.3
-4.5
-7.9
-6.2
-8.0
-6.2
-6.8
-6.4
-9.2
-8.0
-8.2
-4.9
-8.3
-8.7
-9.8
-9.4
-10.4
-6.7

-0.14
-0.34
-0.43
-0.23
-0.45
-0.35
0.00
-0.03
-0.21
-0.45
-0.58
-0.44
-0.27
-0.36
-0.26
-0.35
-0.23
-0.49
-0.77
-0.53
-0.75
-0.44
-0.46
-0.48
-0.75
-0.64

0.16
0.14
0.15
0.17
0.12
0.17
0.17
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.16
0.17
0.15
0.14
0.08
0.15
0.13
0.16
0.16
0.14
0.14
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.17
0.12

-2.8
-6.8
-8.7
-4.6
-9.0
-7.0
0.1
-0.6
-4.1
-9.0
-11.5
-8.8
-5.3
-7.2
-5.3
-6.9
-4.5
-9.8
-15.4
-10.6
-15.0
-8.8
-9.2
-9.7
-14.9
-12.8

-2.9
-8.8
-8.6
-3.4
-8.3
-8.5
-1.6
-7.4
-3.8
-8.4
-11.5
-8.6
-7.6
-6.1
-6.6
-4.8
-7.8
-8.2
-10.4
-7.4
-11.4
-10.7
-6.5
-10.4
-12.3
-9.1

Notes: This table replicates Table IV, defining the outcome as an indicator for being married at age 26 instead of the child's income. All estimates
are scaled in terms of percentage points (pp) impacts on rates of marriage. See notes to Table IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE VII
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 50 Largest Commuting Zones on Household Income, by Child's Gender

Rank Commuting
(p = 25) Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Salt Lake City
Seattle
Washington
DC
Minneapolis
Fort Worth
San Diego
Boston
Manchester
San Jose
Las Vegas
Denver
Portland
San Francisco
Pittsburgh
Newark
Providence
Sacramento
Phoenix
Buffalo
Kansas City
Houston
Miami
Philadelphia
Grand Rapids
Dallas
Cleveland
Bridgeport
Jacksonville
Milwaukee
Dayton
Cincinnati
Columbus
Nashville
St. Louis
Austin
Baltimore
San Antonio
Tampa
New York
Indianapolis
Atlanta
Los Angeles
Detroit
Orlando
Chicago
Fresno
Port St. Lucie
Raleigh
Charlotte
New Orleans

State
UT
WA
DC
MN
TX
CA
MA
NH
CA
NV
CO
OR
CA
PA
NJ
RI
CA
AZ
NY
MO
TX
FL
PA
MI
TX
OH
CT
FL
WI
OH
OH
OH
TN
MO
TX
MD
TX
FL
NY
IN
GA
CA
MI
FL
IL
CA
FL
NC
NC
LA

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Sons
Daughters
Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact
Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.06
0.15
0.08
0.16
0.10
0.02
0.05
0.06
-0.13
-0.03
0.04
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
-0.08
-0.05
-0.01
-0.04
-0.09
-0.10
-0.09
0.00
-0.15
0.10
-0.11
0.03
-0.11
-0.07
0.00
0.06
-0.06
-0.06
-0.07
-0.24
-0.17
-0.17
-0.14
-0.05
-0.13
-0.21
-0.26
-0.23
-0.23
-0.24
-0.26
-0.20
-0.19
-0.19

0.13
0.10
0.10
0.13
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.14
0.11
0.09
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.13
0.08
0.13
0.10
0.08
0.12
0.13
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.14
0.09
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.07
0.14
0.07
0.06
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.13

3.6
9.1
4.7
9.2
5.8
1.1
3.3
3.7
-7.6
-1.7
2.1
7.6
-0.3
-0.1
2.3
-0.1
-4.5
-3.2
-0.5
-2.5
-5.6
-6.1
-5.2
0.2
-8.7
5.7
-6.8
1.9
-6.8
-4.3
-0.1
3.6
-3.4
-3.6
-4.3
-14.3
-10.0
-10.0
-8.2
-3.1
-7.9
-12.3
-15.4
-13.4
-14.0
-14.5
-15.3
-11.8
-11.3
-11.1

0.23
0.22
0.11
0.15
0.02
0.09
0.01
-0.01
0.19
0.15
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.07
-0.05
-0.01
0.07
0.08
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
-0.05
0.06
-0.08
-0.03
-0.11
-0.06
-0.04
-0.07
-0.12
-0.12
-0.10
-0.06
-0.02
-0.14
-0.07
-0.15
-0.16
-0.13
-0.09
-0.04
-0.14
-0.12
-0.11
-0.06
-0.20
-0.27
-0.28

0.10
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.11
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.06
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.10

15.3
14.2
7.1
10.1
1.4
5.7
0.8
-0.7
12.4
9.6
0.5
2.6
5.6
4.6
-3.2
-0.5
4.6
5.0
-0.4
-0.8
0.3
0.9
1.6
-3.2
3.9
-5.1
-2.1
-7.5
-3.9
-2.9
-4.7
-7.7
-7.7
-6.5
-4.2
-1.4
-9.2
-4.4
-9.9
-10.4
-8.2
-5.8
-2.8
-9.0
-7.7
-7.2
-3.7
-13.3
-17.5
-18.6

Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Sons
Daughters
Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact
Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
0.08
-0.02
0.00
0.05
0.00
-0.15
0.04
0.04
-0.13
-0.08
-0.05
-0.09
-0.12
0.08
0.04
0.04
-0.14
-0.06
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02
-0.22
0.01
0.05
-0.07
-0.04
0.02
-0.11
0.03
0.00
0.01
-0.03
-0.06
0.01
-0.14
0.02
-0.11
-0.16
-0.04
-0.01
-0.15
-0.20
-0.14
-0.14
-0.04
-0.13
-0.19
-0.11
-0.09
-0.05

0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

3.2
-0.8
0.0
2.1
0.1
-6.1
1.7
1.5
-5.3
-3.1
-2.1
-3.4
-4.7
3.2
1.6
1.7
-5.4
-2.2
-0.3
-0.3
-0.7
-8.7
0.3
2.0
-2.7
-1.4
0.7
-4.5
1.3
-0.1
0.6
-1.1
-2.4
0.4
-5.5
0.7
-4.5
-6.4
-1.4
-0.3
-5.9
-7.9
-5.7
-5.7
-1.4
-5.1
-7.7
-4.5
-3.7
-2.1

0.14
-0.03
0.08
0.11
0.11
-0.11
0.00
-0.01
-0.12
-0.07
-0.07
-0.14
-0.15
0.10
0.03
-0.01
-0.16
-0.02
0.00
0.05
0.01
-0.24
-0.01
0.03
0.07
-0.06
0.01
-0.04
0.05
0.00
0.08
0.01
-0.01
0.05
-0.03
0.13
-0.04
-0.10
-0.05
-0.05
-0.09
-0.26
-0.17
-0.13
-0.03
-0.11
-0.22
-0.15
-0.05
-0.09

0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06

6.3
-1.4
3.6
5.0
4.9
-4.7
0.0
-0.6
-5.1
-3.2
-3.0
-6.2
-6.6
4.6
1.3
-0.5
-7.2
-0.8
0.1
2.1
0.4
-10.5
-0.6
1.5
3.3
-2.7
0.4
-1.9
2.1
0.1
3.4
0.6
-0.4
2.1
-1.4
5.9
-1.8
-4.6
-2.3
-2.2
-4.1
-11.4
-7.4
-5.7
-1.3
-4.9
-9.7
-6.8
-2.3
-4.1

Notes: This table replicates Table III, reporting separate estimates for sons and daughters (omitting the forecasts based purely on permanent resident outcomes).
Commuting Zones ares sorted by their ranks in Table III (i.e., their impacts pooling genders). See notes to Table III for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE VIII
Forecasts of Causal Effects for 100 Largest Counties (Top and Bottom 25) on Household Income, by Child's Gender

Rank
County
(p = 25)

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Sons
Daughters
Sons
Daughters
Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact
State
Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Dupage
Fairfax
Snohomish
Bergen
Bucks
Norfolk
Montgomery
Montgomery
King
Middlesex
Contra Costa
Middlesex
Macomb
Salt Lake
Ventura
San Mateo
Worcester
Monmouth
Honolulu
Hudson
Kern
Clark
San Diego
Providence
San Francisco

IL
VA
WA
NJ
PA
MA
PA
MD
WA
NJ
CA
MA
MI
UT
CA
CA
MA
NJ
HI
NJ
CA
NV
CA
RI
CA

0.20
0.15
0.23
0.28
0.28
0.21
0.07
0.13
0.19
0.13
0.24
0.13
0.04
-0.01
0.18
0.07
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.18
0.10
-0.02
0.03
0.11
-0.09

0.16
0.19
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.17
0.18
0.14
0.19
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.15
0.10
0.11
0.19
0.18

12.2
9.2
13.9
16.6
16.8
12.4
4.4
7.5
11.1
7.8
14.5
7.6
2.5
-0.9
10.9
4.2
1.2
0.6
0.5
10.4
6.0
-1.2
1.6
6.5
-5.5

0.28
0.23
0.22
0.17
0.14
0.14
0.18
0.21
0.17
0.14
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.16
0.05
0.11
0.07
0.10
0.05
-0.02
0.02
0.10
0.08
0.01
0.13

0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.13
0.12

18.2
15.1
14.6
11.2
9.2
8.9
11.6
13.6
11.4
9.4
9.4
5.2
8.9
10.2
3.5
7.0
4.4
6.8
3.4
-1.1
1.1
6.6
5.2
0.8
8.4

0.14
0.42
0.08
0.15
-0.07
0.18
0.11
-0.22
0.11
0.03
-0.08
0.11
0.04
-0.03
-0.03
-0.13
0.14
0.07
-0.29
0.22
-0.01
-0.13
-0.23
0.05
-0.15

0.12
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.16
0.16
0.15
0.16
0.12
0.17
0.15
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.15
0.17
0.18
0.16
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.12
0.11
0.19
0.18

5.7
16.8
3.2
5.9
-3.0
7.2
4.4
-8.6
4.4
1.3
-3.3
4.2
1.4
-1.4
-1.2
-5.2
5.5
2.7
-11.5
8.6
-0.4
-5.3
-9.2
1.9
-6.1

0.05
0.15
0.03
0.17
0.00
0.11
0.03
0.16
0.03
-0.01
-0.07
-0.08
-0.01
0.09
-0.09
0.02
0.11
0.07
-0.02
0.14
-0.05
-0.05
-0.06
-0.12
-0.21

0.11
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.11
0.14
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.16
0.10
0.15
0.14

2.1
6.6
1.2
7.6
0.1
4.9
1.3
6.9
1.4
-0.4
-3.1
-3.8
-0.5
4.0
-4.1
0.8
5.1
3.0
-1.1
6.3
-2.2
-2.3
-2.5
-5.2
-9.5

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Jefferson
Franklin
San Bernardino
Davidson
Pima
Montgomery
Travis
Essex
Bexar
Milwaukee
Riverside
Los Angeles
Wake
New York
Fulton
Bronx
Wayne
Orange
Cook
Palm Beach
Marion
Shelby
Fresno
Hillsborough
Baltimore City
Mecklenburg

KY
OH
CA
TN
AZ
OH
TX
NJ
TX
WI
CA
CA
NC
NY
GA
NY
MI
FL
IL
FL
IN
TN
CA
FL
MD
NC

0.00
0.13
-0.20
-0.10
-0.39
-0.15
-0.17
-0.08
-0.20
-0.25
-0.29
-0.22
-0.23
-0.12
-0.20
-0.26
-0.29
-0.25
-0.23
-0.28
-0.15
-0.15
-0.28
-0.27
-0.47
-0.22

0.20
0.17
0.10
0.18
0.16
0.20
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.10
0.07
0.19
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.09
0.15
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.17

-0.2
7.6
-11.9
-5.7
-23.0
-9.0
-10.4
-4.8
-12.0
-14.8
-17.0
-13.0
-13.4
-7.0
-11.6
-15.2
-17.4
-14.6
-13.7
-16.5
-8.8
-9.0
-16.8
-16.3
-27.9
-12.8

-0.11
-0.20
-0.09
-0.15
0.00
-0.13
-0.07
-0.19
-0.02
-0.14
-0.07
-0.12
-0.14
-0.23
-0.18
-0.14
-0.11
-0.18
-0.20
-0.08
-0.24
-0.15
-0.13
-0.16
-0.08
-0.22

0.13
0.12
0.08
0.12
0.11
0.13
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.12
0.09
0.06
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.12

-7.1
-12.9
-5.6
-10.0
0.0
-8.7
-4.3
-12.7
-1.6
-9.4
-4.7
-8.0
-9.1
-14.9
-11.5
-9.0
-6.9
-12.0
-12.8
-5.5
-15.5
-10.1
-8.5
-10.2
-5.4
-14.7

0.03
0.17
-0.14
0.15
-0.22
-0.19
-0.34
0.09
-0.14
-0.04
-0.22
-0.26
-0.10
-0.19
0.18
-0.16
-0.05
-0.15
-0.04
-0.31
-0.05
0.19
-0.04
-0.39
-0.10
-0.16

0.20
0.16
0.11
0.18
0.17
0.20
0.15
0.16
0.25
0.17
0.12
0.07
0.17
0.17
0.13
0.18
0.12
0.15
0.08
0.16
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.16
0.16
0.17

1.3
6.8
-5.6
5.9
-8.8
-7.4
-13.6
3.5
-5.6
-1.4
-8.7
-10.5
-4.1
-7.3
7.2
-6.5
-1.9
-6.1
-1.7
-12.4
-1.8
7.7
-1.7
-15.4
-3.9
-6.2

-0.04
0.09
-0.33
-0.08
-0.09
0.00
0.00
0.06
-0.09
-0.04
-0.27
-0.25
-0.14
-0.39
-0.07
-0.25
-0.13
-0.03
0.02
-0.38
-0.20
-0.05
-0.03
-0.12
0.04
-0.01

0.15
0.13
0.10
0.14
0.14
0.15
0.12
0.13
0.17
0.14
0.10
0.07
0.14
0.13
0.11
0.14
0.11
0.12
0.08
0.13
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.14
0.13
0.14

-1.8
3.8
-14.7
-3.4
-3.8
0.1
-0.1
2.7
-4.0
-1.9
-12.0
-11.3
-6.4
-17.2
-3.3
-11.3
-5.9
-1.6
0.8
-16.9
-9.0
-2.2
-1.2
-5.5
2.0
-0.5

Notes: This table replicates Table IV, reporting separate estimates for sons and daughters (omitting the forecasts based purely on permanent resident outcomes).
Counties are sorted by their ranks in Table IV (i.e., their impacts pooling genders). See notes to Table IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE IX
MSE-Minimizing Forecasts of Causal Effects for 50 Largest Commuting Zones on Individual Income, by Child's Gender

`

Rank Commuting
(p = 25) Zone
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Minneapolis
Boston
Newark
Seattle
Washington
DC
Buffalo
Philadelphia
San Francisco
Bridgeport
Las Vegas
Cleveland
Providence
San Jose
Manchester
Pittsburgh
Fort Worth
Milwaukee
Portland
New York
Phoenix
Sacramento
San Diego
Salt Lake City
Miami
Denver
Kansas City
Cincinnati
St. Louis
Jacksonville
Grand Rapids
Baltimore
Chicago
Dallas
Indianapolis
Dayton
Columbus
Houston
Nashville
Detroit
Austin
Tampa
Charlotte
Orlando
San Antonio
Los Angeles
Fresno
Port St. Lucie
Atlanta
New Orleans
Raleigh

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Sons
Daughters
Sons
Daughters
Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact
State
Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
MN
MA
NJ
WA
DC
NY
PA
CA
CT
NV
OH
RI
CA
NH
PA
TX
WI
OR
NY
AZ
CA
CA
UT
FL
CO
MO
OH
MO
FL
MI
MD
IL
TX
IN
OH
OH
TX
TN
MI
TX
FL
NC
FL
TX
CA
CA
FL
GA
LA
NC

0.19
0.15
0.16
0.15
0.08
0.16
-0.08
0.00
-0.06
-0.06
0.18
0.06
-0.08
0.05
0.07
0.10
-0.10
0.12
-0.04
-0.03
-0.11
-0.01
-0.03
-0.16
0.01
-0.07
-0.04
-0.07
0.01
0.09
-0.26
-0.19
-0.16
-0.07
-0.06
0.06
-0.07
-0.10
-0.20
-0.09
-0.19
-0.19
-0.27
-0.18
-0.20
-0.23
-0.27
-0.23
-0.22
-0.24

0.14
0.11
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.13
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.15
0.14
0.12
0.15
0.13
0.07
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.14
0.09
0.12
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.16
0.12
0.09
0.10
0.14
0.16
0.14
0.10
0.15
0.11
0.13
0.09
0.12
0.09
0.12
0.06
0.12
0.12
0.08
0.14
0.13

10.7
8.6
9.0
8.9
4.5
9.5
-4.4
0.2
-3.3
-3.5
10.4
3.2
-4.8
3.1
3.9
6.0
-6.0
7.1
-2.5
-1.8
-6.3
-0.7
-1.7
-9.4
0.5
-4.1
-2.4
-4.2
0.8
5.2
-15.1
-11.1
-9.5
-4.0
-3.7
3.2
-3.9
-5.7
-11.4
-5.2
-11.3
-11.0
-15.5
-10.3
-11.5
-13.4
-15.7
-13.2
-12.9
-13.8

0.17
0.10
0.14
0.11
0.15
0.03
0.20
0.14
0.08
0.14
0.03
0.02
0.12
-0.02
0.01
-0.01
0.02
-0.05
0.04
0.05
0.08
-0.02
-0.03
0.07
-0.01
-0.04
0.01
-0.02
-0.11
-0.10
0.03
0.04
0.04
-0.07
-0.03
-0.07
-0.06
-0.06
-0.01
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.04
-0.08
-0.08
-0.09
-0.01
-0.10
-0.13
-0.09

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.09
0.09

12.0
7.4
10.2
7.7
10.4
1.9
14.3
9.5
5.9
9.7
1.9
1.1
8.4
-1.4
0.9
-0.9
1.1
-3.4
2.6
3.3
5.3
-1.4
-2.5
5.2
-0.4
-2.6
0.7
-1.2
-7.6
-6.7
2.2
2.7
3.2
-4.9
-1.9
-5.0
-4.2
-4.5
-0.4
-3.0
-2.7
-4.1
-3.0
-6.0
-5.8
-6.2
-0.7
-6.9
-9.4
-6.1

0.06
0.12
0.12
-0.01
0.03
0.04
0.06
-0.06
0.08
-0.08
-0.03
0.11
-0.09
0.06
0.10
-0.05
0.06
-0.09
0.03
-0.06
-0.13
-0.13
-0.06
-0.22
-0.11
-0.03
0.02
0.01
-0.14
0.00
0.02
0.00
-0.11
-0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.01
-0.13
-0.11
-0.17
-0.19
-0.13
-0.15
-0.16
-0.17
-0.15
-0.20
-0.17
-0.06
-0.15

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05

2.9
5.5
5.6
-0.6
1.4
1.6
2.6
-2.6
3.6
-3.7
-1.4
5.1
-4.1
2.9
4.5
-2.0
2.6
-4.2
1.5
-2.7
-5.8
-5.8
-2.6
-9.9
-5.1
-1.5
0.7
0.3
-6.2
0.0
0.9
-0.1
-5.2
-1.8
-1.6
-2.5
-0.6
-5.7
-5.1
-7.6
-8.5
-6.1
-7.0
-7.1
-7.8
-6.7
-9.2
-7.5
-2.6
-6.8

0.16
0.18
0.29
-0.12
0.26
0.25
0.15
0.06
0.19
-0.20
0.11
0.04
0.03
0.14
0.10
0.06
0.10
-0.13
0.15
-0.12
-0.15
-0.11
-0.19
-0.10
-0.16
0.02
0.15
0.11
-0.06
-0.11
0.25
0.18
0.18
-0.08
-0.09
0.03
0.09
-0.02
-0.12
0.04
-0.04
-0.06
-0.15
0.03
-0.30
-0.21
-0.31
0.02
0.04
-0.17

0.11
0.09
0.08
0.09
0.07
0.11
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.12
0.11
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.10
0.07
0.08
0.12
0.13
0.12
0.08
0.12
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.06
0.12
0.10
0.07
0.12
0.10

Notes: This figure replicates Online Appendix Table VII, measuring income at the individual level. Commuting Zones ares sorted by their ranks in Online
Appendix Table III (i.e., their impacts pooling genders). See notes to Table III for details.

9.2
10.4
16.8
-6.9
15.4
14.5
8.7
3.7
11.4
-11.9
6.5
2.3
1.7
8.2
5.9
3.6
5.8
-7.7
8.6
-6.9
-8.5
-6.5
-11.0
-5.8
-9.1
0.9
8.7
6.3
-3.2
-6.5
14.8
10.7
10.5
-4.5
-5.4
1.6
5.1
-1.0
-7.1
2.6
-2.4
-3.3
-8.6
1.6
-17.4
-12.1
-17.9
1.0
2.2
-10.0

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE X
MSE-Minimizing Forecasts of Causal Effects for 100 Largest Counties (Top and Bottom 25) on Individual Income, by Child's Gender

Rank
County
(p = 25)

Below-Median Income Parents (p = 25)
Above-Median Income Parents (p = 75)
Sons
Daughters
Sons
Daughters
Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact Impact on Rank % Impact
State
Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth Forecast RMSE from Birth
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Bergen
Norfolk
Fairfax
Dupage
Middlesex
King
Bucks
Middlesex
Hudson
Montgomery
Worcester
Monmouth
Snohomish
Contra Costa
Suffolk
Montgomery
San Mateo
Ventura
Westchester
San Francisco
Providence
Queens
Hartford
Nassau
Macomb

NJ
MA
VA
IL
NJ
WA
PA
MA
NJ
MD
MA
NJ
WA
CA
NY
PA
CA
CA
NY
CA
RI
NY
CT
NY
MI

0.35
0.31
0.15
0.23
0.26
0.21
0.25
0.23
0.28
0.16
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.22
0.21
-0.01
0.06
0.28
-0.08
-0.03
0.16
0.00
0.08
0.10
0.16

0.19
0.19
0.19
0.16
0.19
0.14
0.19
0.16
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.19
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.19
0.11
0.19
0.15
0.16

20.3
17.8
8.9
13.5
15.2
11.8
14.5
13.2
16.1
9.5
8.3
9.0
10.7
12.5
12.4
-0.3
3.3
16.0
-4.8
-1.9
9.4
0.3
4.7
6.0
9.2

0.21
0.19
0.20
0.15
0.16
0.13
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.18
0.08
0.12
0.04
0.09
0.10
0.13
0.14
0.05
0.16
0.16
0.04
0.11
0.07
0.11
0.01

0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08

15.0
13.4
13.9
10.5
11.2
9.4
8.1
8.4
7.3
12.5
5.7
8.5
2.9
6.7
6.8
9.1
9.9
3.4
11.5
11.4
2.9
8.0
4.8
7.8
1.0

0.25
0.31
0.36
0.17
0.09
0.05
-0.02
0.19
0.17
-0.10
0.15
0.15
0.02
-0.07
0.02
0.11
-0.08
-0.04
0.43
-0.07
0.04
-0.03
0.12
-0.05
0.12

0.16
0.16
0.16
0.12
0.16
0.12
0.16
0.14
0.18
0.16
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.17
0.18
0.14
0.16
0.14
0.14

11.3
14.1
16.3
7.7
4.3
2.1
-0.8
8.6
7.7
-4.3
6.8
6.7
0.8
-3.2
0.8
4.9
-3.4
-1.6
19.3
-3.3
2.0
-1.5
5.4
-2.4
5.5

0.39
0.39
0.32
0.23
0.27
-0.01
0.11
0.03
0.45
0.45
0.25
0.30
-0.05
0.07
0.33
0.21
0.25
0.00
0.29
0.08
-0.04
0.23
0.15
0.42
-0.10

0.16
0.16
0.16
0.12
0.17
0.12
0.16
0.13
0.19
0.16
0.18
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.16
0.15
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.17
0.19
0.14
0.16
0.14
0.14

22.9
22.5
18.7
13.5
15.8
-0.8
6.4
2.0
25.9
26.3
14.4
17.6
-3.2
3.9
19.4
12.4
14.8
0.2
17.2
4.6
-2.2
13.6
8.8
24.2
-5.6

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Cook
Milwaukee
Oklahoma
Bernalillo
Wayne
Davidson
Shelby
Pima
Marion
Orange
Hillsborough
Jefferson
Montgomery
Baltimore City
Los Angeles
Mecklenburg
Cobb
Palm Beach
Bexar
Fresno
Fulton
Travis
Jefferson
San Bernardino
Wake
Riverside

IL
WI
OK
NM
MI
TN
TN
AZ
IN
FL
FL
KY
OH
MD
CA
NC
GA
FL
TX
CA
GA
TX
AL
CA
NC
CA

-0.19
-0.26
-0.07
-0.28
-0.23
-0.12
-0.13
-0.37
-0.13
-0.34
-0.21
-0.16
-0.18
-0.49
-0.20
-0.24
-0.24
-0.28
-0.25
-0.24
-0.29
-0.23
-0.34
-0.22
-0.27
-0.28

0.10
0.18
0.17
0.18
0.14
0.18
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.13
0.15
0.20
0.20
0.16
0.07
0.17
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.16
0.13
0.16
0.19
0.10
0.19
0.11

-11.0
-15.1
-4.3
-16.1
-13.3
-6.7
-7.6
-21.2
-7.6
-19.6
-12.0
-9.0
-10.6
-28.1
-11.7
-14.0
-14.0
-16.2
-14.7
-13.6
-16.8
-13.1
-19.7
-12.6
-15.8
-16.0

0.00
-0.02
-0.05
-0.02
-0.02
-0.05
-0.03
-0.01
-0.08
0.00
-0.03
-0.07
-0.08
0.01
-0.05
-0.04
-0.06
-0.01
-0.04
-0.08
-0.08
-0.04
-0.10
-0.12
-0.04
-0.12

0.06
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.08
0.07

0.1
-1.7
-3.5
-1.6
-1.1
-3.6
-2.0
-1.0
-6.0
0.2
-2.1
-5.0
-5.6
1.0
-3.8
-2.6
-4.5
-0.5
-3.0
-5.8
-5.6
-2.9
-6.9
-8.4
-3.0
-8.2

-0.03
-0.02
0.16
-0.25
0.01
-0.02
0.10
-0.24
-0.11
-0.18
-0.35
0.03
-0.21
-0.15
-0.23
-0.15
-0.01
-0.34
-0.19
-0.07
0.09
-0.31
-0.06
-0.15
-0.16
-0.20

0.08
0.16
0.18
0.18
0.12
0.17
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.14
0.16
0.19
0.19
0.16
0.07
0.16
0.15
0.16
0.23
0.18
0.13
0.14
0.19
0.11
0.16
0.12

-1.2
-0.8
7.2
-11.1
0.4
-0.8
4.7
-10.7
-5.0
-8.0
-15.8
1.4
-9.6
-6.9
-10.2
-6.6
-0.5
-15.4
-8.5
-3.2
4.3
-13.8
-2.5
-6.9
-7.3
-8.9

0.25
0.12
-0.01
-0.26
-0.11
-0.08
-0.10
-0.06
-0.09
-0.04
-0.12
0.08
-0.08
0.21
-0.27
-0.05
0.06
-0.42
0.00
-0.09
0.03
0.05
-0.02
-0.42
-0.17
-0.47

0.08
0.16
0.18
0.18
0.12
0.17
0.18
0.17
0.15
0.14
0.17
0.20
0.19
0.16
0.07
0.16
0.15
0.16
0.24
0.19
0.13
0.14
0.19
0.11
0.16
0.11

14.3
7.1
-0.6
-15.4
-6.4
-4.8
-5.7
-3.8
-5.3
-2.1
-6.9
4.9
-4.6
12.2
-15.8
-2.7
3.6
-24.3
-0.2
-5.1
1.7
3.1
-1.1
-24.6
-9.7
-27.4

Notes: This figure replicates Online Appendix Table VIII, measuring income at the individual level. Counties are sorted by their ranks in Online Appendix Table IV
(i.e., their impacts pooling genders). See notes to Table IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XI
Associations Between Place Effects and Area-Level Characteristics Across Commuting Zones for Low-Income Families (p = 25)
SD of
Signal
Covariate
Correlation
(1)
(2)
Std. Dev Correlation s.e.

Regression Estimates
Perm. Res.
(3)
%
s.e.

Causal
(4)
%
s.e.

Sorting
(5)
%
s.e.

Fraction Black Residents
Poverty Rate
Racial Segregation Theil Index
Segregation
Income Segregation Theil Index
and Poverty
Segregation of Poverty (<p25)
Segregation of Affluence (>p75)
Share with Commute < 15 Mins
Log. Population Density

0.100
0.041
0.106
0.034
0.029
0.039
0.091
1.341

-0.51
-0.14
-0.51
-0.57
-0.55
-0.58
0.88
-0.65

0.13
0.16
0.11
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.13
0.12

-7.49
-1.74
-5.16
-3.36
-3.82
-2.99
5.01
-3.39

0.71
0.93
0.78
0.97
0.88
1.01
1.06
1.10

-4.27
-1.20
-4.24
-4.76
-4.55
-4.81
7.26
-5.37

1.06
1.29
0.90
1.14
1.20
1.08
1.11
0.99

-3.22
-0.55
-0.92
1.40
0.73
1.82
-2.25
1.98

0.96
1.28
0.98
1.19
1.15
1.20
1.02
0.87

Household Income per Capita for Working-Age Adults
Gini coefficient for Parent Income
Income
Top 1% Income Share for Parents
Distribution
Gini within Bottom 99%
Fraction Middle Class (Between National p25 and p75)

6920.4
0.082
0.050
0.054
0.061

-0.30
-0.76
-0.49
-0.71
0.70

0.15
0.13
0.09
0.11
0.14

-0.58
-4.20
-0.97
-5.50
4.87

0.88
1.56
0.91
1.20
1.27

-2.52
-6.35
-4.09
-5.92
5.81

1.24
1.09
0.79
0.89
1.17

1.94
2.15
3.11
0.42
-0.94

0.86
1.19
0.65
1.25
1.23

Local Tax Rate
Local Tax Rate per Capita
Local Government Expenditures per Capita
State EITC Exposure
State Income Tax Progressivity

0.006
0.327
673.6
3.712
2.341

-0.13
-0.29
-0.30
0.15
-0.08

0.14
0.17
0.13
0.15
0.16

-0.15
-0.30
0.73
2.52
1.89

0.95
1.08
0.90
0.92
0.64

-1.04
-2.43
-2.49
1.25
-0.66

1.14
1.42
1.09
1.28
1.31

0.90
2.13
3.22
1.27
2.55

0.96
1.09
1.27
0.81
1.30

School Expenditure per Student ($1000)
Student/Teacher Ratio
Test Score Percentile (Controlling for Parent Income)
High School Dropout Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

1.312
2.665
7.157
0.016

-0.02
-0.35
0.51
-0.55

0.15
0.11
0.10
0.14

0.79
0.35
2.27
-4.92

0.89
1.15
2.05
1.04

-0.13
-2.87
4.22
-4.57

1.22
0.89
0.84
1.15

0.91
3.22
-1.95
-0.35

1.12
1.21
1.76
0.92

Number of Colleges per Capita
Mean College Tuition
College Graduation Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

0.006
3311.9
0.104

0.60
-0.15
0.14

0.13
0.11
0.12

1.42
-0.31
1.60

0.90
0.86
0.84

4.99
-1.22
1.17

1.07
0.88
0.96

-3.57
0.91
0.43

1.08
1.01
0.65

Labor Force Participation Rate
Local Labor Fraction Working in Manufacturing
Market
Growth in Chinese Imports 1990-2000
Teenage (14-16) Labor Force Participation Rate

0.047
0.061
0.979
0.100

0.14
0.03
-0.03
0.55

0.16
0.15
0.12
0.14

0.93
-0.64
0.68
3.90

0.90
0.94
0.72
1.47

1.17
0.23
-0.27
4.60

1.34
1.22
0.97
1.15

-0.24
-0.86
0.95
-0.70

1.06
1.00
0.67
1.63

Migration Inflow Rate
Migration Outflow Rate
Fraction of Foreign Born Residents

0.011
0.007
0.100

-0.17
-0.12
-0.45

0.14
0.13
0.10

-0.02
0.81
0.73

0.88
0.88
0.89

-1.44
-0.97
-3.71

1.15
1.07
0.86

1.42
1.78
4.44

0.90
0.88
0.99

Social Capital Index (Rupasingha and Goetz 2008)
Social Capital Fraction Religious
Violent Crime Rate

0.926
0.105
0.001

0.70
0.18
-0.68

0.13
0.17
0.12

3.61
3.21
-2.91

1.24
1.14
1.86

5.78
1.48
-5.64

1.10
1.43
0.96

-2.17
1.73
2.73

1.29
0.87
1.47

0.036
0.015
0.033

-0.57
0.04
0.52

0.12
0.16
0.14

-7.55
-2.12
4.31

1.08
0.89
1.14

-4.70
0.33
4.33

0.99
1.30
1.17

-2.85
-2.45
-0.02

1.20
0.86
1.29

97393.1
178.538

-0.38
-0.43

0.14
0.15

0.58
0.14

0.97
1.08

-3.17
-3.54

1.14
1.24

3.76
3.68

0.58
0.92

Tax

K-12
Education

College

Migration

Family
Structure
Prices

Fraction of Children with Single Mothers
Fraction of Adults Divorced
Fraction of Adults Married
Mean House Prices for Low-Income (p = 25) families
Mean Monthly Rents for Low-Income (p = 25) families

Notes: This table shows associations between CZs causal effects on the incomes of children in low-income families (p = 25) and area-level characteristics. Online Appendix Table
XV provides a definition and source for each of the area-level characteristics in this table. Column 1 reports the standard deviation of each covariate across CZs. Column 2 reports
the signal correlation between each CZ's causal effect and the covariate, computed as the correlation between the raw fixed effect estimate for each CZ and the covariate multiplied
by the ratio of the total SD to the signal SD of the causal effects from Table II. Columns 3 and 4 report coefficients from univariate OLS regressions of permanent resident outcomes
and causal effects on each characteristic. The characteristics are normalized to have a (population-weighted) mean of zero and unit standard deviation across CZs in these
regressions. Both permanent resident outcomes and the causal effects are rescaled so the coefficients can be interpreted as impacts in percentage units using the approach
described in Section V.B. Column 3 shows the coefficient and standard error (s.e.) from the regressions of permanent resident outcomes on each covariate. Column 4 shows the
coefficient and s.e. from regressions of the causal effect of growing up in an area from birth (20 years of exposure) on each covariate. The difference between these coefficients,
shown in Column 5, equals the coefficient from a regression of the difference between the permanent resident outcomes and causal effects on the covariate, which can be
interpreted as the association between sorting and the covariate. Standard errors for all estimates are clustered at the state level to account for spatial autocorrelation. All statistics
reported are computed using population weights, using CZ populations from the 2000 Census.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XII
Associations Between Place Effects and Area-Level Characteristics Across Counties within CZs for Low-Income Families (p = 25)
SD of
Signal
Covariate
Correlation
(1)
(2)
Std. Dev Correlation s.e.

Regression Estimates
Perm. Res.
(3)
%
s.e.

Causal
(4)
%
s.e.

Sorting
(5)
%
s.e.

Fraction Black Residents
Poverty Rate
Racial Segregation Theil Index
Segregation
Income Segregation Theil Index
and Poverty
Segregation of Poverty (<p25)
Segregation of Affluence (>p75)
Share with Commute < 15 Mins
Log. Population Density

0.130
0.055
0.118
0.039
0.034
0.045
0.100
1.698

-0.32
-0.23
-0.37
-0.42
-0.46
-0.36
0.02
-0.27

0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.11

-7.07
-6.12
-7.01
-5.25
-5.65
-4.53
0.73
-5.53

0.55
0.72
0.46
0.36
0.41
0.39
0.62
0.86

-1.98
-1.44
-2.31
-2.62
-2.88
-2.22
0.12
-1.67

0.64
0.67
0.60
0.63
0.64
0.66
0.73
0.69

-5.08
-4.67
-4.70
-2.63
-2.77
-2.31
0.62
-3.86

0.69
0.63
0.61
0.62
0.65
0.62
0.98
0.93

Household Income per Capita for Working-Age Adults
Gini coefficient for Parent Income
Income
Top 1% Income Share for Parents
Distribution
Gini within Bottom 99%
Fraction Middle Class (Between National p25 and p75)

9220.2
0.113
0.001
0.112
0.074

0.06
-0.41
-0.23
-0.41
0.13

0.14
0.14
0.10
0.14
0.13

2.56
-6.05
-2.96
-6.06
2.14

0.79
1.31
0.82
1.31
0.83

0.35
-2.55
-1.41
-2.55
0.80

0.87
0.85
0.59
0.85
0.83

2.20
-3.50
-1.54
-3.51
1.34

0.62
0.86
0.74
0.86
0.72

Local Tax Rate
Local Tax Rate per Capita
Local Government Expenditures per Capita
State EITC Exposure
State Income Tax Progressivity

0.009
0.432
1.0
3.747
2.368

-0.21
-0.15
-0.30
-0.01
-0.19

0.12
0.11
0.13
0.21
0.27

-2.82
-1.34
-3.26
-0.27
-0.42

2.03
1.63
1.80
0.19
0.41

-1.32
-0.91
-1.86
-0.08
-1.20

0.77
0.66
0.84
1.31
1.68

-1.51
-0.44
-1.40
-0.19
0.78

1.71
1.47
1.37
1.23
1.80

School Expenditure per Student ($1000)
Student/Teacher Ratio
Test Score Percentile (Controlling for Parent Income)
High School Dropout Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

1.478
2.807
9.593
0.023

-0.07
-0.10
0.35
-0.37

0.12
0.11
0.13
0.13

-1.13
-1.73
5.51
-5.63

1.29
0.71
1.16
0.69

-0.41
-0.65
2.20
-2.33

0.75
0.67
0.81
0.80

-0.73
-1.08
3.31
-3.30

1.23
0.94
0.99
0.95

Number of Colleges per Capita
Mean College Tuition
College Graduation Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

0.011
4421.3
0.139

-0.19
-0.02
0.03

0.16
0.14
0.16

-3.10
-1.03
-1.71

0.42
0.79
0.63

-1.15
-0.10
0.22

1.01
0.86
0.97

-1.95
-0.93
-1.93

0.97
1.24
1.06

Labor Force Participation Rate
Local Labor
Fraction Working in Manufacturing
Market
Teenage (14-16) Labor Force Participation Rate

0.058
0.070
0.108

-0.10
0.24
0.09

0.12
0.13
0.12

2.97
3.06
3.25

0.75
0.46
0.66

-0.60
1.52
0.54

0.77
0.80
0.77

3.56
1.54
2.71

0.73
0.80
0.79

Migration Inflow Rate
Migration Outflow Rate
Fraction of Foreign Born Residents

0.019
0.014
0.110

-0.04
0.01
-0.03

0.09
0.12
0.12

3.20
0.44
-1.96

0.72
0.75
0.68

-0.23
0.06
-0.18

0.53
0.77
0.77

3.43
0.40
-1.78

0.70
0.78
0.75

Social Capital Index (Rupasingha and Goetz 2008)
Social Capital Fraction Religious
Violent Crime Rate

1.089
0.127
0.002

0.15
0.07
-0.32

0.15
0.14
0.11

-0.15
-0.01
-5.50

0.72
0.55
0.45

0.92
0.47
-1.99

0.92
0.85
0.66

-1.08
-0.48
-3.50

1.09
0.89
0.63

0.069
0.017
0.062

-0.38
-0.34
0.33

0.11
0.13
0.09

-7.80
-5.28
7.46

0.81
0.52
0.42

-2.34
-2.09
2.07

0.66
0.82
0.58

-5.45
-3.20
5.39

0.61
0.81
0.64

107811.0
212.250

-0.04
0.09

0.13
0.11

0.77
3.51

0.59
0.67

-0.27
0.59

0.80
0.71

1.04
2.91

0.81
0.77

Tax

K-12
Education

College

Migration

Family
Structure
Prices

Fraction of Children with Single Mothers
Fraction of Adults Divorced
Fraction of Adults Married
Mean House Prices for Low-Income (p = 25) families
Mean Monthly Rents for Low-Income (p = 25) families

Notes: This table replicates Online Appendix Table XI at the county-within-CZ level. All standard deviations, correlations, and regressions are estimated at the county
level after residualizing all variables with respect to CZ fixed effects, weighting by county population. Standard errors are clustered at the CZ level to account for spatial
autocorrelation.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XIII
Associations Between Place Effects and Area-Level Characteristics Across Commuting Zones for High-Income Families (p = 75)
Standard
Deviation
Signal
of
Correlation
(1)
(2)
Std. Dev Correlation s.e.

Regression Estimates
Perm. Res.
(3)
%
s.e.

Causal
(4)
%
s.e.

Sorting
(5)
%
s.e.

Fraction Black Residents
Poverty Rate
Racial Segregation Theil Index
Segregation
Income Segregation Theil Index
and Poverty
Segregation of Poverty (<p25)
Segregation of Affluence (>p75)
Share with Commute < 15 Mins
Log. Population Density

0.100
0.041
0.106
0.034
0.029
0.039
0.091
1.341

-0.01
-0.06
-0.16
-0.56
-0.45
-0.62
0.60
-0.42

0.20
0.21
0.10
0.17
0.15
0.18
0.15
0.14

-1.06
-1.22
-1.46
-2.81
-2.55
-2.98
3.26
-2.02

0.71
0.48
0.38
0.49
0.43
0.53
0.48
0.54

-0.02
-0.28
-0.72
-2.46
-2.00
-2.76
2.66
-1.87

0.90
0.92
0.45
0.74
0.65
0.79
0.66
0.62

-1.04
-0.94
-0.74
-0.35
-0.55
-0.22
0.59
-0.15

0.54
0.68
0.51
0.51
0.50
0.53
0.56
0.46

Household Income per Capita for Working-Age Adults
Gini coefficient for Parent Income
Income
Top 1% Income Share for Parents
Distribution
Gini within Bottom 99%
Fraction Middle Class (Between National p25 and p75)

6920.4
0.082
0.050
0.054
0.061

-0.33
-0.69
-0.51
-0.59
0.49

0.16
0.23
0.17
0.18
0.18

-1.22
-3.22
-2.14
-2.94
3.06

0.41
0.98
0.78
0.48
0.55

-1.48
-3.07
-2.27
-2.59
2.15

0.72
1.00
0.76
0.77
0.78

0.26
-0.15
0.13
-0.35
0.91

0.53
0.63
0.45
0.64
0.67

Local Tax Rate
Local Tax Rate per Capita
Local Government Expenditures per Capita
State EITC Exposure
State Income Tax Progressivity

0.006
0.327
673.6
3.712
2.341

-0.09
-0.26
-0.69
0.16
-0.42

0.19
0.20
0.25
0.13
0.33

-0.58
-1.18
-2.56
1.41
-1.54

0.50
0.49
0.76
0.50
1.16

-0.38
-1.17
-3.07
0.71
-1.84

0.83
0.90
1.09
0.59
1.46

-0.20
-0.01
0.52
0.69
0.30

0.55
0.61
0.60
0.38
0.46

School Expenditure per Student ($1000)
Student/Teacher Ratio
Test Score Percentile (Controlling for Parent Income)
High School Dropout Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

1.312
2.665
7.157
0.016

0.03
-0.73
0.69
-0.20

0.19
0.19
0.20
0.15

0.31
-3.29
3.40
-1.77

0.67 0.14 0.83
0.38 -3.21 0.84
0.39 3.05 0.91
0.56 -0.87 0.68

0.17
-0.08
0.36
-0.90

0.46
0.66
0.79
0.60

Number of Colleges per Capita
Mean College Tuition
College Graduation Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

0.006
3311.9
0.104

0.46
0.13
-0.03

0.22
0.17
0.15

2.35
0.74
0.56

0.58 2.02 0.97
0.53 0.56 0.75
0.57 -0.11 0.66

0.33
0.18
0.67

0.74
0.50
0.60

Labor Force Participation Rate
Local Labor Fraction Working in Manufacturing
Market
Growth in Chinese Imports 1990-2000
Teenage (14-16) Labor Force Participation Rate

0.047
0.061
0.979
0.100

-0.04
0.36
0.01
0.48

0.21
0.17
0.14
0.25

0.57
1.47
0.55
3.04

0.55 -0.16 0.94
0.48 1.57 0.76
0.34 0.05 0.61
0.63 2.10 1.12

0.73
-0.11
0.50
0.94

0.73
0.63
0.50
0.72

Migration Inflow Rate
Migration Outflow Rate
Fraction of Foreign Born Residents

0.011
0.007
0.100

-0.53
-0.51
-0.86

0.15
0.16
0.18

-1.25
-1.92
-3.21

0.42 -2.34 0.65
0.45 -2.27 0.70
0.66 -3.79 0.80

1.09
0.36
0.59

0.56
0.66
0.48

Social Capital Index (Rupasingha and Goetz 2008)
Social Capital Fraction Religious
Violent Crime Rate

0.926
0.105
0.001

0.66
0.25
-0.78

0.20
0.15
0.20

3.26
2.52
-2.74

0.51 2.93 0.90
0.43 1.10 0.66
0.60 -3.45 0.88

0.33
1.43
0.71

0.71
0.55
0.53

0.036
0.015
0.033

-0.11
0.11
0.48

0.18
0.19
0.18

-1.67
-1.02
2.85

0.69 -0.47 0.81
0.61 0.47 0.86
0.64 2.12 0.80

-1.20
-1.49
0.73

0.51
0.60
0.55

66500.0
264.368

-0.67
-0.79

0.12
0.18

-2.45
-3.20

0.45 -2.96 0.52
0.52 -3.51 0.78

0.51
0.31

0.44
0.56

Tax

K-12
Education

College

Migration

Family
Structure
Prices

Fraction of Children with Single Mothers
Fraction of Adults Divorced
Fraction of Adults Married
Mean House Prices for High-Income (p = 75) families
Mean Monthly Rents for High-Income (p = 75) families

Notes: This table replicates Online Appendix Table XI for high-income families (p = 75); see notes to Online Appendix Table XI for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XIV
Associations Between Place Effects and Area-Level Characteristics Across Counties within CZs for High-Income Families (p = 75)
Standard
Deviation
of
(1)

Signal
Correlation
(2)

Std. Dev Correlation s.e.

Regression Estimates
Perm. Res.
(3)

Causal
(4)

Sorting
(5)

%

s.e.

%

s.e.

%

s.e.

Fraction Black Residents
Poverty Rate
Racial Segregation Theil Index
Segregation
Income Segregation Theil Index
and Poverty
Segregation of Poverty (<p25)
Segregation of Affluence (>p75)
Share with Commute < 15 Mins
Log. Population Density

0.130
0.055
0.118
0.039
0.034
0.045
0.100
1.698

0.14
-0.02
0.14
-0.06
-0.08
-0.04
0.08
-0.04

0.14
0.16
0.09
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.26
0.12

-2.82
-2.38
-2.75
-2.58
-2.64
-2.34
0.50
-3.01

0.21
0.23
0.25
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.37
0.33

0.63
-0.09
0.64
-0.25
-0.38
-0.18
0.37
-0.20

0.64
0.76
0.44
0.50
0.53
0.48
1.21
0.57

-3.46
-2.29
-3.40
-2.32
-2.26
-2.16
0.13
-2.81

0.71
0.71
0.46
0.49
0.53
0.47
1.25
0.55

Household Income per Capita for Working-Age Adults
Gini coefficient for Parent Income
Income
Top 1% Income Share for Parents
Distribution
Gini within Bottom 99%
Fraction Middle Class (Between National p25 and p75)

9220.2
0.113
0.001
0.112
0.074

-0.03
-0.06
-0.01
-0.06
-0.14

0.10
0.13
0.15
0.13
0.14

0.48
-2.98
-1.94
-2.98
1.35

0.24
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.30

-0.12
-0.30
-0.04
-0.30
-0.63

0.45
0.62
0.67
0.62
0.66

0.59
-2.68
-1.90
-2.69
1.98

0.48
0.87
0.92
0.87
0.67

Local Tax Rate
Local Tax Rate per Capita
Local Government Expenditures per Capita
State EITC Exposure
State Income Tax Progressivity

0.009
0.432
1.0
3.747
2.368

-0.01
-0.02
-0.18
0.01
-0.15

0.14
0.11
0.10
0.15
0.10

-1.16
-0.75
-1.47
-0.11
-0.26

1.06
1.02
0.85
0.07
0.23

-0.03
-0.10
-0.85
0.07
-0.67

0.66
0.49
0.48
0.70
0.47

-1.13
-0.65
-0.62
-0.18
0.41

1.28
1.14
0.94
0.69
0.52

School Expenditure per Student ($1000)
Student/Teacher Ratio
Test Score Percentile (Controlling for Parent Income)
High School Dropout Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

1.478
2.807
9.593
0.023

0.05
-0.21
0.03
0.15

0.17
0.16
0.12
0.17

-0.55
-1.04
2.12
-2.22

0.86
0.55
0.25
0.26

0.23
-0.95
0.15
0.68

0.77
0.75
0.55
0.80

-0.78
-0.09
1.98
-2.90

0.77
0.67
0.69
0.84

Number of Colleges per Capita
Mean College Tuition
College Graduation Rate (Controlling for Parent Income)

0.011
4421.3
0.139

-0.43
-0.15
-0.08

0.43
0.14
0.15

-1.44
-0.67
-1.00

0.22
0.37
0.25

-2.00
-0.71
-0.36

2.00
0.63
0.69

0.56
0.04
-0.65

2.00
0.73
0.66

Labor Force Participation Rate
Local Labor
Fraction Working in Manufacturing
Market
Teenage (14-16) Labor Force Participation Rate

0.058
0.070
0.108

-0.14
0.15
0.01

0.15
0.17
0.19

0.47
1.90
1.02

0.38
0.17
0.34

-0.63
0.71
0.06

0.70
0.80
0.90

1.10
1.18
0.96

0.75
0.83
0.91

Migration Inflow Rate
Migration Outflow Rate
Fraction of Foreign Born Residents

0.019
0.014
0.110

-0.31
-0.16
0.19

0.12
0.14
0.09

1.05
-0.54
-1.52

0.22
0.44
0.26

-1.41
-0.75
0.89

0.57
0.65
0.41

2.46
0.21
-2.40

0.52
0.62
0.46

Social Capital Index (Rupasingha and Goetz 2008)
Fraction Religious
Violent Crime Rate

1.089
0.127
0.002

0.00
-0.11
0.06

0.16
0.15
0.15

-0.31
-0.01
-1.99

0.36
0.32
0.31

0.01
-0.49
0.27

0.74
0.71
0.67

-0.33
0.48
-2.26

0.86
0.74
0.66

Fraction of Children with Single Mothers
Fraction of Adults Divorced
Fraction of Adults Married

0.069
0.017
0.062

-0.07
-0.12
0.16

0.14
0.16
0.17

-3.20
-1.93
3.41

0.19
0.33
0.21

-0.34
-0.57
0.75

0.63
0.74
0.79

-2.86
-1.36
2.66

0.63
0.69
0.74

78006.5
283.212

0.02
-0.04

0.14
0.11

0.73
-0.26

0.41
0.46

0.11
-0.18

0.65
0.51

0.62
-0.08

0.51
0.55

Tax

K-12
Education

College

Migration

Social
Capital
Family
Structure
Prices

Mean House Prices for High-Income (p = 75) families
Mean Monthly Rents for High-Income (p = 75) families

Notes: This table replicates Online Appendix Table XII for high-income families (p = 75); see notes to Online Appendix Tables XI and XII for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XV
Commuting Zone and County Characteristics: Definitions and Data Sources
Variable
(1)

Number of individuals who are black alone divided by total population

2000 Census SF1 100% Data Table P008

Poverty Rate

Fraction of population below the poverty rate

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P087

Racial Segregation

Multi-group Theil Index calculated at the census-tract level over four groups:
White alone, Black alone, Hispanic, and Other
Rank-Order index estimated at the census-tract level using equation (13) in
Reardon (2011); the δ vector is given in Appendix A4 of Reardon's paper.
H(pk) is computed for each of the income brackets given in the 2000 census.
See Appendix D for further details.

2000 Census SF1 100% Data Table P008

H(p25) estimated following Reardon (2011); we compute H(p) for 16 income
groups defined by the 2000 census. We estimate H(p25) using a fourth-order
polynomial of the weighted linear regression in equation (12) of Reardon
(2011).
Same definition as segregation of poverty, but using p75 instead of p25

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P052

Number of workers that commute less than 15 minutes to work divided by
total number of workers. Sample restricts to workers that are 16 or older and
not working at home.
Logarithm of the Population Density where the Population Density is defined
as the Population divided by the Land Area in square miles.

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P031

Household Income per Capita

Aggregate household income in the 2000 census divided by the number of
people aged 16-64

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P054

Gini

Gini coefficient computed using parents of children in the core sample, with
income topcoded at $100 million in 2012 dollars

Tax Records, Core Sample of Chetty et al. (2014)

The fraction of income within a CZ going to the top 1% defined within the CZ,
computed using parents of children in the core sample

Tax Records, Core Sample of Chetty et al. (2014)

Gini coefficient minus top 1% income share

Tax Records, Core Sample of Chetty et al. (2014)

Segregation
and Poverty Segregation of Poverty (<p25)

Segregation of Affluence (>p75)
Fraction with Commute < 15 Mins
Logarithm of Population Density

Income
Top 1% Income Share
Inequality
Gini Bottom 99%

Total tax revenue per capita divided by mean household income per capita
for working age adults (in 1990)

1992 Census of Government county-level summaries

Local Tax Rate Per Capita

Total tax revenue per capita

1992 Census of Government county-level summaries

Local Govt Expenditures Per Capita

Total local government expenditures per capita

1992 Census of Government county-level summaries

Tax Progressivity

The difference between the top state income tax rate and the state income tax 2008 state income tax rates from the Tax Foundation
rate for individuals with taxable income of $20,000 in 2008

State EITC Exposure

The mean state EITC top-up rate between 1980-2001, with the rate coded as
zero for states with no state EITC

Hotz and Scholz (2003)

School Expenditure per Student

Average expenditures per student in public schools

NCES CCD 1996-1997 Financial Survey

Student Teacher Ratio

Average student-teacher ratio in public schools

NCES CCD 1996-1997 Universe Survey

Residual from a regression of mean math and English standardized test
scores on household income per capita in 2000

George Bush Global Report Card

Residual from a regression of high school dropout rates on household income NCES CCD 2000-2001
per capita in 2000. Coded as missing for CZs in which dropout rates are
missing for more than 25% of school districts.

Number of Colleges per Capita

Number of Title IV, degree offering insitutions per capita

IPEDS 2000

College Tuition
College Graduation Rate (Income
Adjusted)

Mean in-state tuition and fees for first-time, full-time undergraduates
Residual from a regression of graduation rate (the share of undergraduate
students that complete their degree in 150% of normal time) on household
income per capita in 2000

IPEDS 2000
IPEDS 2009

Share of people at least 16 years old that are in the labor force
Share of employed persons 16 and older working in manufacturing.
Percentage growth in imports from China per worker between 1990 and 2000,
scaled asofan
annualized
rate
times 10
Fraction
children
in birth
cohorts
1985-1987 who received a W2 (i.e. had
positive wage earnings) in any of the tax years when they were age 14-16

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P043
2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P049
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013)
Tax Records, Extended Sample

Migration into the CZ from other CZs (divided by CZ population from 2000
Census)
Migration out of the CZ from other CZs (divided by CZ population from 2000
Census)
Share of CZ residents born outside the United States

IRS Statistics of Income 2004-2005

Rupasingha and Goetz (2008)

Fraction Religious

Standardized index combining measures of voter turnout rates, the fraction of
people who return their census forms, and measures of participation in
community organizations
Share of religious adherents

Violent Crime Rate

Number of arrests for serious violent crimes per capita

Uniform Crime Reports

Fraction of Children with Single
Mothers

Number of single female households with children divided by total number of
households with children

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P015

Fraction of Adults Divorced

Fraction of people 15 or older who are divorced

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P018

Fraction of Adults Married

Fraction of people 15 or older who are married and not separated

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P018

Migration Outlflow Rate
Fraction Foreign Born
Social Capital Index

Family
Structure

2000 Census Gazetteer Files

Local Tax Rate

Migration Inflow Rate

Social
Capital

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P052

Tax Records, Core Sample of Chetty et al. (2014)

Labor Force Participation
Share Working in Manufacturing
Local Labor
Growth in Chinese Imports
Market
Teenage (14-16) Labor Force
Participation

Migration

2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P052

Fraction Middle Class (between p25 Fraction of parents (in the core sample) whose income falls between the 25th
and p75)
and 75th percentile of the national parent income distribution

Test Score Percentile (Income
K-12
Education adjusted)
High School Dropout Rate (Income
adjusted)

College

Source
(3)

Fraction Black

Income Segregation

Tax

Definition
(2)

IRS Statistics of Income 2004-2005
2000 Census SF3 Sample Data Table P021

Association of Religion Data Archives

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XV, Continued
Commuting Zone and County Characteristics: Definitions and Data Sources
Variable
(1)

Definition
(2)

Source
(3)

Monthly Rent for Below-Median
Income Families

Median "Contract Rent" (monthly) for the universe of renter-occupied housing
units paying cash rent at the tract level. Aggregated to the county/CZ level by
taking the mean, weighting by the population with below-median incomes for
families with children < 18 present (income bins 9 and below)

2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GBO)
[Rent]
2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GYI) [for
weights]

Monthly Rent for Above-Median
Income Families

Median "Contract Rent" (monthly) for the universe of renter-occupied housing
units paying cash rent at the tract level. Aggregated to the county/CZ level by
taking the mean, weighting by the population with above-median incomes for
families with children < 18 present (income bins 10 and above)

2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GBO)
[Rent]
2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GYI) [for
weights]

House Price for Below-Median
Income Families

Median value of housing units at the tract level. Aggregated to the county/CZ
level by taking the mean, weighting by the population with below-median
incomes for families with children < 18 present (income bins 9 and below)

2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GB7)
2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GYI) [for
weights]

House Price for Above-Median
Income Families

Median value of housing units at the tract level. Aggregated to the county/CZ
level by taking the mean, weighting by the population with above-median
incomes for families with children < 18 present (income bins 10 and above)

2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GB7)
2000 Census SF3a (NHGIS SF3a, code: GYI) [for
weights]

Price

Notes: This table provides a description of each variable used in Section X and reported in Appendix Tables XI to XIV and Figures XV and XVI. For variables obtained at the county
level, we construct population-weighted means at the CZ level. See Appendix D of Chetty et al. (2014) for further details on data sources and construction of the variables.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE XVI
Association Between Rents and Causal Effects on Children's Incomes for High-Income Families
Dep. Var.: Mean Monthly Rent For High-Income Families ($)
CZs

Causal Effect (1% Increase
in Child's Income)

(1)

All Counties
(2)

-574.0***
(158.2)

102.9
(101.7)

Counties within CZs
Counties in 100 Observable
Largest CZs
Component
(3)
(4)
109.3
(104.2)

Observable Component

409.1***
(64.25)

Unobservable Component

Mean of Dependent Variable
Signal R-Squared
Number of Observations

Unobservable
Component
(5)

35.99
(67.47)
948.17
0.623
595

931.63
0.000
2367

1038.02
0.000
694

1030.23
0.066
673

1030.23
0.007
673

Notes : This table replicates Table V for high-income (p = 75) families; see notes to Table V for details.

FIGURE I: Causal Effect Estimates vs. Permanent Residents’ Outcomes for Low-Income Families

Causal Effect of One Year of Exposure on Mean Rank
0
0.5
-0.5

A. Across Commuting Zones

Seattle
Washington DC

Cleveland

Baltimore
Detroit
Atlanta

38

Minneapolis
San Diego
Philadelphia
Newark
Boston
San Francisco
Miami Phoenix
Sacramento
Dallas
Pittsburgh
Houston

Chicago

New York

Bridgeport

Los Angeles

40
42
44
46
Mean Rank of Children of Permanent Residents at p=25

48

Causal Effect of One Year of Exposure on Mean Rank
1
-1
0
-0.5
0.5

B. Across Counties

Hudson
Kings
Essex

35

Bronx

New York

Union

Middlesex

Queens
Suffolk
Westchester

Bergen

Nassau

40
45
50
Mean Rank of Children of Permanent Residents at p=25

55

Notes: Panel A plots causal effects of childhood exposure to each CZ, estimated using movers’ outcomes, vs. permanent
residents’ outcomes. The vertical axis shows estimates of µ̂25,c , the causal effect of an additional year of childhood exposure
to a CZ (relative to the average CZ) on the mean percentile rank at age 26 for children in families at income percentile
p = 25. The horizontal axis plots ȳ25,c , the mean ranks of children of permanent residents (non-movers) at p = 25. CZs with
populations above 2.5 million (based on the 2000 Census) are labeled. Dashed vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals
for µ̂25,c . The solid line shows the conditional expectation of µ̂25,c given ȳpc , estimated using an OLS regression pooling all
CZs and weighting by the precision of µ̂25,c . Panel B replicates Panel A at the county level. Counties within the New York
and Newark CZs that have populations above 500,000 are labeled. The sample in both figures consists of all children in the
1980-86 birth cohorts who are U.S. citizens; see Section II for further details.

FIGURE II: Sensitivity of Causal Effect Estimates to Controls
A. Across Commuting Zones

B. Across Counties (p=25)

-0.5

Correlation: 0.987
(0.003)

-0.5

Correlation: 0.970
(0.010)

Estimates Including Additional Controls
0

Estimates Including Additional Controls
0

0.5

0.5

A. Across CZs (p=25)

-0.5
0
0.5
Baseline Estimates of Causal Effect on Mean Rank (per Year of Childhood Exposure)

-0.5
0
0.5
Baseline Estimates of Causal Effect on Mean Rank (per Year of Childhood Exposure)

B. Across Counties

Estimates Including Additional Controls
0

Correlation: 0.991
(0.003)

-0.5

Correlation: 0.978
(0.009)

-0.5

Estimates Including Additional Controls
0

0.5

D. Across Counties (p=75)

0.5

C. Across CZs (p=75)

-0.5
0
0.5
Baseline Estimates of Causal Effect on Mean Rank (per Year of Childhood Exposure)

-0.5
0
0.5
Baseline Estimates of Causal Effect on Mean Rank (per Year of Childhood Exposure)

Notes: These figures present scatterplots of the relationship between our baseline causal effect estimates µ̂25,c and estimates
using specifications that include controls for changes in parent income and marital status around the time of the move
interacted with the child’s age at move (see Section IV.B for details). Panel A plots CZ-level estimates for children with
below-median income parents (p = 25). Panel B replicates Panel A at the county level. Panels C and D replicate Panels
A and B for above-median income families (p = 75). In each figure, the horizontal axis shows estimates from the baseline
specification and the vertical axis shows estimates using the specifications with additional controls. The figures also report
the precision-weighted correlation between the two sets of estimates, with standard errors in parentheses.

Causal Effect of One Year of Exposure on Mean Rank
0.4
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2

FIGURE III: Construction of Mean-Squared-Error Minimizing Forecasts
for Children in Low-Income Families

Seattle
Washington DC

Philadelphia
Albuquerque

Detroit
Raleigh

38

Chicago

Providence
New York
Los Angeles

40
42
44
46
Mean Rank of Children of Permanent Residents at p=25

Fixed Effect Estimate

Optimal Forecast

48

Std. Error of Fixed Effect

Notes: This figure illustrates the construction of the MSE-minimizing forecasts of causal effects, µfpc , for a selected set of CZs.
The forecasts shown are for children with parents at income percentile p = 25. The circles plot the raw fixed effect estimates
µ̂25,c (per year of childhood exposure) vs. the mean ranks of children of permanent residents, as in Figure Ia. The dashed
vertical lines around these points represent ±1 standard error of µ̂25,c . The solid regression line shows E [µpc |ȳpc ], the predicted
causal effect of each CZ given the outcomes of its permanent residents, which is estimated from a population-weighted OLS
regression of µ̂25,c on ȳpc using data for all CZs. The diamonds show the MSE-minimizing forecast, which is a weighted average
of µ̂25,c (the circle) and E [µpc |ȳpc ] (the prediction from the regression line), with greater weight placed on µ̂25,c when the
standard error of µ̂25,c is smaller.

FIGURE IV: Forecasts of Causal Effects on Children’s Income by Commuting Zone
A. For Children with Parents at 25th Percentile (µ25,c )
f

B. For Children with Parents at 75th Percentile (µ75,c )
f

Notes: These maps show MSE-minimizing forecasts of each commuting zone’s causal effect, µfpc , on children’s household income
at age 26. Panel A shows estimates for children in below-median income families (p = 25), while Panel B shows estimates
for children in above-median income families (p = 75). These forecasts are constructed using the methodology described in
the notes to Figure III. Estimates are scaled to show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20
years of childhood exposure) in a given CZ relative to the (population-weighted) average CZ in the country. CZs are grouped
into (unweighted) deciles based on their causal effects, with lighter colors depicting areas with more positive causal effects.
For example, growing up in CZs in the highest decile raises children’s incomes at p = 25 by more than 23.8% relative to the
average CZ, while growing up in the CZs in the lowest decile reduces their incomes by 9.4% relative to the average CZ. CZs
with fewer than 250 permanent residents, for which we do not report permanent resident outcomes and therefore do not have
forecasts of causal effects, are shaded with the striped pattern.

FIGURE V: Forecasts of Causal Effects by County in the New York and Boston Areas

A. New York Area, at 25th Percentile (µ25,c )

B. Boston Area, at 25th Percentile (µ25,c )

C. New York Area, at 75th Percentile (µ75,c )

D. Boston Area, at 75th Percentile (µ75,c )

f

f

f

f

Notes: These maps show MSE-minimizing forecasts of each county’s causal effect, µfpc , on children’s household income at
age 26 for counties in the New York and Boston Combined Statistical Areas. Panels A and B show estimates for children in
below-median income families (p = 25), while Panels C and D show estimates for children in above-median income families
(p = 75). These county-level forecasts are constructed using an approach analogous to that described in the notes to Figure
III. Estimates are scaled to show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood
exposure) in a given county relative to the (population-weighted) average county in the country. Counties are grouped into
deciles at the national level based on their causal effects, with lighter colors depicting areas with more positive causal effects.

FIGURE VI: Predictors of Place Effects For Children with Parents at 25th Percentile
A. Across Commuting Zones

Perm.
Residents = Selection

+

Causal

Theil Index of
Racial Segregation

Corr. with
Causal Effect
-0.51

Frac w/Commute
<15 mins.
Gini
Coef.
Top 1%
Income Share
Test Scores
Cond. on Income
School Expend.
Per Capita

0.88
-0.76
-0.49
0.51
-0.02

Num. of Colleges
Per Capita

0.60

Social Capital
Index

0.70

Frac. Single
Moms

-0.57

Frac. Foreign
Born

-0.45

Frac. Black
Residents

-0.51

-8.0

-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Percentage Impact of 1 SD Change in Covariate

8.0

B. Across Counties within CZs
Perm.
Residents

Theil Index of
Racial Segregation

=

Selection

+

Causal

Corr. with
Causal Effect
-0.37

Frac w/Commute
<15 mins.
Gini
Coef.
Top 1%
Income Share
Test Scores
Cond. on Income
School Expend.
Per Capita

0.02
-0.41
-0.23
0.36
-0.07

Num. of Colleges
Per Capita

-0.19

Social Capital
Index

0.15

Frac. Single
Moms

-0.38

Frac. Foreign
Born

-0.03

Frac. Black
Residents

-0.32

-8.0

-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Percentage Impact of 1 SD Change in Covariate

8.0

Notes: Panel A plots coefficients from univariate OLS regressions of permanent resident outcomes ȳ25,c and causal effects
µ̂25,c for below-median income families (p = 25) on various CZ-level characteristics (xc ), weighting by population. The
characteristics are normalized to have a (population-weighted) mean zero and unit standard deviation across CZs. Both ȳ25,c
and µ̂25,c are rescaled so the coefficients can be interpreted as impacts in percentage units using the approach described in
Section V.B. The vertical tick marks plot coefficients from regressions of ȳ25,c on xc . The solid bars plot coefficients from
regressions of the causal effect of growing up in an area from birth (20 years of exposure), 20µ̂25,c , on xc . The difference between
the tick mark and the bar (depicted by the dashed horizontal line) therefore represents the coefficient from a regression of
ȳ25,c − 20µ̂25,c on the covariate xc , which can be interpreted as the association between selection effects and the covariate.
The numbers on the right report the correlations between µ25,c and xc , which are obtained by dividing the coefficient from
regressing 20µ̂25,c on xc by 20 times the standard deviation of µ25,c (from Table II). Panel B presents analogous estimates at
the county-within-CZ level, standardizing the covariates to have (population-weighted) mean zero and unit standard deviation
across counties within CZs, and estimating regressions at the county level controlling for CZ fixed effects. Point estimates and
standard errors for the characteristics shown in this figure are provided in Online Appendix Tables XI and XII, along with
results for additional characteristics. Definitions of the covariates are provided in Online Appendix Table XV.

FIGURE VII: Predictors of Place Effects For Children with Parents at 75th Percentile
A. Across Commuting Zones

Perm.
Residents = Selection + Causal

Theil Index of
Racial Segregation

Corr. with
Causal Effect
-0.16

Frac w/Commute
<15 mins.
Gini
Coef.
Top 1%
Income Share
Test Scores
Cond. on Income
School Expend.
Per Capita

0.60
-0.69
-0.51
0.69
0.03

Num. of Colleges
Per Capita

0.46

Social Capital
Index

0.66

Frac. Single
Moms

-0.11

Frac. Foreign
Born

-0.86

Frac. Black
Residents

-0.01

-8.0

-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Percentage Impact of 1 SD Change in Covariate

8.0

B. Across Counties within CZs

Perm.
Residents = Selection

Theil Index of
Racial Segregation

+ Causal

Corr. with
Causal Effect
0.14

Frac w/Commute
<15 mins.
Gini
Coef.
Top 1%
Income Share
Test Scores
Cond. on Income
School Expend.
Per Capita

-0.01

Num. of Colleges
Per Capita

-0.43

0.08
-0.06

0.03
0.05

Social Capital
Index

0.00

Frac. Single
Moms

-0.07

Frac. Foreign
Born

0.19

Frac. Black
Residents

0.14

-8.0

-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
Percentage Impact of 1 SD Change in Covariate

8.0

Notes: This figure replicates Figure VI using children in above-median income families (p = 75) instead of below-median
income families (p = 25); see notes to Figure VI for details.

Forecasted Causal Effects (% impact, from birth)
15
-10
-5
0
5
10

FIGURE VIII: Opportunity Bargains in the New York Area

Putnam Bergen
Hunterdon
Sussex
Carbon

Middlesex

Warren

Northampton

Pike

Monroe
Litchfield

Monmouth

Hudson

Lehigh

Somerset

Morris
Ocean
Westchester

Dutchess
Mercer Union
Queens
Ulster
Kings
New Haven
Richmond
Orange

Passaic

Rockland

Suffolk
Nassau

Fairfield

Essex
Manhattan

Bronx

600

800

1000
1200
Median Rent in 2000 (in 2012 $)

1400

Notes: This figure plots the MSE-minimizing forecasts of causal effects, µf25,c , for counties in the New York Combined Statistical
Area (shown in Figure Va) vs. average monthly rents for low-income families. The forecasted causal effects µf25,c are scaled
to show the percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county
relative to the average county in the country. See notes to Figure Va for further details on construction of µf25,c . Monthly
rents are measured using data from the 2000 Census (in 2012 dollars), and are defined as the mean of median rents across
Census tracts, weighting by the number of families with children who have below-median income. The solid line shows the
best-fit line obtained from regressing µf25,c on rents, weighting by county population. Points above the line are “opportunity
bargains” – counties that produce particularly good outcomes for children relative to other counties with comparable rents.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE I:
Causal Effect Estimates vs. Permanent Residents’ Outcomes for High-Income Families

Causal Effect of One Year of Exposure on Mean Rank
0
0.5

A. Across Commuting Zones

Washington DC

Pittsburgh

Baltimore
Newark
Minneapolis
Boston
Houston
Dallas
Phoenix
Bridgeport
Philadelphia
New York
Chicago
Cleveland
Seattle

Atlanta
Detroit
San Francisco
San Diego
Sacramento

-0.5

Miami
Los Angeles

52

54
56
58
Mean Rank of Children of Permanent Residents at p = 75

60

Causal Effect of One Year of Exposure on Mean Rank
1
-1
0
-0.5
0.5

B. Across Counties

Hudson

Kings

Westchester

Bergen

Essex
Queens
Suffolk

Nassau
Middlesex
Union

Bronx
New York

50

55
60
Mean Rank of Children of Permanent Residents at p = 75

65

Notes: This figures replicates Figure I using children in above-median income families (p = 75) instead of below-median
income families (p = 25); see notes to Figure I for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE II: Forecasts using Additional Covariates vs. Baseline Forecasts

Forecasts from Specification Incl. Additional Predictors
60
-20
0
20
40

A. Low-Income Families (p = 25)

Correlation: 0.926
(0.016)

-20

0

20

40

Forecasts from Baseline Specification (% Impact from Birth)

Forecasts from Specification Incl. Additional Predictors
-10
0
10
20

B. High-Income Families (p = 75)

Correlation: 0.951
(0.013)

-10

0

10

20

Forecasts from Baseline Specification (% Impact from Birth)

Notes: This figure presents a scatter plot of alternative forecasts of CZs’ causal effects on children’s income ranks vs. our
baseline forecasts µfpc (shown in Figure V). The baseline forecasts only use data on movers’ and permanent residents’ outcomes.
The alternative forecasts also use the following additional covariates: the fraction of African American residents, the Theil
index of racial segregation, the Gini index, the fraction of single parents, the social capital index, and expenditures on public
schools per student. These characteristics are incorporated using the methodology described in Appendix C. Panel A shows
estimates for children in below-median income families (p = 25), while Panel B shows estimates for children in above-median
income families (p = 75). Each panel also reports the (population-weighted) correlation between the baseline and alternative
forecasts, with standard errors in parentheses. See notes to Figure IV for additional details on construction of these forecasts.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE III: Forecasts of CZs’ Causal Effects on Individual Income
A. Low-Income Families (µ25,c )
f

B. High-Income Families (µ75,c )
f

Notes: This figure replicates Figure IV, measuring children’s income at the individual rather than family level (i.e., excluding
spousal income). See notes to Figure IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE IV:
Forecasts of CZs’ Causal Effects on Household Income by Child’s Gender

A. Sons in Low-Income Families (µ25,c )

B. Daughters in Low-Income Families (µ25,c )

C. Sons in High-Income Families (µ75,c )

D. Daughters in High-Income Families (µ75,c )

f

f

f

f

Notes: This figure replicates Figure IV, measuring income at the household (i.e., family) level and reporting separate estimates
for sons and daughters. See notes to Figure IV for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE V:
Forecasts of CZs’ Causal Effects on Individual Income by Child’s Gender

A. Sons in Low-Income Families (p = 25)

B. Daughters in Low-Income Families (p = 25)

C. Sons in High-Income Families (p = 75)

C. Daughters in High-Income Families (p = 75)

Notes: This figure replicates Appendix Figure IV, measuring income at the individual level and reporting separate estimates
for sons and daughters. See notes to Figure IV for details.

0.0

Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

1.0

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE VI: Distribution of Counties’ Causal Effects by Gender

-40.0

-20.0
0.0
20.0
Forecast of County-Level Causal Effect at p=25
Sons
Daughters

40.0

Notes: This figure presents the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of our county-level forecasts of causal effects µf25,c for
sons (solid line) and daughters (dashed line) in low-income families (p = 25). The causal effects µf25,c are scaled to show the
percentage change in income from growing up from birth (i.e., 20 years of childhood exposure) in a given county relative to
the average county in the country. See notes to Figure V for details on construction of these forecasts.

