                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GROWTH AND CHILDBEARING IN THE SHORT- AND LONG-RUN

                                     Shoumitro Chatterjee
                                         Tom Vogl

                                      Working Paper 23000
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23000


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2016




We thank David Canning, Janet Currie, Moshe Hazan, Richard Rogerson, as well as conference
and seminar participants at Columbia, IFPRI, Princeton, Stanford, Tel Aviv, NBER Summer
Institute, and PopPov for comments. Maria Canals, Chitra Marti, and Reka Zempleni provided
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Shoumitro Chatterjee and Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Growth and Childbearing in the Short- and Long-Run
Shoumitro Chatterjee and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 23000
December 2016
JEL No. E32,J13,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

Despite being key to theories of economic growth and the demographic transition, evidence on
how fertility responds to aggregate income change is mixed. We analyze economic growth and
fertility change in the developing world over six decades, using data on 2.3 million women from
255 surveys in 81 countries. We find that fertility responds differently to fluctuations and long-
run growth, and the nature of these responses varies over the lifecycle. Fertility is procyclical,
falling during recessions, but also declines with long-run growth. Lifetime fertility is affected by
fluctuations near the end of the reproductive period but not those at prime reproductive age. Our
results are consistent with models linking demography, human capital, and long-run growth,
extended to include a lifecycle with liquidity constraints.


Shoumitro Chatterjee
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
sc20@princeton.edu

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
123 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

The relationship between macroeconomic conditions and fertility is sometimes positive and sometimes

negative. In historic pre-industrial populations, birth rates rose during eras of relative prosperity

(Galloway 1988; Lee 1997), much in line with Malthus’s characterization of fertility control as a

“preventive check” on population size (Malthus 1798). Birth rates are similarly procyclical in present-

day industrialized countries, as evidenced by a voluminous literature reviewed by Sobotka, Skirbekk,

and Philipov (2011). But fertility is currently highest in the poorest and least-developed countries,

suggesting that the economies that grew most in recent history contain the populations in which

reproduction slowed most (Bongaarts and Watkins 1996).1 The mixed empirical record impedes

theoretical progress on the linkages between economic growth and the demographic transition.

    This paper empirically characterizes the relationship between economic growth and fertility

change during the process of economic development, with an eye toward reconciling the wide range

of aggregate elasticities one can find in the data. The key insight is that fertility may respond differ-

ently to growth over different time horizons. Long-run growth may alter prices and returns in ways

that short-run fluctuations do not, while short-run fluctuations may have liquidity and intertemporal

substitution effects that are absent in the long run. A rough way to conceptualize this difference

is to think of long-run growth as influencing the ideal number of children and of fluctuations as

influencing the timing of childbearing. For example, unified growth theory (Galor 2011) emphasizes

how long-run growth may reduce the optimal number of children by increasing the return to child

investment or women’s work, forces unlikely to play out over the business cycle or even perhaps

within an individual lifecycle.2 Similarly, models of fertility over the lifecycle (Hotz, Klerman, and

Willis 1997) highlight how income or price fluctuations can alter the timing of childbearing, even

if lifetime fertility remains constant. To take both perspectives into account, we consider short-run

and lifecycle fertility responses to fluctuations alongside longer-run relationships.

    For studying growth-fertility linkages at different time horizons, we combine macroeconomic data

with fertility data on 2.3 million women from 255 World Fertility Surveys (WFS) and Demographic

and Health Surveys (DHS), covering 81 low- and middle-income countries from 1950 to 2010. The
   1
     Further complicating the record, Myrskylä, Kohler, and Billari (2009) confirm that fertility is currently highest in
the least-developed countries but also find a positive development-fertility relationship in the most-developed countries.
   2
     The idea that technological progress raises the return to human capital dates back to Nelson and Phelps (1966).
In an separate but related line of work, Barro and Becker (1989) show that at a given interest rate, higher productivity
growth lowers fertility by incentivizing higher consumption growth.
                                                            1
survey data allow us to avoid standard cross-national databases on fertility, which rely heavily on

interpolation, smoothing, and demographic modeling (United Nations 2015; World Bank 2015)—

especially problematic for the study of fluctuations. We also use the survey data to calculate cohort

measures of fertility and investigate within-country heterogeneity—difficult to do with cross-national

databases—and to better match the timing of conception (rather than birth) to fluctuations.

    With these data in hand, we can provide a geographically and temporally broader account of

the growth-fertility relationship at various time horizons than has previously been possible. In

fact, estimates of this relationship in contemporary developing countries are surprisingly rare at any

time horizon. A small literature has documented drops in fertility during economic crises in select

developing countries, consistent with the procyclicality observed in other settings, but this research

does not speak to the distinction between the short and long run, and its generalizability to a broader

set of countries is not clear.3 Analyses of growth and fertility change across countries over longer time

horizons, though less plagued by the limitations posed by interpolated fertility indicators, are less

conclusive and even rarer.4 Also unknown in developing countries is whether any fertility responses

to short-run fluctuations extend beyond adjustments in a woman’s childbearing timing to affect her

lifetime number of children, as they do in the United States (Currie and Schwandt 2014).

    We address these gaps in the literature with three analyses: two on the flow of fertility at the

population level (i.e., period fertility) and one on the stock of fertility at the cohort level (i.e., cohort

fertility). First, we examine how the annual rate of starting a successful pregnancy (i.e. conceiving a

future liveborn child) responds to growth fluctuations in the short run, paying attention to whether

immediate effects are subsequently offset and whether fertility responds differently to booms and

busts. Second, we estimate how the long-run rate of economic growth relates to the long-run rate of

fertility decline. Third, we look across birth cohorts within a country to ask how completed fertility

varies with macroeconomic conditions experienced at different phases of the reproductive lifecycle.

    To motivate these empirical analyses, we explore a lifecycle extension of the parental choice

problem from the theoretical literature on long-run growth and the demographic transition, in which

liquidity-constrained parents with uncertain incomes and wages make consumption, childbearing, and
   3
     See National Research Council (1993); Tapinos, Mason, and Bravo (1997); Lindstrom and Berhanu (1999); and
Adsera and Menendez (2011). The single study with the broadest geographical coverage is Adsera and Menendez’s
analysis of fertility over the business cycle in 18 Latin American countries.
   4
     Bongaarts and Watkins (1996) find that changes in the Human Development Index negatively predict changes in
the total fertility rate from 1960 to 1990. Schultz (1997) finds that, conditional on covariates, economic growth was
uncorrelated with total fertility rate change from 1972 to 1988.
                                                         2
child investment choices over a finite reproductive period.5 This theoretical framework highlights how

procyclical fertility can coexist with a negative long-run relationship between economic growth and

fertility change, as well as how income or wage fluctuations toward the end of the reproductive

period can have permanent effects on fertility, while the effects of earlier fluctuations may be offset

by subsequent adjustments in childbearing decisions.6 In the framework, optimal fertility timing is

heavily influenced by liquidity constraints and intertemporal labor substitution over the lifecycle,

while optimal lifetime fertility is heavily influenced by long-run growth and its implications for wage

rates or the quality-quantity tradeoff.

       Our empirical results illustrate these implications of the lifecycle framework. When we study an-

nual fluctuations, we find that fertility is procyclical within the reproductive lifecycle, with statistical

significance at prime childbearing ages. The procyclicality is driven entirely by downturns and is

stronger for less-educated women, reinforcing the potential role of liquidity constraints that prevent

poor households from smoothing through recessions. In contrast, when we study average rates of

change over periods of 20 or more years, we find that fertility declines with long-run economic growth.

More specifically, prime-age fertility declines more rapidly in faster-growing countries, while older-age

fertility declines more slowly; on net, the former effect dominates that latter for total fertility. These

patterns reflect a simultaneous decline and delay of fertility in faster-growing countries, which can

also be reconciled with a lifecycle model in which long-run growth raises the return to human capital

investment and women’s work. When we compare cohorts within a country, we find that growth

experienced in the prime childbearing years is unrelated to lifetime fertility, while growth in the 30s

leads to higher lifetime fertility—again consistent with our theoretical predictions regarding offset

opportunities early and late in the reproductive lifecycle. Growth fluctuations thus affect both the

tempo (timing) and quantum (lifetime cumulation) of fertility (Bongaarts and Feeney 1998). We

show that many of our findings are obscured in standard cross-national fertility data, while many

others are altogether impossible to study, underscoring the benefits of combining hundreds of surveys.

       The short- and long-run analyses of period fertility differ substantially in their statistical in-

terpretation, in that the short-run analysis uses a demanding regression specification that isolates

within-country, within-age, and within-year variation, while the long-run analysis must rely on cross-
   5
     See Galor and Weil (2000); Galor and Moav (2002); Hazan and Berdugo (2002); De La Croix and Doepke (2003);
and Cervellati and Sunde (2015).
   6
     See Foster (1993) for a related model of how short- and long-run economic-demographic relationships can differ.

                                                         3
country (although still within-age) variation in rates of change. Indeed, the short-run results are

robust to including a range of fixed effects, trends, and covariates, suggesting that they reflect a

causal effect of aggregate fluctuations. Conversely, causality is harder to infer from the long-run

results, which reflect correlations between long-run growth and other trends that incentivize lower

fertility. Notably, these results are not explained by the initial levels of GDP per adult and population

density; nor by rates of change in adult female education, adult female labor force participation, the

sectoral composition of value added, urbanization, infant mortality, conflict, and democratization.7

Instead, we find only one variable that explains a meaningful part of the negative association between

long-run economic growth and fertility change: the rate of change in secondary school enrollment

(among teens, not mothers). Because rising enrollment suggests rising returns to human capital

investment, these results are consistent with human capital-based theories of unified growth.8

       While our findings shed light on the evolution of fertility during the process of growth (and

recession), they do not directly speak to whether the demand for children exhibits positive wealth or

income effects. That question, which has long interested economists, is related to our investigation,

but substitution and liquidity effects are key to understanding our short- and long-run results. In this

sense, our contribution should be seen as separate from studies identifying positive wealth or income

effects on fertility using variation from natural resource booms within or across countries (Lovenheim

and Mumford 2013; Brueckner and Schwandt 2015) or from housing booms in the United States

(Lovenheim and Mumford 2013; Dettling and Kearney 2014).9 Theoretically and methodologically,

our analysis is more similar to research on the link between economic growth and mortality decline at

various time horizons (Deaton 2007; Baird, Friedman, and Schady 2011), as well as on the cumulative

mortality effects of economic shocks over the lifecycle (Cutler, Huang, and Lleras-Muney 2016).

       We focus on how economic growth and its correlates affect fertility, rather than causality running

the other way, from fertility to growth. The idea that high fertility causes underdevelopment has

long concerned researchers and policymakers (Coale and Hoover 1958); recent findings support this

concern but suggest that the effects are modest in size (Ashraf, Weil, and Wilde 2013; Miller and
   7
      The ideal test for the role of women’s work would use wages (Schultz 1985; Heckman and Walker 1990), not labor
force participation or sectoral composition. Unfortunately, wage data are unavailable for most of our sample.
    8
      A more directly relevant covariate would be parents’ expected return to human capital investment at the time of
the childbearing decision, but this variable is unavailable. Contemporaneous school enrollment is an imperfect proxy.
    9
      In a related study that spans the literatures on both income effects and the business cycle, Schaller (2016) interacts
nationwide industry-level labor demand shocks with the local industrial composition of employment to identify the
fertility effects of shocks to men’s and women’s labor market opportunities in the United States.

                                                             4
Babiarz 2016). Though this concern is also relevant for models of economic growth and the demo-

graphic transition, it is beyond the scope of this paper, so we rule out any first-order effects in this

direction by studying growth in GDP per adult rather than GDP per capita. Most specifically, our

results pertain to the relationship between economic growth and fertility change after an economy

escapes the Malthusian trap but before it attains high income per capita and low fertility. In the

Malthusian era, although macroeconomic fluctuations had similar effects on fertility (Galloway 1988;

Lee 1997), sustained productivity growth led to higher population density rather than rising living

standards and declining fertility (Ashraf and Galor 2011). In the modern era, the balance of income

and substitution effects from long-run growth may differ. Indeed, when we examine data from con-

temporary industrialized countries as a complementary exercise, we find similar procyclicality but

no association between growth and fertility change in the long run. Thus, our paper clarifies the

forces underlying growth-fertility linkages at various horizons, both over time and over the lifecycle,

for researchers and policymakers interested in demographic aspects of the development process.



2     Lifecycle Considerations in Models of Demography and Growth

In the standard overlapping generations formulation, models of long-run economic growth and the

demographic transition posit parents making choices regarding the quantity (and sometimes quality)

of their children in a single period. Though tractable, this setup precludes a distinction between

short- and long-run forces, as well as any consideration of the timing of fertility over the lifecycle.10

In this section, we build on these models to explore how fertility behavior responds to fluctuations

and long-run growth over a finite reproductive lifecycle. Our key goal is to understand how the

balance of income and substitution effects, as well as their persistence, varies across different time

horizons and different points in the lifecycle.

    As is common in this literature (Jones, Schoonbroodt, and Tertilt 2010), we model parents’ utility

as separable over their own consumption ct , their number of children nt , and their children’s mean

human capital ht :

                                   U (ct , nt , ht ) = uc (ct ) + un (nt ) + uh (ht )                              (1)
  10
     Doepke, Hazan, and Maoz (2015) and Jones and Schoonbroodt (2016) calibrate overlapping generations models
with lifecycles and endogenous fertility but assume either deterministic income or a single childbearing period. A
microeconomic literature reviewed by Hotz, Klerman, and Willis (1997) estimates lifecycle fertility models that rarely
include long-run forces and make restrictive credit market assumptions. Sommer (2016) calibrates a lifecycle fertility
model with liquidity constraints but studies the effects of earnings risk, rather than fluctuations or long-run growth.
                                                           5
However, we treat t as a period rather than a generation, so that U (·) becomes a period utility

function. Specifically, we consider a generation of parents who live t = 1, · · · , T periods and can

bear children until they reach menopause at age M < T . We assume that each sub-utility func-

tion ux (·) is increasing, concave, and twice continuously differentiable, with limx↓0 u0x (x) = ∞ and

limx↑∞ u0x (x) = 0. Parental choices maximize expected utility, discounted by factor β.

    Parents start their lives with assets A0 and then receive stochastic wages wt (with a period

time endowment of 1) and unearned income yt in subsequent periods. Because wt factors into the

time cost of children, but yt does not, one can also think of these variables as reflecting women’s

and men’s labor income, respectively. Some models include subsistence consumption constraints

to accommodate both Malthusian and modern population dynamics, but we do not, since we are

mainly interested in fertility behavior after the emergence of sustained economic growth. However,

we do impose a borrowing constraint (At ≥ 0), which may be key to understanding the effects of

fluctuations.11 In each period, parents allocate their potential income wt + yt among their own

consumption, the quantity and quality costs of children, and savings (which earn gross return R).

    Although the most realistic setup would treat births as binary, we allow parents to set a birth rate

bt ∈ [0, 1] in each period.12 Parents begin their lives with no children and accumulate them according

to: nt = nt−1 + bt . To avoid keeping track of children’s ages, we assume that parents pay child costs

only once, at birth. Each child costs τ ∈ (0, 1) units of time and κ units of the consumption good,

plus any education spending et to produce human capital.13 Education spending is transformed into

human capital by a (twice continuously differentiable) human capital production function h (et ; ḡ),

which we allow to depend on the long-run growth rate of technology ḡ. Following Galor and Weil

(2000), we assume that education increases human capital at a decreasing rate (he > 0, hee < 0) while

long-run growth depletes human capital but makes education more productive (hḡ < 0, heḡ > 0).

    Because our primary interest is not the allocation of education within the family, we simplify by

assuming that parents plan a single education level e for all of their children in period 0 of the model,

before the first period of the lifecycle. From period 1 to period M − 1, parents then make a sequence

of consumption and birth decisions, followed by a sequence of consumption decisions from menopause
  11
     By modeling an endowment economy with aggregate shocks in general equilibrium, Jones and Schoonbroodt (2016)
can generate procyclicality (over periods much longer than those considered here) without borrowing constraints.
  12
     Besides following much of the literature, continuous fertility allows us to derive first-order conditions that capture
much intuition while avoiding the complications of discrete/continuous dynamic models (Iskhakov et al. 2015).
  13
     The assumption that education has no time cost serves only to avoid corner solutions in which education exhausts
the parents’ period time constraint. It does not substantively affect the analysis.
                                                            6
M to death T . In light of the finite horizon, we work backward: characterizing the consumption

sequence first, the birth sequence next, and education spending last.

       The first-order conditions to the lifecycle problem lead to a standard consumption Euler equation:


                                            u0c (ct ) = βREt u0c (ct+1 ) + λt
                                                                         
                                                                                                                          (2)


where λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the borrowing constraint. When the borrowing constraint

does not bind, parents set the current marginal utility of consumption to the discounted expected

marginal utility of consumption in the next period. When it does bind, they fall short of consuming

enough in the current period to satisfy this condition, with a positive multiplier filling the gap.

Although the Euler equation does not directly involve fertility, the consumption smoothing motive is

key to understanding the timing of births over the business cycle. This point becomes apparent upon

inspection of a separate first-order condition, which equates the marginal benefit of consumption

with the discounted marginal benefits of childbearing:

                                                         PT                   h              i
                                    u0n (nt−1 + bt ) +     s=t+1 β
                                                                     s−t E
                                                                          t       u0n (ns ) ∂n s   0    1
                                                                                            ∂bt + µt − µt
                    u0c (ct ) =                                                                                           (3)
                                                               τ wt + κ + e

where µ0t and µ1t are the Lagrange multipliers on the constraints that the birth rate be at least 0 and

at most 1, respectively.

       Equations (2)-(3) provide much insight into the effects of wage and income fluctuations. Because

the right-hand side of equation (3) is divided by the marginal cost of childbearing—which includes

wt —a temporary fall in the wage incentivizes the shifting of births from the future to the present. If

T is large relative to M , then fluctuations in wt before menopause have minimal effects on expected

lifetime income, so this intertemporal substitution effect is likely to dominate any income effects when

the borrowing constraint does not bind. Under these conditions, fluctuations in yt are also unlikely to

have a large effect on the birth rate when T is large. When the constraint binds, however, a negative

wage or income shock decreases current consumption by equation (2), which then also incentivizes

reduced childbearing by equation (3).14 The possibility that childbearing behavior is procyclical due

to borrowing constraints also implies possible non-linearity and heterogeneity. Borrowing constraints
  14
     Existing research on fertility over the business cycle has also noted offsetting liquidity and intertemporal substitution
effects, albeit generally without fully specifying a model (e.g., Ward and Butz 1980; Adsera and Menendez 2011).


                                                              7
may bind more during deep recessions, and the poor may be especially likely to hit zero assets.15

       The durability of children adds several nuances in equation (3).16 The lagged number of children

appears inside u0n (·), placing a ceiling on the marginal utility of children for all t > 1. No such ceiling

exists for the marginal utility of consumption, implying that births decline to zero more rapidly than

consumption when parents are borrowing constrained. Also because the lagged number of children

appears inside u0n (·), parents may offset past adjustments in childbearing. For example, if a negative

shock forced borrowing-constrained parents to forego births in period t − 1, then the marginal gains

from childbearing are high in period t. Demographers refer to intertemporal substitution of births

of this type as a tempo effect.17 When offset is incomplete ( ∂n
                                                              ∂bt > 0 for s > t), the benefit of current
                                                                s



childbearing includes the marginal utility of children in the future. In fact, offset becomes impossible

after menopause, so wage and income shocks toward the end of the reproductive lifecycle may be

more likely to have permanent effects on the number of children. As a result, parents approaching

menopause may tolerate greater declines in consumption to finance childbearing.

       The insights about fluctuations from equations (2)-(3) do not necessarily carry to long-run pro-

ductivity growth, which may be built into parents’ expectations and may alter prices and returns

in ways that fluctuations do not. In general, we are agnostic about how long-run growth affects the

parents’ budget constraint, but as a starting point, it is useful to assume that ḡ reflects the growth

rate across generations but does not affect wages or incomes in the parents’ lifetimes. This approach

mimics overlapping generations long-run growth models and allows us to focus on substitution effects

from ḡ. Assuming an interior solution, the education spending plan satisfies the first order condition:

                                                                     M −1
                                                              T
                               u0h (h (e; g)) he (e; g) ( 1−β
                                                                     X
                                                           1−β ) =          β t−1 E0 [νt bt ]                      (4)
                                                                     t=1


where νt is the multiplier on the budget constraint in period t. Higher ḡ raises the left-hand side,

which leads parents to rasie e. The increase in e pushes up the denominator in equation (3), so the

optimal number of children declines (which then reinforces the increase in e in equation [4]).

       Thus, a central mechanism of unified growth theory—in which technology growth causes lower

fertility by increasing the return to child investment—remains intact, even in a model that admits
  15
    This last claim comes up against the reality that fertility control is imperfect, which we have not included in the
model. If the poor are also less effective at regulating the timing of births, then the prediction becomes ambiguous.
 16
    These insights build on Becker (1960), who first introduced the concept of children as durable goods.
 17
    In the very short run, some of the tempo effect will be biological due to postpartum infecundity.

                                                          8
procyclical fertility in the short run. This prediction relates long-run economic growth to the the level

of fertility, while many of our analyses examine changes in fertility, but this gap is easy to address with

slight adjustments to the theory. For example, if parents adapt to the new economic environment

slowly, then long-run growth will be associated with long-run (rather than instantaneous) fertility

decline. A similar prediction obtains if higher ḡ incrementally raises the return to education spending

from its most recent value.

      If ḡ affects parents’ budget constraint, then these predictions become less sharp. In this case,

the effect of long-run growth on fertility additionally depends on the balance of income effects from

higher wt and yt and substitution effects from higher wt . Many economic theories of the demographic

transition emphasize the link between long-run growth and rising women’s wages (Schultz 1985; Galor

and Weil 1996), which in our framework can be seen as a shift from yt to wt in the composition of

household income. By equation (3), such a shift incentivizes fertility reduction. If this mechanism is

at work, then long-run growth will also cause fertility to become more countercyclical.

      For parsimony, our framework abstracts from several additional margins that may be relevant to

fertility change. First, we ignore human capital investment in adulthood, a margin that may imply

additional lifecycle fertility consequences of long-run growth. Suppose parents could supplement their

own human capital by investing time in further schooling or on-the-job training, and suppose long-

run growth also raised the returns to these activities. A standard result is that individuals front-load

human capital investment at young ages to reap returns over a longer horizon (Ben-Porath 1967).

By this reasoning, long-run growth leads to fertility delay in addition to decline.18 Second, we do not

directly consider the proximate determinants of fertility that underlie fertility responses to growth

(Bongaarts and Potter 1983). Intentional changes in childbearing, as captured in the framework,

may be achieved through some mix of traditional birth control (including marriage timing), modern

contraception, and abortion.19 Other proximate determinants that may act as mediators, such as

unintentional changes in coital frequency (e.g., from stress or migration) or infecundity (e.g., from

malnutrition), are less natural in our choice framework but still relate to its emphasis on liquidity

constraints and intertemporal substitution. Our empirical analysis examines marriage timing but

not these other mechanisms because of data limitations. Third, we do not explicitly model child

mortality. In our empirical analysis, we find no evidence that child mortality explains our results.
 18
      See Blackburn, Bloom, and Neumark (1993) for a model making this point.
 19
      Alam and Pörtner (2016) find that crop losses increase modern contraceptive use and decrease fertility in Tanzania.
                                                            9
3         Data

Our analysis requires careful measurement of economic growth and fertility. For the former, we

obtain data on GDP from the Penn World Table (PWT) v. 8.1 (Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer

2015), matching it with data on population and age structure from the United Nations. The central

independent variable is the logarithm of GDP per adult age 15-64 for country c in year t, GDP pact ,

where the age range for the denominator is chosen to minimize concern about the endogeneity

of population size due to endogenous fertility and mortality. To ease interpretation, this variable

is multiplied by 100, so that the results are quantified in log points, which approximately reflect

percentage points. When analyzing levels, we adjust for purchasing power parity (PPP); when

analyzing growth rates, we adjust for inflation but use national prices, following the recommendation

in Johnson et al. (2013). Our focus on growth in production rather than technology follows the

empirical literature but departs somewhat from the theory.

         To measure fertility, we assemble data from all publicly available, standard format WFS and DHS

surveys that are nationally representative for all women and can be merged with our macroeconomic

dataset, leading to a sample of 81 countries. Appendix Table A1 lists the number of surveys for

each of these countries, which were all classified as low- or middle-income at the time of the surveys

(World Bank 2015). In both the WFS and the DHS, respondents provide full birth histories, listing

all of their children ever born, with information on birth date and survival status.20 These data

allow us to track fertility behavior over time and over the lifecycle, although they are sometimes

subject to reporting errors (Schoumaker 2014), a matter we discuss further below.21 Some surveys

only interviewed women who had ever been married or had completed schooling; for these surveys,

we only use data on women who at the time of the survey belonged to an age group in which the

rate of ever marriage or school completion exceeded 95%.

         For all analyses, we collapse the individual-level data into country-year-age or country-cohort

cells, allowing us to weight countries in a consistent way across a range econometric models. To

estimate the fertility rate for each cell, we pool data from all surveys in the same country and rescale

the survey weights to reflect each survey’s sample size contribution to the cell.22 We exclude cells
    20
     The DHS from El Salvador 1985 and Nigeria 1999 have well-known deficiencies in their birth histories (Casterline
and Odden 2016). For these surveys, we do not use the birth histories but do use data on lifetime fertility.
  21
     Reporting errors take the form of both omitted births (which are likely to have been in the distant past or to have
involved deceased children) and displaced births (either forward or backward in time).
  22
     Motivated by concerns that reporting errors are more likely for longer recall periods, we apply a Bartlett kernel to
                                                           10
with fewer than 30 observations (<5% of cells) for precision. We generate two types of fertility rates:

period, summarizing fertility outcomes across ages in a given year, and cohort, summarizing the

lifetime fertility outcomes of women born in the same year.

    For the analysis of period fertility, we study the age-specific conception rate, CRcta : the number

of conceptions per 1000 women aged a in year t from country c. Because we do not have information

on miscarriages or abortions, we focus only on conceptions that resulted in a live birth; because

we do not have information on gestational age at delivery, we assume that conception took place 9

months before the date of birth.23 As such, we do not directly analyze childbearing behavior but

instead use approximate dates of conception for fetuses that survived gestation: a limitation, given

that economic conditions may affect the probability of fetal death. The term “conception rate” is

thus a slight abuse of demographic terminology, but one that follows Currie and Schwandt (2014)

in their leading work on economic conditions and fertility. This choice to focus on the timing of

conception rather than birth also follows Currie and Schwandt, under the reasoning that economic

growth may be more likely to affect the former.

    To help distinguish between the short and long run, we focus on country-age combinations with

conception rates and macroeconomic data spanning at least 20 years. As reported in the first two

columns of Table 1, this sample definition gives rise to 58,988 distinct cells defined by country, year,

and age, with conception rates based on the fertility histories on 2.3 million women from 65 countries.

Pooling all ages 15-44, age-specific conception rates have a mean of 199 per 1000. The annual change

in log GDP per adult, which approximates the annual growth rate, averages 1.0 log points, with a

standard deviation of 5.8. Female education averages 4 years; the urbanization rate, 38 percent; and

GDP per adult, 4,476 international dollars, adjusted for purchasing power parity.

    For the analysis of cohort fertility, we study the completed fertility rate, CF Rcj : the number

of children per 1000 women from country c and birth cohort j. We only include women over 45 at

the time of the survey, treating their fertility as complete. Our main cohort analyses are based on

all children ever born, although we show that we obtain similar results when we only count children

who survived to the date of the survey.

    As reported in the last two columns of Table 1, data are available on 935 country-cohort cells from
the rescaled survey weights in a robustness exercise, down-weighting births that occurred long before the survey.
  23
     We count multiple births as coming from a single conception and allow for the possibility that a woman may
conceive twice in one year.

                                                       11
62 countries, containing 212k women over 45. The completed fertility rate per 1000 women averages

5951 children ever born and 4862 surviving children; an individual woman experiencing these rates

would bear 6 children, of whom 1 would die before she reached her late 40s. Compared with the

period sample, the cohort sample is characterized by a higher average age because it excludes women

below age 45. Average educational attainment is also lower because earlier cohorts received less

education. Other characteristics have similar means in the two samples.

    For covariates, analyses of heterogeneity, alternative measures of fertility, and comparisons with

developed countries, we draw on several additional aggregate data sources. We obtain alternative

fertility data from the World Development Indicators (WDI) and United Nations (UN); informa-

tion on contraceptive use, population density, and the sectoral composition of value added from the

UN; school enrollment and labor force statistics from the WDI and International Labor Organiza-

tion (ILO); democratization scores from the POLITY IV project; and conflict indicators from the

UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset. Other covariates, like average female education, the infant

mortality rate, and the urbanization rate, are estimated from the WFS/DHS microdata. For com-

parison with developed countries, we use the Human Fertility Database, which brings together vital

registration data from wherever they are of high quality.



4     Analysis of Period Fertility

Our analysis of period fertility focuses on how changes in fertility across the age distribution vary

with short- and long-run economic growth. We begin by laying out how we distinguish between

short- and long-run patterns empirically, followed by the main results for both horizons. We then

delve further into the results—assessing non-linearity, lag structure, heterogeneity, and alternative

covariates—first for the short run and then for the long run.


4.1   Defining Time Horizons

A key issue is how to define “short run” and “long run.” To allow the data to speak to this issue,

we run a series of first-difference regressions in which we vary the length of the difference. For each

5-year age group A from [15, 19) to [40, 44), we run:


                         CRcta − CRc,t−∆,a = β A Yct − Yc,t−∆ + αaA + εA
                                                                
                                                                       cta                         (5)
                                                12
where Yct = 100 × ln (GDP pact ). Because the distribution of ages within each age group varies across

countries and over time, we include a single-year age effect αaA , thus allowing fertility levels to trend

differently for each age within the age group. We estimate equation (5) using a range of values for

the length of the difference ∆, from 1 to 30 years. Figure 1 displays the results, for each age group

plotting estimates of the coefficients against the length of the difference.

   The patterns in Figure 1 make clear that economic growth and fertility change have different

relationships over different time horizons. In the annual first difference (∆ = 1), all age groups have

positive coefficients, indicating procyclical fertility. However, all but one age group immediately begin

trending downward with rising ∆, becoming negative by ∆ = 14 and leveling off at about ∆ = 20.

In other words, for all age groups less than 40, economic growth over periods of 14 or more years

is negatively associated with fertility change over the same period. Meanwhile, above 40, economic

growth is positively related to fertility change at all time horizons. These patterns have several

noteworthy implications, both statistical and economic. First, the associations at longer time horizons

bias the annual first-difference coefficients estimated with equation (5), with the magnitude of the bias

depending on the relative contributions of transitory fluctuations and long-run growth to the variance

of the annual growth rate. For all ages under 40, the long-run associations are negative, implying

that a naive first-difference specification understates the procyclicality of conceptions; above 40, the

positive long-run association implies the opposite. Any analysis of short-run procyclicality must

correct for these biases. Second, the sharp drop of the coefficients for the first five age groups beyond

∆ = 1, as well as their leveling at about ∆ = 20, suggest 1 and 20 years as reasonable definitions

of the short and long run. Third, the implied procyclicality with varied long-run associations is

consistent with the theories described in Section 2, although the subsequent analysis will need to

address robustness to covariates and statistical significance.


4.2   Methods

Based on the patterns in Figure 1, we divide our study of period fertility into a short-run analysis

of annual fluctuations and a long-run analysis of average annual changes over periods of at least 20

years. To distinguish time horizons as clearly as possible, we restrict both analyses to country-age

cells that span at least 20 years. For the short-run analysis, we modify equation (5) to eliminate bias

from the long-run relationship by including a country effect, which absorbs the country’s long-run

                                                   13
average rate of change in GDP per adult and the conception rate. For completeness, we also include

a year effect, addressing any concern about spurious global trends. The first-difference specification

then becomes:

                                    ∆CRcta = β A gct + λA    A    A    A
                                                        c + τt + αa + εcta                                           (6)

where ∆CRcta is the change in the conception rate from the previous year, and gct is the annual

change in 100 × ln (GDP pact ), which approximates the growth rate. λA    A        A
                                                                     c , τt , and αa are the country,

year, and age effects, which in first differences serve to control for correlated level trends.24 The

coefficient β A isolates how fluctuations of the growth rate from its long-run country average affect

changes in the conception rate, net of year- and age- specific factors. A 1-log point growth fluctuation

raises the change in the conception rate by β A .

    For the long-run analysis, we seek to estimate a long-difference version of equation (5). The

standard approach would relate simple changes in log GDP per adult to simple changes in fertility over

an interval of 20 years. However, because our country-year-age conception rates are noisy estimates

from surveys, we deviate from this standard approach in order to leverage as much information as

possible on the rate of long-run fertility change. Instead of the long difference, we analyze the average

annual rates of change in the two variables, g ca and ∆CRca , over periods of at least 20 years. To

estimate these quantities using as much information as possible, we regress 100 × ∆ ln (GDP pact )

and CRcta on year within each country-age cell, using the slope of the trend as the estimated average

annual rate of change.25 We then run the following regression for each 5-year age group A:


                                           ∆CRca = β A g ca + αaA + εA
                                                                     ca                                              (7)


As before, the single-year age effect αaA absorbs any age-related factors common across countries. By

collapsing the country-year-age observations into country-year cells, we remove the time dimension

from our panel, so the year effect τtA drops out. Similarly, because equation (7) primarily analyzes
   24
      Equation (6) can be obtained from differencing a level specification with country (µA            A              A
                                                                                          c ), year (τ̃t ), and age (ωa )
fixed effects, as well as country (λA
                                    c ) and age (α A
                                                   a ) linear trends:

                        CRcta = β A (100 × ln (GDP pact )) + µA     A    A    A      A       A
                                                              c + τ̃t + ωa + λc t + αa t + ε̃cta

On differencing, µA         A                   A    A     A        A
                    c and ωa drop out, while λc , τt ≡ ∆τ̃t , and αa become country, year, and age effects. However,
serial correlation, non-stationarity, and the need for PPP adjustment make the level specification unattractive.
  25
     An alternative approach would simply take the mean of observed annual changes gct and ∆CRcta , but this approach
would not use all available information due to gaps in the data. For example, if data were collected only in 1970, 1971,
1990, and 1991, then the mean of the two observed annual changes would ignore developments during 1971-1990.
                                                           14
variation in ∆CRcta and gct that was absorbed by the country effect in equation (6), we omit λA
                                                                                              c

from the long-run regression. Here, β A represents the cross-country association of long-run economic

growth with long-run fertility change, net of age-related factors. A country with a 1-log point faster

rate of long-run growth fluctuation experiences a β A .

       For both equations (6) and (7), we summarize the age group results by reporting the implied

result for the total conception rate (TCR) per 1000 women, defined as the expected number of

conceptions in a hypothetical cohort of 1000 women who experience current age-specific conception

rates at every age from 15 to 44:                                            !
                                                                 X
                                                    T CR                 A
                                                β          =5        β                                              (8)
                                                                 A

This summary measure is the sum of the age group coefficients, multiplied by 5 to account for the

length of each age group. While heterogeneity over the age distribution is key to our investigation,

β T CR provides an overall measure of the association between economic growth and fertility change.

       To assess the roles of other aggregate variables in explaining any relationship between economic

growth and fertility change, we report estimations of equations (6) and (7) with and without a main

set of covariates. In the extended models, we control for the initial level of population density and

log PPP-adjusted GDP per adult, as well as the change (for the short-run analysis) or average rate

of change (for the long-run analysis) in female education, urbanization, infant mortality, and armed

conflict.26 These variables serve as our main controls because they may be key drivers of demographic

change, and they are available for all country-years in our dataset. We consider covariates that are

available only for subsamples later.

       Female education and urbanization are averaged at the country-year-age level, just as with the

conception rate. Because these characteristics are measured at the time of the survey, they change

minimally over the lifecycle for women born in the same country and year. Thus, when we compute

changes from years t − 1 to t in the average characteristics of women aged a, we effectively measure

differences between birth cohorts c, t − a − 1 and c, t − a.27 Fluctuations in this cohort difference

are unlikely to be correlated with fluctuations in growth over time, so these variables pose little

omitted variable risk in the short-run analysis; nevertheless, we include them for completeness.28
  26
     Some of our these covariates may mediate an effect of growth, leading to risk of over-controlling.
  27
     Some changes may occur over the lifecycle if women born in the same country and year are surveyed multiple times,
but such changes are generally small in the data.
  28
     At younger ages, education and sector of residence may respond to growth fluctuations, raising concern that reverse
causality in the covariates may bias estimates of β A .
                                                            15
Analogously, when we compute average annual rates of change for a specific age over multiple years,

we effectively measure trends across birth cohorts. Because these trends may be correlated with

long-run growth, female education and urbanization may be more relevant in the long-run analysis.

    The remaining covariates may be important in both analyses. For infant mortality, we pool all

maternal ages to measure rates at the country-year level in an effort to minimize noise. In the short-

run analysis, we track deaths among infants conceived in the previous rather than current year, both

because these deaths are less likely to be endogenous and because they are more likely to influence

conceptions in the current year.29 Thus, we control for the change in the overall infant mortality

rate from year t − 2 to t − 1.

    For weighting and variance estimation, we make conservative choices that clarify interpretation.

Sample sizes in individual WFS and DHS surveys range from fewer than 5,000 to more than 100,000

women, suggesting possible efficiency gains from weighting cells by their sizes. We choose to weight

cells equally to ease interpretation of the results, effectively giving countries balanced representation

within each age group or birth cohort. When relevant, we show in the Appendix that weighted

analyses lead to similar results. We also cluster standard errors by country, allowing for arbitrary

error covariance within country while imposing independence across countries.


4.3    Main Results

Table 2 reports the main results of the analysis of period fertility. The first two columns summarize

the level of fertility and its rate of change. In column (1), average conception rates follow an inverted

u-shape in age, peaking at 261 per 1000 among 20-24 year olds. The TCR per 1000—the number

of conceptions expected of a hypothetical cohort of 1000 women experiencing these age-specific

conception rates over their reproductive lifecycles, is 5483, or 5.5 conceptions per woman. Despite

this high level, fertility was falling throughout the sample period, as revealed in column (2). On

average, conception rates in all age groups declined by 1 to 3 points per year, with a -67 annual

change in the TCR, corresponding to a decadal reduction of two-thirds of a conception per woman.

    These rates of fertility change serve as dependent variables in the remainder of Table 2. Columns

(3)-(4) report the short-run coefficients from equation (6), first without the main covariates and
  29
     We include an indicator for missing mortality information in the extended short-run model, mainly to deal with
the absence of lagged mortality data for the first cell in any country-age series. Results are unchanged if we drop these
cells instead.

                                                           16
then with them. In the basic model without covariates, all of the short-run coefficients are positive,

indicating procyclical fertility, with statistical significance in the prime childbearing ages. The largest

coefficient of 0.56 implies that a one log point increase in GDP per adult raises the number of
                         1
conceptions by roughly   2   per 1000 25-29 year olds. Moving from 25-29 to neighboring age groups, the

coefficients decline more than would be proportional to the level of fertility. This finding is consistent

with the theoretical framework’s prediction that older parents (who are closer to menopause) are less

willing to forego births during a recession, although it is only suggestive evidence. Combining all age

groups, the TCR increases by 8.8 per 1000 in response to a log point positive growth fluctuation. As

reported in Table 1, the annual change in log GDP per adult has a standard deviation of 5.8, which

puts these magnitudes in further perspective. The standard deviation shrinks only slightly, to 5.4,

after conditioning on the fixed effects in equation (6), so one can multiply the results by 5-6 to gauge

the effect of a one standard deviation growth fluctuation.

   Alternative regression specifications leave these results intact. In column (4), the addition of co-

variates in the extended model does not meaningfully alter the coefficients or their significance levels.

For completeness, we report the coefficients on these covariates in Appendix Table A3. Changes in

female education, urbanization, and infant mortality all have significant relationships with concep-

tion rate changes at various ages, yet none meaningfully explains the procyclicality of conceptions.

Additional robustness checks are reported in Appendix Figure A1, which plots age-group-specific

coefficients from a range of alternative short-run models. One weights cells by their size; another

reweights observations within each cell to give more weight to fertility outcomes with shorter recall

periods (using a Bartlett kernel); another omits country, year, and age effects; and three others add

country-specific linear, quadratic, and cubic time trends. Both the weighted model and the trend

models deliver results very similar to those reported in Table 2. However, in the model with no coun-

try, year, or age effects, the coefficients at prime childbearing ages (20-34)—while still statistically

significant—shrink by roughly one-quarter, while the coefficient in the 40-44 age group grows by the

same proportion.

   That the omission of country, year, and age effects modifies coefficients across the age distribution

in different directions is easily reconciled by the analysis of long-run rates of change, where the results

are nearly opposite the short-run estimates. As shown in the final two columns of Table 2, long-run

economic growth and long-run fertility change are negatively correlated at prime ages but positively

                                                    17
correlated at older ages. Column (5) reports the basic model without covariates, revealing these

marked contrasts across the age distribution. A comparison of women in their early thirties with

women in their early forties provides the starkest contrast. Among 25-29 and 30-34 year olds, a

1-point faster average annual rise in log GDP per adult is associated with a 0.43-point faster average

decline in conception rates: roughly equal and opposite in sign from the short-run coefficient in

column (3). Meanwhile, among 40-44 year olds the same increase in long-run growth is associated

with a 0.14-point slower average decline in conception rates. This result reflects the postponement

of childbearing in faster-growing economies. On net, the offsetting coefficients different ages imply

a long-run TCR coefficient of -6.1, so that overall, faster long-run economic growth is associated

with more rapid fertility decline. The average rate of change in log GDP per adult has a standard

deviation of 1.8, so a one standard deviation increase in long-run growth is associated with fertility

declining at a decadal rate of one conception for every nine women.

   As with the short-run analysis, these long-run results are robust to alternative regression speci-

fications. In column (6), the estimates remain similar after controlling for the initial level of GDP

per adult as well as the average rates of change in conflict, female education, urbanization, and

infant mortality. Appendix Table A3 again reports the coefficients on these covariates. Average

rates of change in female education and fertility are negatively correlated, yet this relationship does

not explain the long-run growth-fertility link. Further specification checks are reported in Appendix

Figure A3, which plots age-group-specific coefficients from a range of alternative long-run models.

Changing the minimum long-run time horizon from 20 years to 15 or 25 does not change the esti-

mates, nor does reweighting conception rates using a Bartlett kernel as in (Appendix Figure A2).

We also obtain similar results when we use the average of observed annual changes, which has the

same interpretation as our main measure of the average annual change but loses information from

gaps in the country-year panel.


4.4     Exploring the Procyclicality of Fertility

4.4.1    Non-Linearities

All of the preceding models assume linearity, but the theoretical framework’s emphasis on liquidity

constraints suggests that conception rates may respond differently to booms and busts, and these

responses may be non-linear in the size of the economic fluctuation. To assess such non-linearities
                                                18
in the short-run results, we discretize the distribution of 100 × ∆ ln (GDP pact ) into six bins (< −10,

[−10, −5), [−5, 0), [0, 5), [5, 10), and ≥ 10) and then run a semi-parametric version of equation

(6) that replaces the continuous variable gct with bin indicators. We prefer this approach to non-

parametric regression because it allows us to control for country, year, and age effects while still

measuring the change in log GDP per adult in its original units. Results are summarized in Figure

2, with Panel A plotting the age-group-specific coefficients and Panel B plotting the implied TCR

coefficients with 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals. Confidence intervals for the age-group-specific

coefficients are displayed in Appendix Figure A4.

    In Figure 2, a clear asymmetry emerges, with conceptions falling sharply in deep recessions but

not rising in pronounced expansions. Relative to the base category, moderate economic growth of

0-5 log points, a recession of more than 10 log points decreases the total conception rate by 171 per

1000 women: nearly one-fifth of a child per women. Looking across age groups, 25-29 year olds are

hardest hit, with conceptions declining 16 per 1000 during these extreme recessions. As shown in the

histogram at the bottom of Panel B, recessions of this magnitude are rare but not unprecedented,

with 3 percent of the sample (1,644 cells) in this category. Meanwhile, during episodes of positive

growth, changes in conception rates do not depend on the extent of growth.


4.4.2    Lags

The theoretical framework also makes clear that women may offset past fertility adjustments, sug-

gesting that we should include lagged growth rates as additional covariates in equation (6). Figure 3

extends the model with four lags; alternative lag lengths produced similar results.30 Panel A reports

results for each age group, showing pronounced offset behavior in the year following a growth fluctu-

ation. In response to a 1-point positive fluctuation, conceptions among 25-29 year olds rise 0.53 per

1000 in the same year but fall 0.40 per 1000 in the following year. Both coefficients are statistically

significant, as shown in Appendix Figure A5, which draws the impulse response functions with con-

fidence intervals. Most other age groups display the same pattern, although the confidence intervals

are sometimes too wide for a definitive interpretation, especially at longer lags. One notable excep-

tion is the impulse response function for 30-34 year olds, which displays the weakest offset behavior.

This pattern will be relevant for the cohort results in Section 5.
  30
     To focus on the growth fluctuations that identified the results in Table 2, we only use the sample that has both
lagged growth rates and lagged conception rates, which is 86 percent of the sample missing lagged conception rates.
                                                         19
      Aggregation across age groups allows us to characterize the impulse response function with less

noise. Panel B of Figure 3 reports the implied TCR coefficients for the contemporaneous and lagged

effects. In response to a 1-point growth fluctuation, TCR rises 10.8 at first but then falls 7.6 in the

following year. These coefficients reflect the partial effect of past economic fluctuations on the current

change in the conception rate. The running sum of the coefficients, plotted in black, reveals that the

effect of a fluctuation dissipates over time but does not disappear. In particular, the cumulative effect

of a fluctuation on TCR shrinks to 3 one year after the fluctuation but settles at a significant 6-8

children per 1000 women thereafter. Some but not all of the short-run fertility response to economic

fluctuations is offset through subsequent adjustments to childbearing. Importantly, because we study

the year-to-year change in the conception rate at a fixed age, rather than the change for a fixed birth

cohort, this exercise does not map exactly onto the evolution of fertility choices over time for a

particular woman. The cohort analysis in Section 5 will address this issue.


4.4.3      Heterogeneity

Who responds most to growth fluctuations? Our rich dataset also allows us to explore which individ-

ual and aggregate characteristics are linked with stronger procyclicality. To shed light on heterogene-

ity within countries, we study how the average characteristics of mothers change over the business

cycle. An alternative approach would categorize women by characteristics and then compute sepa-

rate conception rates by category, but this approach considerably reduces cell sizes and also alters

the country composition of our sample.31 By looking at the average characteristics of mothers, we

avoid these problems. To further minimize changes in sample composition from cells with no births,

we run the analysis at the country-year level, for the same countries and years in the main sample.

      We focus on four characteristics that may be especially relevant to understanding the procycli-

cality of conceptions: age, education, urban residence, and ever-marriage. Education and urban

residence correspond to the time of the survey—at the end of the birth history—while age and mar-

riage are contemporaneous to the year of conception risk. This approach to studying heterogeneity

requires us to control carefully for the age structure and average characteristics of all women in the

country-year cell. As such, we modify equation (6) to include additional covariates: changes in the

fraction of all women in each single-year age group, as well as changes in average years of education,
 31
      Some countries have few women with no education, for example; others have few to none with secondary education.

                                                          20
percent urban, and percent ever-married among all women. The coefficient on gca now captures how

growth fluctuations influence the composition of conceiving mothers, over and above any association

of growth with the composition of women at risk for conceiving. Before looking at maternal charac-

teristics, however, we first estimate the modified model using the change in the conception rate (in

the country-year cell) as the dependent variable. Reported in column (1) of Table 3, the coefficient

is a statistically significant 0.24—which implies a TCR coefficient of 7.3, roughly four-fifths of the

short-run TCR coefficients estimated more flexibly in Table 2. Thus, we obtain similar results despite

aggregating age groups.

       The next four columns of Table 3 present the results for maternal characteristics, with a single

noteworthy result: a significant positive relationship between growth fluctuations and the average

education of mothers. A log point positive growth fluctuation is associated with a decrease in average

education of 0.002 years. To put this in perspective, if we replace the growth rate with an indicator

for recession (gct < 0), we obtain a coefficient of 0.02, suggesting that the average education of

mothers increases by 0.02 years (0.5 percent of the average education level and 25 percent of its

annual rate of change) during a downturn. This finding implies that less-educated women are more

responsive to growth fluctuations: consistent with a role for credit constraints and unsupportive of

the idea that only more-educated women can control their fertility.32

       Other average characteristics of mothers do not vary significantly with growth fluctuations. The

most noteworthy of these null results concerns marriage, given the historical importance of marriage

as a method of fertility limitation (Hajnal 1965; Wrigley 1981). In Appendix Table A3, we investigate

this margin further by analyzing marriage rates and conception rates inside and outside marriage.33

Conceptions are 2.4 times more procyclical after marriage than before marriage, but they are also

2.8 times more likely, which explains the stability of the share of mothers ever married. Additionally,

neither the rate of new marriages among all women nor the hazard of marriage among never-married

women varies significantly with growth fluctuations.

       In the final column of Table 3, we use an average characteristic of children, rather than mothers,

as the outcome: the fraction male. Growth fluctuations do not affect the sex composition of births,

providing suggestive evidence that our fertility results, despite their reliance only on live births,
  32
     The results in Table 3 do not rule out countercyclical fertility among more-educated women. But if we compute
separate conception rates for more- and less-educated women, we find procyclicality in both groups, with a larger
magnitude among the less-educated.
  33
     We again use country-year cells, controlling flexibly for changes in the age structure.
                                                       21
reflect changes in conceptions rather than fetal deaths. Trivers and Willard (1973) proposed that

natural selection leads mothers in worse condition to produce more female offspring, a theory that

receives support in data on the sex ratio at birth in humans (Almond and Edlund 2007; Almond

et al. 2016). If live births responded to growth fluctuations because of fetal death rather than fertility

behavior, then this theory would predict the procyclicality in the fraction male.

       While the analyses in Table 3 speak to who responds most to growth fluctuations within a

country, heterogeneity across countries is also of interest. Appendix Tables A4 and A5 investigate

heterogeneity by aggregate characteristics and region, respectively. In Appendix Table A4, the short-

run TCR coefficient does not vary significantly with the lagged levels of GDP per adult, contraceptive

prevalence, average education, or urbanization, nor with the female labor force share.34 These null

results are somewhat surprising. Many results so far—procyclicality, asymmetry to booms and busts,

heterogeneity by education—are consistent with a role for liquidity constraints. But conceptions are

not more procyclical in poorer countries, nor in lower education countries. The theory would have

also predicted more procyclicality in countries where women’s work is rare, so that substitution

effects are small. But the data show no heterogeneity by the extent of women’s work. At the same

time, Appendix Table A5 reveals marginally significant regional variation, with countries in Africa,

Latin America, and the Caribbean exhibiting stronger procyclicality than those in Asia. In fact,

conception rates appear to be entirely unresponsive to economic fluctuations in South and Southeast

Asia. Given the null result for heterogeneity by aggregate socioeconomic characteristics, this regional

heterogeneity is puzzling.


4.4.4      Comparison with Other Datasets

The suggestive evidence on regional variation raises the question of how the short-run fertility re-

sponse to economic fluctuations in WFS/DHS countries compares with that in developed countries,

which have been the focus of the literature on fertility and the business cycle (Sobotka, Skirbekk,

and Philipov 2011). Cross-national data on conception rates by year in developed countries are not

readily available, so we rely on birth rates to explore this issue. Specifically, we analyze annual age-

specific birth rates from our WFS/DHS microdata and from the Human Fertility Database (HFD),
  34
    To maximize interpretability, Appendix Table A4 splits the sample above and below the median of each aggregate
characteristic. If we instead interact each characteristic with the change in log GDP per adult, we still find no significant
heterogeneity. We measure the female labor force share in a single year, 1990, because panel data are limited for many
countries. The WDI has more complete panel data after 1990, but country effects account for over 95% of the variation.
                                                             22
a compilation of natality data from populations with high-quality vital registration systems, mostly

in developed countries. Using equation (6), we relate changes in these birth rates to the weighted
                                                                                               1
average of current and lagged changes in log GDP per adult, assigning weight                   4   to the current change
       3
and    4   to the lagged change to roughly match the conception period for the current year’s births.

      Table 4 presents the results, revealing comparable birth rate procyclicality. In the WFS/DHS

sample, the results closely tracked the conception rate results in Table 2, with column (2) reporting

a total fertility rate coefficient (which is analogous to the total conception rate coefficient, but for
                                                                                                                        2
the birth rate) of 8.0. In the HFD sample, where the average population is 20 times richer and                          3   less

fertile than the WFS/DHS sample, this coefficient is slightly smaller, at 5.5 (column [5]), although

the difference between samples is not significant. In absolute terms, fertility is similarly procycli-

cal in developing and developed countries, although this result also implies stronger proportional

procyclicality in developed countries.

      For an additional point of comparison, we rerun this analysis using total fertility rates (instead of

age-specific birth rates) from the World Development Indicators, a popular dataset in cross-country

research. For the developed country sample, estimates from the WDI are similar to those from the

HFD, with column (6) showing a total fertility rate coefficient of 6.4. However, for the developing

country sample, the WDI delivers estimates in column (3) that are insignificant and close to zero,

likely because the WDI’s fertility data are heavily smoothed for countries with low-quality vital

registration systems. Researchers using this popular cross-country dataset would have incorrectly

concluded that fertility is far more procyclical in richer, lower-fertility countries.


4.5        Exploring the Long-Run Link Between Growth and Fertility Decline

4.5.1       Non-Linearities

While theory gives no clear prediction regarding non-linearities in the long-run relationship, more

flexible estimation may yield interesting results here as well. Because equation (7) includes no country

or year effects, and the age effects are of minimal importance, we rely on a bivariate regression

smoother to characterize non-linearities in the long run.35 Figure 4 displays local linear regressions

of the average annual rate of change in the conception rate on the average annual rate of economic

growth, using a bandwidth of 2 log points. Panel A graphs the regression function for each age
 35
      Estimation of equation (7) without age effects leads to extremely similar coefficients and significance levels.
                                                             23
group, with the domain running from the 5th to the 95th percentiles of that age group’s distribution

of average growth. To avoid clutter, we relegate confidence intervals to Appendix Figure A6.

   Relative to the coefficient estimates in Table 2, the curves in Figure 4, Panel A, provide three

new insights. First, unlike the short-run results, the long-run regression functions do not deviate

substantially from linearity. Second, for all age groups, conception rates trended downward across

the distribution of long-run growth rates; the estimated regression functions are uniformly negative.

Third, the positive long-run coefficient for the 40-44 age group reflects not an increase in conception

rates in faster-growing countries but instead a slower decrease.

   To generate the implied regression function for the TCR, Panel B aggregates these results over

the intersection of the age-group-specific domains. The dotted and dashed lines represent 90 and

95 percent confidence intervals, which we block-bootstrapped at the country level. Consistent with

the patterns in Panel A, the average rate of fertility change declines linearly in the average growth

rate. At the 10th percentile of the average growth rate—where the economy shrank by 1.6 percent

per year—the TCR declined at an annual rate of 60 conceptions per 1000 women. Meanwhile, at the

90th percentile—where the economy grew by 3.2 percent per year—the TCR declined at a 33 percent

faster rate: 80 conceptions per 1000 women annually.


4.5.2   Mechanisms

Although controlling for trends in conflict, female education, urbanization, and infant mortality did

not alter results in Table 2, other relevant covariates were omitted because they are not available

for all country-years. For the long-run analysis, however, yearly measurements are less important

than for the short-run analysis. Even with gaps in the data, one can compute informative estimates

of the average annual rate of change in a covariate. In Table 5, we control for the average annual

rate of change in each of four covariates that are not available for the whole sample but may shed

light on mechanisms: secondary school enrollment, female labor force participation, the sectoral

composition of value added, and the extent of democracy. For each of these covariates, we report

two regressions: one including the average annual rate of change in the covariate, one omitting it but

using the restricted sample with a non-missing average annual rate of change. For reference, column

(1) repeats the full-sample estimates from specification (7), first reported in Table 2, column (5). We

compute the average annual rate of change using the methods described in Section 3. In estimating

                                                  24
this rate of change for a country-year cell, we only use country-year-age cells that have data on both

the conception rate and the covariate.

   Our theoretical framework emphasizes the hypothesis by Galor and Weil (2000) that long-run

growth raises the return to human capital investment, which increases investment per child and

therefore the marginal cost of children. A test of this theory is difficulty because it would ideally use

data on schooling (or returns to schooling) 1-2 decades after the fertility outcome. As an imperfect

substitute, we rely on school enrollment at the time of the fertility outcome, under the assumption

that parents’ expectations regarding their children’s returns are heavily influenced by the current

desirability of schooling. In the WDI, gross enrollment ratios are available from many more countries

in our sample than net enrollment ratios, so we use the former. A well-known problem with gross

enrollment ratios is that they can by biased by grade repetition, and indeed, more than one-third of

the country-years in our dataset have primary school ratios in excess of 100. We therefore rely on

secondary school enrollment ratios, which never exceed 100 in our sample. The average rate of change

in secondary enrollment is also closely related to the average rate of economic growth in our sample;

a 1-log point higher average rate of growth predicts that secondary enrollment rises 0.1 percentage

points faster per year. When we control for this covariate in column (2), the coefficients on average

growth rise substantially. Because all but one of these coefficients are negative, they are attenuated

by the inclusion of the rate of change in secondary enrollment; the TCR coefficient shrinks by roughly

half. Therefore, trends in contemporaneous secondary school enrollment can partly explain our long-

run results. Importantly, contemporaneous enrollment reflects the desirability of schooling, not the

education of mothers. The results in Table 2 already established that maternal education does not

explain the results.

   A separate theory posits that the technological progress associated with economic growth raises

the returns to women’s work (Galor and Weil 1996), increasing the costs of childbearing and therefore

pushing fertility downward. To examine this possibility, we first use the labor force participation

rate of women over age 15, assembled by Olivetti (2014) from ILO databases. Columns (3)-(4) show

no meaningful change in the long-run results from the inclusion of the average rate of change in this

covariate. One complication is that the female labor force participation rate does exactly reflect the

opportunity cost of women’s time. Goldin (1995) points out that female labor force participation is

high early in the development process, but wages are low and work is compatible with childcare: for

                                                   25
example, work on the family farm close to home. A rising opportunity cost of children may be better

reflected in the size of the service sector, which employs women outside the home at higher wages,

and may therefore create more of a work-fertility tradeoff. Panel data on the sectoral composition

of the labor force are extremely sparse, so we instead use data on the sectoral composition of value

added (agriculture, manufacturing, services, and other). Here again, in columns (5)-(6), controlling

for trends in these sectoral composition variables fails to change the long-run results. Overall, our

tests fail to find evidence that women’s work plays an important role in our long-run results. Data

on wages or the sectoral composition of the labor force would improve these tests but are unavailable

for most of our sample.

   As a final exploration into the mechanisms driving the long-run results, we control for trends

in the Polity IV score, a measure of democratic institutions. Democracy does not play a key role

in economic theories of the fertility transition, but demographer Dyson (2013) suggests a possible

link. Whatever the link, columns (7)-(8) reveal that trends in democratization do not explain the

association between long-run growth and long-run fertility change.


4.5.3   Comparison with Other Datasets

Just as Table 4 compared the short-run results for developing-country with those for developed

countries and alternative fertility data sources, Table 6 carries out this exercise for the long-run

analyses. We again use vital statistics data from the HFD as our main source for developed countries,

but for alternative fertility data, we draw on age-specific fertility rates from the UN instead of

total fertility rates from the WDI. Relative to the WDI, the UN data have the advantage of being

disaggregated into five-year age groups, but they are only available in five-year intervals, making them

appropriate only for studying longer-run change, not annual fluctuations. Because interpolation and

demographic modeling raise fewer problems for analyses of longer-run change, we anticipate that

the UN data will generate results broadly similar to those from the WFS/DHS. However, while this

similarity is likely to hold for the total fertility rate, the results may diverge for specific age groups.

Some of the demographic modeling techniques employed by the UN (e.g., the Gompertz relational

hazard model) are known to perform poorly at the extremes of the reproductive lifespan, where they

tend to impose a rate and direction of fertility change similar to those occurring at prime childbearing

ages. For all of these datasets, we compute average annual rates of change in log GDP per adult and

                                                    26
the age-specific fertility rate using the methods described in Section 4.2. We then regress average

growth on average fertility change for each age group.

    In another stark departure from the short-run results, Table 6 reveals the long-run patterns are

quite different for developing and developed countries. Despite using the birth rate instead of the

conception rate, the long-run coefficients for the WFS/DHS dataset are similar in magnitude and

sign to the main results in Table 2: negative at prime childbearing ages and positive toward the end

of the reproductive lifespan, with a significantly negative implied coefficient for the total fertility rate.

The HFD data show no such pattern. One age-group-specific coefficient is significantly negative, but

the others are either close to zero or positive, and the implied coefficient for the total fertility rate is

small and insignificant. Faster long-run growth does not appear to be associated with more fertility

decline in high-income, low-fertility populations, suggesting that the fertility-reducing substitution

effects of long-run growth are stronger during the development process.

    Also in contrast to the short-run results, the standard cross-national database produces results

that are not wildly incorrect. For developing countries, the implied total fertility rate coefficient

is significantly negative; for developed countries, it is small and insignificant. However, consistent

with bias from demographic modeling, the UN data perform poorly at the end of the reproductive

lifespan. For developing countries, the 40-44 age group has a negative coefficient, perhaps because

model assumptions forced fertility to trend similarly at younger and older ages. If we had used

standard cross-national data instead of survey data in our main analysis, we still would have missed

an important nuance in the relationship between growth and fertility change in the long run.



5    Analysis of Cohort Fertility

The period fertility analysis clarified the distinctions between short- and long-run relationships at the

population level, but shed light on fertility behavior over the lifecycles of individual women. If women

fully offset the short-run effects before the end of childbearing, then the observed procyclicality

will not affect lifetime fertility; growth fluctuations will alter the tempo but not the quantum of

fertility. As noted in the theoretical framework, full offset is more likely for fluctuations early in

the reproductive lifecycle; women approaching menopause may not have time to make up for lost

childbearing opportunities. To investigate these issues, this section changes the unit of analysis from


                                                     27
the country-year-age cell to the country-cohort cell, defined as all women born in the same year in

the same country. It then relates a cohort’s completed fertility rate with its experience of economic

growth over the reproductive lifecycle.


5.1    Methods

We regress the cohort’s completed fertility rate on average economic conditions experienced in each

age interval A from [15, 19) to [40, 44), adjusting for the cohort’s average age when surveyed acj , a

country fixed effect λc , and a cohort fixed effect δj :

                                           X
                                CF Rcj =       β AgA
                                                   cj + θacj + λc + δj + εcj                          (9)
                                           A


where g A
        cj is the average annual change in log GDP per adult over age interval A, measured in log

points. Together, the β A coefficients capture how completed fertility responds to within-country,

within-cohort differences in economic growth experienced over the lifecycle.

   The country fixed effect λc absorbs cross-country variation in long-run economic growth, so that

the β A coefficients reflect the persistent influence of the short-run fluctuations. Importantly, however,

the underlying variation is not exactly the same as that in the short-run period analysis. On the

one hand, five year growth may be more similar to long-run growth; on the other, it may reflect

deeper business cycle variation with greater liquidity effects. Nevertheless, aggregated into five year

age intervals in this way, the model delivers more precise and concise estimates.

   Without the country fixed effect, the β A coefficients reflect cross-country variation as well. The

Galor and Weil (2000) assumptions on the human capital production function predict that faster

growing countries will have a lower level of fertility, so we also run equation (9) without λc . However,

we acknowledge that cross-country variation in the level fertility raises many concerns about omitted

variables, so we place less emphasis on this shortened regression specification.


5.2    Results

Table 7 reports how a cohort’s completed fertility rate relates to its experience of economic growth

over the reproductive lifecycle. The first three columns use our primary measure of completed fertility,

the number of children ever born per 1000 women. Columns (1) omits the country fixed effect from

                                                     28
equation (9) and finds that economic growth is negatively associated with the completed fertility

rate across the age distribution. This result is consistent with the Galor and Weil (2000) prediction

regarding the long-run growth rate and the level of fertility.

    When we include the country fixed effect in columns (2) and (3) to isolate the effects of fluctuations

around the long-run growth rate, the estimated coefficients change dramatically. Up to age 30,

fluctuations have no relation with lifetime fertility, consistent with full offset of short-run responses.

Offset opportunities appear to diminish thereafter, with the results indicating permanent effects

of fluctuations in the 30s. Considering the theoretical prediction that parents will make smaller

adjustments to fertility when those adjustments are more likely to be permanent, this age pattern

lines up well with the rapid decline of the short-run coefficients after the late 20s. Net of the long-run

growth rate, a 1 log point increase in the average annual growth rate experienced during 30-34 or

35-39 raises completed fertility by roughly 40 children per 1000 women. The estimated coefficients

shrink slightly but remain statistically significant when we control for cohort characteristics like

average education and share urban (column [3]) or only count children who survived until the survey

date (column [4]).

    Puzzlingly, however, any of these magnitudes far exceed effects that the short-run effects would

imply if they were permanent. This accumulating effect appears inconsistent with the dissipation

of the short-run effects in Figure 3. Research on the US has found similar patterns of short-run

effects accumulating over the lifecycle (Currie and Schwandt 2014), although the key margin in that

context is childlessness, which does not play an important role here.36 Three points may help explain

this puzzle. First, in the short-run model with lags, 30-34 is the age group with the weakest offset

pattern. Second, fertility may respond non-linearly to a sustained and deep recession, which may be

better reflected in a five-year average than a single-year growth measure. Third, the 95% confidence

intervals for the short-run effects (with our without offset) and the completed fertility effects contain

values consistent with each other.

    An alternative approach to estimating the fertility impact of economic conditions over the lifecycle

would use the level of GDP per adult, rather than its growth rate, in equation (9). In this approach,

the country and cohort fixed effects absorb cross-country and cross-cohort variation in the level of

development and the level of fertility, but they fail to address trends in both variables. As such,
  36
     Childlessness rates are low in sample cohorts, averaging 4 percent, and are unrelated to within-country variation
in cohort experiences of economic growth.
                                                         29
if we used the level of GDP per adult, the β A coefficients would reflect the net influence of the

short- and long-run associations, making them difficult to interpret. Nevertheless, for completeness,

we present levels-on-levels regressions in the final two columns of Table 7. For comparability, we

use the 5-year average of 100 times the logarithm of GDP per adult as our covariate; to match

the first two columns of the table, column (5) omits the country fixed effects, while column (6)

includes them. Unsurprisingly, the results are mixed. The specification without country fixed effects

leads to both positive and negative significant coefficients, which has no coherent explanation. With

country fixed effects, the coefficients are either close to (and not significantly different from) zero

or significantly negative. Across cohorts within a country, a higher level of resources per capita in

the prime childbearing ages is associated with lower completed fertility; long-run trends dominate

short-run effects in the level-on-level estimations.



Conclusion

Conflicting evidence on the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and fertility has ham-

pered the understanding of demographic change during the process of economic development. This

paper contributes three main empirical results that illuminate this relationship over different time

horizons in contemporary developing countries. First, conception rates are procyclical in the short

run, falling during recessions. Second, prime-age conception rates decline with long-run economic

growth, while older-age conception rates rise with it. Third, across birth cohorts within a country,

higher economic growth late in the reproductive lifecycle predicts higher completed fertility. These

results are broadly consistent with an extension of long-run growth models with endogenous fertility

to include a lifecycle with liquidity constraints.

   The short-run procyclicality is consistent with evidence on fertility responses to economic fluctu-

ations both in historical, pre-industrial populations and in contemporary, industrialized populations

(Lee 1997; Sobotka, Skirbekk, and Philipov 2011). Distributed lag models and cohort analyses sug-

gest that economic fluctuations affect both the tempo (timing) and quantum (lifetime cumulation)

of fertility (Bongaarts and Feeney 1998). The weight of the evidence suggests a role for liquidity

constraints, but beyond this implication, the mechanism behind procyclicality in the short run is

not clear. One possibility involves couples taking intentional steps to reduce conception risk during


                                                     30
recessions, by using modern contraception or traditional birth control strategies like withdrawal,

the rhythm method, or abstinence. Because we only measure conceptions that resulted in live birth,

abortion may play a role. But other mechanisms beyond conscious choice may also be at work. Stress

may decrease coital frequency among cohabiting couples, and migration for labor market opportu-

nities may temporarily split couples (Timaeus and Graham 1989). Crisis-related malnutrition may

also reduce fecundity (Bongaarts 1980). How to distinguish these possibilities is a fruitful direction

for future research. Another promising direction concerns the reason for the apparent absence of

procyclicality in South and Southeast Asia.37

       The short-run patterns stand in stark contrast to the relationship between long-run trends in

income per head and fertility, which is negative on average but heterogeneous across age groups. The

main takeaway is that some force that accompanies long-run economic growth leads to faster declines

in childbearing, as reflected in the negative long-run coefficient for the total conception rate, and also

to delays in childbearing, as reflected in the positive long-run coefficient for conceptions among 40-44

years olds. Evidence suggests that this force is related to rising secondary school enrollment, but not

declining child mortality, rising adult female education or labor force participation, structural trans-

formation, or democratization. Theories positing that long-run economic growth raises the return

to human capital investment (Galor and Weil 2000)—either in children, explaining fertility decline,

or in women as adults (including on-the-job training), explaining fertility delay—may therefore go a

long way in explaining the long-run results.38

       While our results help clarify divergent results on the relationship between aggregate income

growth and fertility change, they raise interesting questions about mechanisms and about how fer-

tility’s relation to economic growth varies with the underlying source of that growth. They also

highlight the importance of careful measurement, showing how one can use large amounts of retro-

spective survey data to improve on standard cross-national datasets.


  37
     This result is especially puzzling because analyses of India and Indonesia find within-country patterns that are
similar to our main findings: procyclicality in fertility or contraceptive use (McKelvey, Thomas, and Frankenberg 2012;
Bhalotra and Rocha 2016) amidst a negative association between growth and fertility change in the long run (Gertler
and Molyneaux 1994; Foster and Rosenzweig 2006) .
  38
     Reversals in intergenerational wealth flows (Caldwell 1982), individualization or secularization (Lesthaeghe 1983)
may also play a role, although some of these processes are consistent with rising child investment returns.




                                                          31
References
Adsera, Alicia and Alicia Menendez. 2011. “Fertility Changes in Latin America in Periods of Eco-
 nomic Uncertainty.” Population Studies 65 (1):37–56.

Alam, Shamma Adeeb and Claus C Pörtner. 2016. “Income Shocks, Contraceptive Use, and Timing
  of Fertility.” Working paper.

Almond, Douglas and Lena Edlund. 2007. “Trivers–Willard at Birth and One year: Evidence from
  US Natality Data 1983–2001.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences
  274 (1624):2491–2496.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, Michael Joffe, and Marten Palme. 2016. “An Adaptive Significance
  of Morning Sickness? Trivers–Willard and Hyperemesis Gravidarum.” Economics and Human
  Biology 21 (2):167–171.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor. 2011. “Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch.”
  American Economic Review 101 (5):2003–2041.

Ashraf, Quamrul H., David N. Weil, and Joshua Wilde. 2013. “The Effect of Fertility Reduction on
  Economic Growth.” Population and Development Review 39 (1):97–130.

Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman, and Norbert Schady. 2011. “Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant
  Mortality in the Developing World.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3):847–856.

Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker. 1989. “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth.”
  Econometrica 57 (2):481–501.

Becker, Gary S. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and Economic Change in
  Developed Countries, edited by Ansley Coale. New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 209–240.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.”
  Journal of Political Economy 75 (4):352–365.

Bhalotra, Sonia and Rudi Rocha. 2016. “The Timing of Fertility in Response to Income Shocks.”
  Working paper.

Blackburn, McKinley L., David E. Bloom, and David Neumark. 1993. “Fertility Timing, Wages, and
  Human Capital.” Journal of Population Economics 6 (1):1–30.

Bongaarts, John. 1980. “Does Malnutrition affect Fecundity? A Summary of Evidence.” Science
  208 (4444):564–569.

Bongaarts, John and Griffith Feeney. 1998. “On the Quantum and Tempo of Fertility.” Population
  and Development Review 24 (2):271–291.

Bongaarts, John and Robert E. Potter. 1983. Fertility, biology, and behavior: An analysis of the
  proximate determinants. New York: Academic Press.

Bongaarts, John and Susan Cotts Watkins. 1996. “Social Interactions and Contemporary Fertility
  Transitions.” Population and Development Review :639–682.

Brueckner, Markus and Hannes Schwandt. 2015. “Income and Population Growth.” Economic
  Journal 125 (589):1653–1676.
                                              32
Caldwell, John C. 1982. Theory of Fertility Decline. New York: Academic Press.

Casterline, John B. and Colin Odden. 2016. “Trends in Inter-Birth Intervals in Developing Countries
  1965–2014.” Population and Development Review 42 (2):173–194.

Cervellati, Matteo and Uwe Sunde. 2015. “The Economic and Demographic Transition, Mortality,
  and Comparative Development.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (3):189–225.

Coale, Ansley J. and Edgar M. Hoover. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Development.
  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. 2014. “Short-and Long-term Effects of Unemployment on
 Fertility.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (41):14734–14739.

Cutler, David M., Wei Huang, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2016. “Economic Conditions and Mor-
 tality: Evidence from 200 Years of Data.” Working Paper 22690, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

De La Croix, David and Matthias Doepke. 2003. “Inequality and Growth: Why Differential Fertility
  Matters.” American Economic Review 93 (4):1091–1113.

Deaton, Angus. 2007. “Global Patterns of income and Health: Facts, interpretations, and Policies.”
  UN WIDER Annual Lecture 10 .

Dettling, Lisa J and Melissa S Kearney. 2014. “House Prices and Birth Rates: The Impact of the
  Real Estate Market on the Decision to Have a Baby.” Journal of Public Economics 110:82–100.

Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay D. Maoz. 2015. “The Baby Boom and World War II:
 A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies (82):1031–1073.

Dyson, Tim. 2013. “On Demographic and Democratic Transitions.” Population and Development
 Review 38 (s1):83–102.

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2015. “The Next Generation of the
  Penn World Table.” American Economic Review 105 (10):3150–3182.

Foster, Andrew D. 1993. “The Effects of Economic Fluctuations on Human Capital, Marriage and
  Fertility in Sub-Saharn Africa.” Working paper.

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2006. “Does Economic Growth Reduce Fertility? Rural
  India 1971-1999.” India Policy Forum 3 (1):179–208.

Galloway, Patrick R. 1988. “Basic Patterns in Annual Variations in Fertility, Nuptiality, Mortality,
 and Prices in Pre-Industrial Europe.” Population Studies 42 (2):275–303.

Galor, Oded. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton University Press.

Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth.” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics 117 (4):1133–1191.

Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.” American Economic
 Review 86 (3):374–387.

———. 2000. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation to the Demo-
 graphic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review 90 (4):806–828.
                                            33
Gertler, Paul J and John W Molyneaux. 1994. “How Economic Development and Family Planning
 Programs Combined to Reduce Indonesian Fertility.” Demography 31 (1):33–63.

Goldin, Claudia. 1995. “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development and
 Economic History.” In Investment in Women’s Human Capital and Economic Development, edited
 by T. P. Schultz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 61–90.

Hajnal, John. 1965. “European Marriage Patterns in Perspective.” In Population in History: Essays
 in Historical Demography, edited by D.V. Glass and D.E.C. Eversley. London: Edward Arnold,
 pp. 101–143.

Hazan, Moshe and Binyamin Berdugo. 2002. “Child Labour, Fertility, and Economic Growth.”
 Economic Journal 112 (482):810–828.

Heckman, James J. and James R. Walker. 1990. “The Relationship Between Wages and Income
  and the Timing and Spacing of Births: Evidence from Swedish Longitudinal Data.” Econometrica
  58 (6):1411–1441.

Hotz, V. Joseph, Jacob Alex Klerman, and Robert J. Willis. 1997. “The Economics of Fertility in
 Developed Countries.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. 1, edited by Mark R.
 Rosenzweig and Oded Stark. Elsevier, pp. 349–430.

Iskhakov, Fedor, Thomas Jørgensen, John Rust, and Bertel Schjerning. 2015. “Estimating Discrete-
  Continuous Choice Models: The Endogenous Grid Method with Taste Shocks.” Working paper,
  University of Copenhagen.

Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian. 2013. “Is Newer
  Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates.” Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics 60 (2):255–274.

Jones, Larry E. and Alice Schoonbroodt. 2016. “Baby Busts and Baby Booms: The Fertility Response
  to Shocks in Dynastic Models.” Review of Economic Dynamics 22:157–178.

Jones, Larry E., Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michèle Tertilt. 2010. “Fertility Theories: Can They
  Explain the Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?” In Demography and the Economy, edited by
  John B. Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 43–100.

Lee, Ronald D. 1997. “Population Dynamics: Equilibrium, Disequilibrium, and Consequences of
  Fluctuations.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, edited by Mark R. Rosensweig
  and Oded Stark. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1063–1115.

Lesthaeghe, Ron. 1983. “A Century of Demographic and Cultural Change in Western Europe: An
  Exploration of Underlying Dimensions.” Population and Development Review :411–435.

Lindstrom, David P. and Betemariam Berhanu. 1999. “The Impact of War, Famine, and Economic
  Decline on Marital Fertility in Ethiopia.” Demography 36 (2):247–261.

Lovenheim, Michael F. and Kevin J. Mumford. 2013. “Do Family Wealth Shocks Affect Fertility
  Choices? Evidence from the Housing Market.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2):464–475.

Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. J. Johnson.

McKelvey, Christopher, Duncan Thomas, and Elizabeth Frankenberg. 2012. “Fertility Regulation in
 an Economic Crisis.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 61 (1):7–38.
                                            34
Miller, Grant and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. 2016. “Family Planning Program Effects: Evidence from
 Microdata.” Population and Development Review 42 (1):7–26.
Myrskylä, Mikko, Hans-Peter Kohler, and Francesco C. Billari. 2009. “Advances in Development
 Reverse Fertility Declines.” Nature 460 (7256):741–743.
National Research Council. 1993. Demographic Effects of Economic Reversals in Sub-Saharan Africa.
 Washington: National Academies.
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps. 1966. “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion,
  and Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 56 (2):69–82.
Olivetti, Claudia. 2014. “The Female Labor Force and Long-Run Development: The American
  Experience in Comparative Perspective.” In Human Capital in History: The American Record,
  edited by Leah Platt Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press, pp. 161–197.
Schaller, Jessamyn. 2016. “Booms, Busts, and Fertility Testing the Becker Model Using Gender-
  Specific Labor Demand.” Journal of Human Resources 51 (1):1–29.
Schoumaker, Bruno. 2014. Quality and Consistency of DHS Fertility Estimates, 1990-2012. Rockville,
  Maryland: ICF International.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1985. “Changing World Prices, Women’s Wages, and the Fertility Transition:
  Sweden, 1860-1910.” Journal of Political Economy 93 (6):1126–1154.
———. 1997. “Demand for Children in Low Income Countries.” In Handbook of Population and
 Family Economics, vol. 1, edited by Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark. Elsevier, pp. 275–347.
Sobotka, Tomáš, Vegard Skirbekk, and Dimiter Philipov. 2011. “Economic Recession and Fertility
  in the Developed World.” Population and Development Review 37 (2):267–306.
Sommer, Kamila. 2016. “Fertility Choice in a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Uninsurable
  Earnings Risk.” Journal of Monetary Economics 83:27–38.
Tapinos, Georges Photios, Andrew Mason, and Jorge Bravo. 1997. Demographic Responses to Eco-
  nomic Adjustment in Latin America. Oxford University Press.
Timaeus, Ian and Wendy Graham. 1989. “Labor Circulation, Marriage, and Fertility in Southern
  Africa.” In Reproduction and Social Organization in Sub-Saharan Africa, edited by Ron Lesthaeghe.
  Berkeley: University of California Press.
Trivers, Robert L. and Dan E. Willard. 1973. “Natural Selection of Parental Ability to Vary the Sex
  Ratio of Offspring.” Science 179 (4068):90–92.
United Nations. 2015. World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Methodology of the United
 Nations Population Estimates and Projections. New York: UN.
Ward, Michael P and William P Butz. 1980. “Completed Fertility and its Timing.” Journal of
 Political Economy 88 (5):917–940.
World Bank. 2015. “Country Classification: A Short History.” http://go.worldbank.org/
 U9BK7IA1J0.
Wrigley, Edward A. 1981. Marriage, Fertility, And Population Growth In Eighteenth-Century Eng-
 land. New York: St. Martins Press.
                                               35
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                Period analysis                  Cohort
                                        Full sample      20-year sample          analysis
                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)
Fertility rates (per 1000)                                        	  
 Age-specific conception rate             191 (95)           199 (91)
 Completed fertility rate, ever-born                                           5951 (1284)
 Completed fertility rate, surviving                                            4862 (870)
Macroeconomic conditions
 Country GDPpa, PPP                     4711 (4218)         4476 (4087)        4229 (3292)
 Change in log GDPpa, log pts.           1.0 (6.1)           1.0 (5.8)          0.7 (1.6)
Cell characteristics
 Average years of education               4.6 (5.7)          4.0 (2.9)           3.6 (2.4)
 Percent urban at survey                   40 (21)            38 (22)             37 (22)

 Number of women                          2,374,019          2,279,955              242,886
 Number of cells                           67,050              58,988                  935
 Number of countries                          76                 65                     62
Notes: Period sample consists of country-year-age cells; cohort sample consists of country-
cohort cells. “Conception rate” only includes conceptions that resulted in live birth.
“GDPpa” is gross domestic product per adult age 15-64. For the cohort sample,
macroeconomic conditions are first averaged over each cohort’s reproductive lifecycle and
then summarized across cohorts.




                                             36
    Table 2: Economic Growth and Conception Rates in the Short- and Long-Run
               Mean of conception          Short run regressions         Long run regressions
                rate per 1000 in…
               Levels      Changes           Basic     Extended            Basic      Extended
                 (1)         (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
Ages 15-19       164         -1.2            0.10          0.12            -0.08         -0.06
                                            [0.07]       [0.07]*          [0.07]        [0.08]
Ages 20-24       261         -1.9            0.30          0.33            -0.27         -0.27
                                          [0.09]***    [0.09]***         [0.13]**      [0.13]**
Ages 25-29       253         -2.4            0.56          0.59            -0.43         -0.46
                                          [0.14]***    [0.14]***        [0.11]***     [0.11]***
Ages 30-34       209         -2.4            0.33          0.35            -0.43         -0.46
                                           [0.16]**     [0.15]**        [0.14]***     [0.11]***
Ages 35-39       144         -2.6            0.22          0.21            -0.15         -0.07
                                            [0.19]        [0.19]          [0.14]        [0.09]
Ages 40-44       65          -2.9            0.23          0.22            0.14          0.16
                                            [0.20]        [0.20]        [0.05]***     [0.05]***

TCR             5483          -67            8.77         9.07            -6.14         -5.77
                                          [2.50]***    [2.58]***        [2.29]***     [1.80]***

# cells          58,994      56,926         56,926        56,926           1,595          1,595
Notes: Columns (1)-(4) use country-year-age cells; columns (5)-(6) use country-age cells.
Columns (3)-(4) regress the annual change in the age-specific conception rate on the annual
change in 100 × log GDP per adult, controlling for country, year, and single-year age
effects; columns (5)-(6) regress the average annual rate of change in the age-specific
conception rate on average annual rate of economic growth, controlling for single-year age
effects. “Extended” models also control for the initial level of GDP per adult (PPP) and
population density; and the change or trend in female education, urbanization, infant
mortality, and conflict. Column (4) also an indicator for missing mortality information (3%
of all cells). “Conception rate” only includes conceptions that resulted in live birth; “TCR”
refers to the total conception rate per 1000; estimates equal 5 times the sum of age-group-
specific estimates. Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. * p < 0.1, ** p <
0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                               37
                    Table 3: Cyclicality in the Composition of Births
                                                 Average characteristics of…
                                                    Mothers                          Children
                Concep.        Age        Education       % urban         % ever     % male
                 rate                                                      mar.
                   (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)             (5)     (6)
Δ log GDPpa        0.24       -0.0001      -0.0022            -0.014      -0.009      0.012
  × 100         [0.07]***     [0.001]    [0.0009]***          [0.013]     [0.014]    [0.016]

Outcome mean      201           23           3.5                35          92         51
Outcome SD        (52)          (3)         (2.5)              (19)        (10)        (3)

# cells           2831         2831          2831              2831        2831       2831
Notes: Regressions of annual changes in average characteristics on annual changes in 100 ×
log GDP per adult, controlling for country and year fixed effects, as well as changes in age
composition, average years of education, percent urban, and percent married among all
women in each cell. “Conception rate” only includes conceptions that resulted in live birth.
Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                            38
             Table 4: Comparison of Procyclicality Results with Other Datasets
                          Country-years in the WFS/DHS                     Country-years in the HFD
                          Mean 2005 GDPpa, PPP = 5,239                   Mean 2005 GDPpa, PPP = 46,993
                            Mean GDPpa growth = 0.91                       Mean GDPpa growth = 2.41
                                WFS/DHS                  WDI                      HFD                   WDI
                      Mean rate       Regression      Regression      Mean rate      Regression      Regression
                        (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
Ages 15-19               138             0.163                            28            0.173
                                       [0.078]**                                     [0.062]***
Ages 20-24               258             0.145                           103            0.397
                                        [0.097]                                      [0.135]***
Ages 25-29               261             0.475                           126            0.179
                                      [0.108]***                                      [0.086]**
Ages 30-34               224             0.340                            83            0.189
                                      [0.107]***                                     [0.066]***
Ages 35-39               161             0.358                            35            0.141
                                       [0.151]**                                     [0.029]***
Ages 40-44                80             0.155                             8            0.030
                                        [0.277]                                      [0.008]***

Total fertility          5601            8.19             0.28           1920              5.55          6.44
 rate per 1000                        [2.63]***          [0.23]                         [1.14]***     [1.31]***

Num. of cells           57,126          55,479           2,460          23,310           23,130         760
Notes: “WFS” = World Fertility Survey; “DHS” = Demographic and Health Survey; “HFD” = Human
Fertility Database; “WDI” = World Development Indicators. Coefficients from regressions of annual changes in
the age-specific fertility rate on the weighted average of current and lagged annual changes in 100 × log GDP
per adult, with weight 0.25 on the current change and weight 0.75 on the lagged change. In the WFS/DHS
and HDI, unit of observation is a country-year-age cell, and the dependent variable is the age-specific birth
rate; analyses are run by 5-year age group and include country, year, and age fixed effects. Total fertility rate
estimates equal 5 times the sum of age-group-specific estimates. In the WDI, unit of observation is a country-
year cell, and the dependent variable is the total fertility rate; analyses are adjusted for country and year
indicators. Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. Sample includes all WFS/DHS and HFD cells
that can be matched with macroeconomic data from the Penn World Table and total fertility rate data from
the WDI, excluding cells with < 30 obs and from country-age combinations spanning < 20 yrs. WFS/DHS
countries are listed in Table A1; HFD countries include Austria, Belarus, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom, and the United States. We omit
Japanese data for 1966, when birth rates dropped 25% due to superstition surrounding the year of the fire
horse. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                       39
                            Table 5: Alternative Long-Run Covariates
               Secondary school       Sectoral composition        Female lab. force           Sample with
             gross enrollment rate       of value added             participation           POLITY IV Score
                (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)           (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
Ages 15-19      -0.06    -0.02           -0.11    -0.11            -0.06       -0.05         -0.14    -0.09
               [0.10]    [0.11]          [0.10]   [0.09]          [0.08]      [0.10]        [0.07]*   [0.07]
Ages 20-24      -0.43    -0.36           -0.27    -0.27            -0.33       -0.37         -0.38    -0.38
              [0.16]** [0.17]**         [0.14]*  [0.15]*         [0.13]**    [0.17]**     [0.11]*** [0.11]***
Ages 25-29      -0.42    -0.33           -0.42    -0.44            -0.46       -0.52         -0.48    -0.49
             [0.14]***   [0.17]       [0.15]*** [0.15]***       [0.12]***   [0.13]***     [0.11]*** [0.13]***
Ages 30-34      -0.29    -0.12           -0.42    -0.45            -0.35       -0.42         -0.42    -0.41
              [0.14]**   [0.15]        [0.17]** [0.17]***        [0.15]**    [0.20]**     [0.14]*** [0.16]***
Ages 35-39      -0.08     0.06           -0.39    -0.41            -0.08       -0.05         -0.12    -0.08
               [0.15]    [0.16]        [0.16]** [0.16]***         [0.15]      [0.19]         [0.13]   [0.13]
Ages 40-44       0.20     0.28            0.07     0.05             0.14        0.17          0.14     0.14
             [0.07]*** [0.07]***         [0.08]   [0.09]         [0.06]**    [0.08]**      [0.05]** [0.05]**

TCR            -5.35      -2.42         -7.74     -8.12            -5.69      -6.16         -7.00     -6.57
              [2.92]*     [3.09]      [3.00]*** [2.96]***        [2.50]**    [3.16]*      [2.16]*** [2.30]***

Covariate?                 ✓                         ✓                          ✓                        ✓
# cells        1297       1297           1424       1424          1261        1261           1532       1532
Notes: Regressions the average annual rate of change in the age-specific conception rate on the average annual
rate of economic growth, as reported in columns (5)-(6) of Table 2. Each pair of columns restricts to the
subsample with non-missing information on the average annual rate of change in the specified covariate. The
even-numbered columns report models that include an age-specific coefficient on the average annual rate of
change in the covariate. “TCR” refers to the total conception rate per 1000; estimates equal 5 times the sum
of age-group-specific estimates. Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01




                                                      40
                 Table 6: Comparison of Long-Run Results with Other Datasets
                                      Country-ages in the WFS/DHS              Country-ages in the HFD
                                        WFS/DHS                UN                HFD                 UN
                                            (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)
 Ages 15-19                                -0.116             -0.008              0.191               0.36
                                          [0.069]             [0.090]           [0.160]           [0.152]**
 Ages 20-24                                -0.286             -0.354             -0.181              0.511
                                         [0.126]**          [0.109]***          [0.482]            [0.263]*
 Ages 25-29                                -0.476             -0.562             -0.673             -0.184
                                        [0.116]***          [0.148]***         [0.314]**            [0.247]
 Ages 30-34                                -0.423             -0.529             -0.073             -0.329
                                        [0.132]***          [0.158]***          [0.177]             [0.234]
 Ages 35-39                                -0.220             -0.332             -0.030             -0.275
                                          [0.142]           [0.107]***          [0.176]             [0.228]
 Ages 40-44                                 0.152             -0.076             -0.024             -0.130
                                         [0.069]**            [0.066]           [0.083]             [0.121]

 Total fertility                           -6.84              -9.30              -3.95              -2.33
  rate per 1000                          [2.27]***          [2.52]***            [3.58]             [3.35]

 Num. of cells                             1601                317                510                96
Notes: “WFS” = World Fertility Survey; “DHS” = Demographic and Health Survey; “HFD” = Human
Fertility Database; “UN” = United Nations World Population Prospects, 2015 Revision. Coefficients from
regressions of the average annual rate of change in the conception rate on the average annual rate of economic
growth. The unit of observation is a country-age cell, and the dependent variable is the average annual rate of
change in age-specific birth rate. Total fertility rate estimates equal 5 times the sum of age-group-specific
estimates. Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. WFS/DHS countries are listed in Table A1;
HFD countries include Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, United Kingdom, and the United States. We
omit Japanese data for 1966, when birth rates dropped 25% due to superstition surrounding the year of the fire
horse. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                      41
    Table 7: Economic Growth and Completed Fertility Across Cohorts Aged 45+
                                Economic conditions measured as average…
                       Annual change in 100 × log GDPpa          100 × log GDPpa, PPP
                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)
Avg. economic conditions during ages…
 15-19               -55           -7         -15         -5              2.9       -0.9
                  [18]***         [13]       [10]        [12]           [3.9]      [2.3]
 20-24               -46           -3         -15          2              2.9       0.9
                   [21]**         [14]       [12]        [14]           [4.3]      [2.8]
 25-29               -66           10           1          7             -2.5       -3.6
                  [17]***         [16]       [15]        [16]           [3.4]     [1.6]**
 30-34               -42           38          26         29             -7.4       -4.2
                  [14]***       [14]**      [12]**      [12]**         [3.8]*     [1.7]**
 35-39               -46           43          35         36              6.8       1.9
                  [20]***        [13]*     [12]***     [12]***         [3.7]*      [1.6]
 40-44               -46           25          34         18            -11.4       -1.0
                    [29]          [17]      [12]**       [15]         [3.3]***     [1.4]
Cohort avg. ed.                              -226
                                           [54]***
Cohort % urban                               -4.7
                                             [5.3]

Cohort FE             ✓           ✓           ✓           ✓              ✓           ✓
Country FE                        ✓           ✓           ✓                          ✓
Fertility measure Ever-born   Ever-born   Ever-born   Surviving      Ever-born   Ever-born

Num. cells           935          935        935          935           935         935
Notes: Dependent variable is the number of children per 1000 women. All regressions control
for the average age (45-49) of the cohort when surveyed. Brackets contain SEs clustered by
country. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                            42
   Figure 1: Economic Growth and Fertility Change over Varying Time Horizons

                                                    25-29
                                .4
                 First-difference coefficient




                                                                                     40-44
                       0              .2




                                                    30-34                          35-39
                                                                      20-24            15-19
                                -.2




                                                0           10                20             30
                                                            Length of difference


Notes: For each 5-year age group, the figure plots coefficients from regressions of the
change in the conception rate from year t – Δ to year t on the change in 100 × log GDP
per adult over the same period, controlling for single-year age indicators. Separate
regressions were run for each integer value of Δ from 1 to 30.




                                                                    43
                                                               Figure 2: Non-Linear Short-Run Estimates

                                                                          A. Age-specific conception rates




                    Change in age-specific conception rate
                                                               8




                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                 35-39

                                                                                                         20-24

                                                               4




                                                                                                                               4
                                                                      15-19
                                                               0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                               -4




                                                                                                                               -4
                                                                                                                 40-44
                                                               -8




                                                                                                                               -8
                                                                                        30-34
                                                               -12




                                                                                                                               -12
                                                                      25-29
                                                               -16




                                                                                                                               -16
                                                                           < -10   [-10,-5)   [-5,0)   [0,5)   [5-10)   ≥ 10


                                                                              B. Total conception rate
                                                               200
                    Change in total conception rate per 1000
                                                               100
                                                               0
                                                               -100
                                                               -200




                                                                                                                                     % of all cells
                                                                                                                               50
                                                               -300




                                                                                                                               25
                                                               -400




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                           < -10   [-10,-5)   [-5,0)   [0,5)   [5-10)   ≥ 10
                                                                      Change in log GDP per adult (log points)


Notes: Panel A shows coefficients for each age group from regressions of annual changes in
the age-specific conception rate on binned annual economic growth, controlling for country,
year, and age fixed effects. Panel B shows implied estimates and CIs for the total conception
rate per 1000 women, obtained by summing the age-group-specific estimates and multiplying
by 5. Omitted category is [0,5). Major caps are 95% CIs; minor caps are 90% CIs. CIs
clustered by country.



                                                                                              44
                                                                     Figure 3: Distributed Lag Models

                                                                           A. Age-specific conception rates
                                                                   25-29




                                                          .5
                   Partial effect of growth fluctuation
                                                          .25      15-19
                                                                                                                40-44
                                                                                      30-34
                                                                                                                20-24
                                                          0




                                                                                                                35-39
                                                          -.25
                                                          -.5




                                                                           0          1        2    3       4



                                                                                 B. Total conception rate
                                                             15
                                Effect of growth deviation




                                                                               Cumulative effect
                                                             10
                                                             5
                                                             0




                                                                     Partial effect
                                                             -5
                                                             -10




                                                                           0           1       2    3       4
                                                                       Lag (years since growth fluctuation)


Notes: Panel A shows coefficients for each age group from regressions of annual changes in
the age-specific conception rate on current and lagged annual changes in 100 × log GDP
per adult, controlling for country, year, and age fixed effects. Panel B shows implied
estimates and CIs for the total conception rate per 1000 women. Partial effects equal 5
times the sum of age-group-specific estimates; cumulative effects are the running sum of
partial effects. Major caps are 95% CIs; minor caps are 90% CIs. CIs clustered by country.


                                                                                              45
                                                                    Figure 4: Non-Linear Long-Run Estimates

                                                                             A. Age-specific conception rates




                                                             0




                                                                                                                            1
                  Avg. ann. rate of change in ASCR
                                                                                                       40-44

                                                             -1
                                                                                 15-19
                                                             -2


                                                                                         20-24




                                                                                                                            .5
                                                                           35-39
                                                             -3




                                                                                                                25-29
                                                             -4




                                                                                                        30-34




                                                                                                                            0
                                                                      -3    -2     -1    0    1    2      3     4       5


                                                                                   B. Total conception rate
                  Avg. ann. rate of change in TCR per 1000
                                                             -40
                                                             -60
                                                             -80
                                                             -100




                                                                                                                                      Density
                                                                                                                            0 .1 .2
                                                             -120




                                                                      -3    -2     -1    0    1    2      3     4       5
                                                                     Avg. ann. rate of change in log GDP per adult

Notes: Panel A shows local linear regression estimates for each age group, bandwidth = 2.
The domain of each plot runs from the age group’s 5th to 95th percentile of the average
annual rate of change in log GDP per adult. Panel B shows implied regression function for
the total conception rate per 1000 women, obtained by summing the age-group-specific
estimates (for the domain in which they overlap) and multiplying by 5. CIs (dashed = 95%,
dotted = 90%) are block bootstrapped by country. At the bottom of Panel B is a kernel
density estimate for all country-age cells, bandwidth = 1.


                                                                                             46
                                       APPENDIX

                Table A1: Number of WFS/DHS Surveys per Country

Albania                      1   Ghana                   7   Pakistan                     4
Armenia                      3   Guatemala               2   Panama                       1
Azerbaijan                   1   Guinea                  3   Paraguay                     2
Bangladesh                   8   Honduras                2   Peru                         9
Benin                        5   India                   3   Philippines                  5
Bolivia                      5   Indonesia               8   Rwanda                       5
Brazil                       2   Jamaica                 1   Sao Tome and Principe        1
Burkina Faso                 4   Jordan                  5   Senegal                      8
Burundi                      2   Kazakhstan              2   Sierra Leone                 1
Cambodia                     4   Kenya                   7   South Africa                 1
Cameroon                     5   Korea, Rep.             1   Sri Lanka                    1
Central African Republic     1   Kyrgyz Republic         2   Swaziland                    1
Chad                         2   Lesotho                 4   Syria                        1
Colombia                     7   Liberia                 3   Tajikistan                   1
Comoros                      2   Madagascar              4   Tanzania                     5
Congo, Dem. Rep.             2   Malawi                  4   Thailand                     1
Congo, Rep.                  2   Maldives                1   Togo                         3
Costa Rica                   1   Mali                    3   Trinidad and Tobago          2
Cote d'Ivoire                4   Mauritania              1   Tunisia                      2
Dominican Republic           8   Mexico                  2   Turkey                       4
Ecuador                      2   Moldova                 1   Uganda                       5
Egypt                        8   Morocco                 4   Ukraine                      1
El Salvador                  1   Mozambique              3   Uzbekistan                   1
Ethiopia                     3   Namibia                 4   Venezuela                    1
Fiji                         1   Nepal                   5   Vietnam                      1
Gabon                        2   Niger                   4   Zambia                       5
Gambia                       1   Nigeria                 5   Zimbabwe                     5
List includes all 255 World Fertility Surveys and Demographic and Health Surveys that could
be matched with growth rates from the Penn World Table.




                                            47
                      Table A2: Extended Model Results from Table 2
Age group:                15-19      20-24               25-29        30-34       35-39       40-44
                           (1)        (2)                 (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
A. Short-run regression (Table 2, column 4)
Δ ln(GDPpa)                0.12       0.33                 0.59        0.35        0.21        0.22
 × 100                   [0.07]*   [0.19]***            [0.14]***    [0.16]**     [0.19]      [0.20]
Lagged ln(GDPpa)              1.33        0.55              0.93        1.40       -1.08       -0.37
 × 100, PPP                [0.65]**      [0.79]           [0.78]       [0.97]      [0.94]      [1.26]
Δ avg. yrs. ed.              -9.21       -9.51             -6.58       -4.33       -2.46       -2.57
                          [1.45]***    [1.81]***        [1.97]***    [2.09]**      [2.00]      [1.98]
Δ pct. urban                 -0.04        0.12              0.05       -0.16       -0.28       -0.22
                             [0.13]      [0.18]           [0.16]       [0.14]    [0.14]**      [0.17]
Δ conflict                   -1.49        2.22             -0.13       -1.22        1.85        3.00
                             [1.87]      [3.07]           [2.74]       [3.53]      [3.53]      [3.20]
Δ IMRt-1                      0.02        0.19              0.27       -0.04       -0.01        0.04
                             [0.03]    [0.05]***        [0.08]***      [0.08]      [0.09]      [0.09]
Lagged Pop                   0.001       0.005            -0.007      -0.004       0.001       0.018
 Density                    [0.005]     [0.007]          [0.004]*     [0.006]     [0.008]    [0.008]**

B. Long-run regression (Table 2, column 6)
Trend ln(GDPpa)          -0.06       -0.27                -0.46       -0.46       -0.07         0.16
  × 100                 [0.08]     [0.13]**             [0.11]***   [0.11]***     [0.09]     [0.05]***
Initial ln(GDPpa)        -0.43       -1.34                -1.38       -1.04       -0.23        -0.12
 × 100, PPP                [0.25]*     [0.28]***     [0.27]***       [0.35]***     [0.36]     [0.22]
Trend avg. yrs. ed.         -4.47         -5.46         -8.07          -10.36       -7.53      -6.57
                            [3.84]       [3.86]       [3.50]**        [4.77]**    [4.38]*    [2.73]**
Trend pct. urban            -0.05         -0.11          0.00            0.19        0.32      -0.14
                            [0.16]       [0.20]         [0.10]        [0.08]**   [0.07]***    [0.20]
Trend conflict               1.72          8.28         12.29           19.77       19.76       4.12
                           [12.34]      [11.08]        [12.34]         [20.21]    [20.22]     [8.13]
Trend IMR                   -0.07          0.00          0.10            0.05       -0.02      -0.02
                            [0.13]       [0.15]         [0.15]          [0.33]     [0.23]     [0.12]
Initial Pop                -0.005        -0.005        -0.007          -0.007      -0.004    -0.0009
  Density                [0.001]***    [0.002]**    [0.002]***      [0.002]***   [0.002]**   [0.0009]
Notes: Each panel represents a single regression; each column provides coefficients for a separate age
group. Panel A regresses the annual change in the age-specific conception rate on the covariates
shown, controlling for country, year, and single-year age effects. Panel B regresses the trend in the
age-specific conception rate on the covariates shown. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                   48
         Table A3: Can Marriage Explain the Procyclicality of Conceptions?
                                     Conception rate                          Marriage
                                           Pre-         Post-
                           Overall                                     Rate          Hazard
                                          marital       marital
                            (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)
Δ log GDPpa                 0.23           0.14          0.33         -0.05           -0.13
   × 100                 [0.07]***        [0.09]*      [0.16]**       [0.06]         (0.12)

Outcome level mean          201             97           270            52               195
Outcome level SD            (52)           (36)          (78)          (23)              (73)

Number of cells             2831           2830          2831          2831              2830
Notes: Regressions of the changes in outcomes on annual changes in 100 × log GDP per
adult, controlling for country and year fixed effects, as well as changes in the age
composition of each cell. All rates are per 1000. Columns (2) and (5) have smaller sample
sizes because 1 cell has no never-married women. Brackets contain standard errors clustered
by country. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                            49
       Table A4: Aggregate Heterogeneity in the Procyclicality of Conceptions
                                        Lagged    Female labor    Lagged Lagged share
                            Lagged
                                     contraceptive force share average years urban at
                          GDPpa, PPP
                                      prevalence     in 1990   of education   survey
                              (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
Coefficient below              8.46          8.58         9.95          8.83          8.80
 variable's median          [3.19]***     [3.32]***    [3.62]***     [3.42]***      [3.37]**
Coefficient above              9.68         10.22         8.33          9.24          7.86
 variable’s median          [2.65]***     [3.24]***    [3.15]***     [1.94]***     [1.78]***

p-value for difference        0.741        0.725         0.725         0.911         0.779

Number of cells                56,926        48,092        56,926       56,926       56,926
Notes: Total conception rate coefficients based on regressions of annual changes in the age-
specific conception rate on annual changes in 100 × log GDP per adult, controlling for
country, year, and age fixed effects. Coefficients are estimated by 5-year age group and then
summed and multiplied by 5 to obtain TCR coefficient. Brackets contain standard errors
clustered by country. Sample sizes vary because data on some of the aggregate variables are
not available for the full sample. “GDPpa” is GDP per adult, from the Penn World Table;
contraceptive prevalence is the estimated share of women of childbearing age using modern
contraceptives, from the UN; female labor force share is the percent of the labor force aged
15-64 that is female, from the WDI; average years of education and share urban are
estimates from WFS/DHS survey data. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                             50
                   Table A5: Regional Heterogeneity in Procyclicality
                                                 p-values: coefficients equal within pair
                                                         Africa      C/W Asia      S/SE Asia
                                          (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)
Africa                                    9.43
                                       [2.96]***
Central/Western Asia                      4.53            0.01
                                         [2.96]
South/Southeast Asia                     -2.46            0.18          0.44
                                         [8.43]
Latin America/Caribbean                  10.81            0.69          0.09          0.12
                                       [2.33]***

p-value: all coefficients equal          0.15

 Number of cells                          56,926
Notes: Total conception rate coefficients based on full-sample regressions of annual changes
in the age-specific conception rate on annual changes in 100 × log GDP per adult interacted
with region indicators, controlling for country, year, and age fixed effects. An additional
(unreported) interaction term is included for the group of five countries (Albania, Fiji,
Korea, Moldova, Ukraine) that did not fit into these regional classifications. Analyses are run
by 5-year age group; age group associations are summed and multiplied by 5 to obtain TCR
association. Brackets contain standard errors clustered by country. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01




                                                51
 Figure A1: First-Difference Models with Varying Time Horizons, Constant Samples
                                      A. Country-age cells spanning ≥ 20 years                                                B. Country-age cells spanning ≥ 30 years
                  .6




                                                                                                          .6         .4
   First-difference coefficient




                                                                                           First-difference coefficient
                             .4




                                                                                                         .2
                .2




                                                                    40-44
                                                                                            0
   0




                                                                    35-39
                                                                    15-19
                                                                     20-24
                                                                                                          -.2




                                                                     25-29
                  -.2




                                                                     30-34
                                  0              10                20            30                                       0              10                20            30
                                                 Length of difference                                                                    Length of difference


Notes: Reproduces Figure 1 using samples that do not change for different time horizons.
For each 5-year age group, each panel plots coefficients from regressions of the change in
the conception rate from year t – Δ to year t on the change in 100 × log GDP per adult
over the same period, controlling for single-year age indicators. Separate regressions were
run for each integer value of Δ from 1 to 20 (Panel A) and 1 to 30 (Panel B).




                                                                                      52
                              Figure A2: Alternative Short-Run Models
               .6
               .5
          Coefficient
         .3    .2
               .1.4




                    15-19         20-24            25-29         30-34          35-39              40-44
                                                        Age group

                            Bartlett weights            Weighted by cell size    No FE or trends
                            Country linear trend        Country quad trend       Country cubic trend



Notes: Age-group-specific coefficients from regressions of the change in the conception rate
on the change in log GDP per adult. “Baseline” is the short-run model reported in Table 2;
“Bartlett weights” uses a Bartlett kernel to downweight longer recall periods; trend models
add country-specific polynomials in time to the baseline model.




                                                        53
                               Figure A3: Alternative Long-Run Models
              .2
              0
         Coefficient
           -.2-.4
              -.6




                   15-19           20-24               25-29         30-34                           35-39             40-44
                                                            Age group
                           15+ avg. ann. change           25+ avg. ann. change                           20+ avg. ann. change

                           20+ avg. obs. ann. change      20+ avg. ann. change w/ Bartlett weights




Notes: The figure compares results from different methods of computing the average annual
rate of change. “20+ avg. ann. change” is the long-run model reported in Table 2, “20+
avg. obs. ann. change” uses the average of observed annual changes (leaving out gaps in the
panel) instead of the slope of the annual trend. “Bartlett weights” downweights observations
with longer recall periods. The remaining results use alternative minimum time horizons (15
and 25 years) to estimate the slope of the annual trend.




                                                              54
                                                          Figure A4: Non-Linear Estimates by Age Group, Short Run

                                                                 15-19                                    20-24                                   25-29
                                            20
                                            10
   Change in age-specific conception rate
                                            0
                                            -10
                                            -20




                                                                 30-34                                    35-39                                   40-44
                                            20
                                            10
                                            0
                                            -10
                                            -20




                                                  <-10 [-10,-5) [-5,0) [0,5) [5,10)   ≥10 <-10 [-10,-5) [-5,0) [0,5) [5,10)   ≥10 <-10 [-10,-5) [-5,0) [0,5) [5,10)   ≥10

                                                                             Change in log GDP per adult (log points)

Note: Binned estimates reported in Figure 1, Panel A, here with 95% confidence intervals.
Coefficients from regressions of annual changes in the age-specific conception rate on binned
annual economic growth, controlling for country, year, and age fixed effects. Confidence
intervals are clustered at the country level.




                                                                                                        55
                          Figure A5: Distributed Lag Models by Age Group, Short Run

                                15-19                    20-24                   25-29
                1
                .5
                0
                -.5
  Coefficient
                -1




                                30-34                    35-39                   40-44
                1
                .5
                0
                -.5
                -1




                      0     1     2     3   4   0   1        2   3   4   0   1     2     3   4
                                                        Lag

Note: Distributed lag model reported in Figure 3, Panel A, here with 95% confidence
intervals. Coefficients from regressions of annual changes in the age-specific conception rate
on current and lagged annual changes in 100 × log GDP per adult, controlling for country,
year, and age fixed effects. Confidence intervals are clustered at the country level.




                                                        56
                                                 Figure A6: Non-Linear Estimates by Age Group, Long Run

                                                      15-19                            20-24                            25-29
                                        0
  Trend in pregnancies per 1000 women
                                        -2
                                        -4
                                        -6




                                                      30-34                            35-39                            40-44
                                        0
                                        -2
                                        -4
                                        -6




                                             -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5
                                                                      Trend in log GDP per adult (x 100)

Note: Local linear regression estimates with 95% confidence intervals. The dependent
variable is the estimated trend in conception rates within a country-age cell, while the
independent variable is the estimated trend in log GDP per adult in the same cell.
Bandwidth equals 2, and confidence intervals are block bootstrapped at the country level.




                                                                                      57
