NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR DROPS: EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE RETURN TO ADDITIONAL
LABOR IN MICROENTERPRISES
Suresh De Mel
David McKenzie
Christopher Woodruff
Working Paper 23005
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23005

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

Funding for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation (SES0820375), the
World Bank, DfID, the Knowledge for Change Trust Fund, the Diagnostic Facility for Shared
Growth Trust Fund, the Strategic Research Program Trust Fund, and the Templeton Foundation.
Matthew Groh provided excellent research assistance. The surveys and interventions were carried
out with aplomb by the Kandy Consulting Group, without whose assistance we would not have
been able to undertake the project. The surveys and interventions in this project were carried out
under approval from the Human Research Protection Program at UCSD, Project #080861S. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Suresh De Mel, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Drops: Experimental Evidence on the Return to Additional Labor in Microenterprises
Suresh De Mel, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 23005
December 2016
JEL No. C93,D22,L26,O12,O17
ABSTRACT
The majority of enterprises in developing countries have no paid workers. Is this optimal, or the
result of frictions in labor markets? We conduct an experiment providing wage subsidies to
randomly chosen microenterprises in Sri Lanka. In the presence of frictions, a short-term subsidy
could have a lasting impact on employment. We find the subsidy induced firms to hire, but there
was no lasting impact on employment, profitability, or sales. Analysis rules out several
theoretical mechanisms that could result in sub-optimally low employment. We conclude that
labor market frictions are not the reason own-account workers do not become employers.

Suresh De Mel
University of Peradeniya
demel.suresh@gmail.com
David McKenzie
The World Bank, MSN MC3-307
1818 H Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
dmckenzie@worldbank.org

Christopher Woodruff
Queen Elizabeth House
University of Oxford
OX1 3TB
UK
and NBER
christopher.woodruff@qeh.ox.ac.uk

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23005

1. Introduction
The modal firm in most developing countries consists of a self-employed entrepreneur with no
paid employees. Do labor market frictions prevent more of these firm-owners from hiring
workers? The development literature has long characterized rural labor markets as incomplete,
leading to non-separation of household production and consumption decisions (Rosenzweig,
1988 provides a review). But there is theoretical debate as to the extent to which there are
frictions in urban markets. A long-held view has been that of dualism, in which large, formal
firms face serious frictions from minimum wages and other regulations, but smaller firms operate
without frictions in an unregulated sector (e.g. Fields 1975; Rauch 1991; Zenou 2008).
However, more recent literature argues that minimum wages and other regulations can have
spillovers that distort the informal sector (Freeman, 2010). Moreover, even in the absence of
regulatory distortions, there can be other important frictions. For example, training costs coupled
with high worker turnover may imply that new workers should pay to work at firms for some
initial period, something limited contracting options (Stiglitz, 1974) usually rule out.1 Other
frictions arise from imperfect information. The diversity of technologies and products in urban
markets may make it harder to identify the right match for a job (Rosenzweig, 1988); supervision
and search costs may make it prohibitive for firms to expand labor beyond family members
(Emran et al, 2008); and owners may lack information even about their own entrepreneurial
ability (Jovanovic, 1982).
We conduct an experiment to test directly whether hiring additional labor can benefit small firms
in Sri Lanka. Previous work providing “capital drops” to microenterprises in Sri Lanka found
evidence of capital constraints, but also found that capital alone was not enough to transition
firms to hiring workers (de Mel et al, 2008, 2012). In this paper, we report on an attempt to drop
labor into firms by offering microenterprises temporary wage subsidies equivalent to roughly
half the wage of an unskilled worker for a period of six months. In the absence of frictions, a
short-term subsidy should increase employment during the subsidy period, but have no lasting
impact, whereas under the alternative labor market models, a temporary subsidy can have longterm impacts on firm size.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
1

"Apprenticeships"common"in"certain"labor"markets"appear"to"reflect"the"low"initial"marginal"product"of"labor."But"
as"Hardy"and"McCasland"(2015)"show,"the"efficiency"of"the"apprenticeship"solution"is"compromised"by"credit"
constraints"and"information"frictions."""

2"
"

We find that 24 percent of firms take the subsidy to hire a worker, resulting in an increase in
employment in the treated firms during the subsidy period. However, using 12 rounds of survey
data to track the dynamics of adjustment for four years post-subsidy, we show there is no lasting
effect on employment, firm profitability, or sales. A combination of shedding of workers by
treated firms and additional hiring by control firms completely eliminates the employment gap
within two years. The only long-term effect is that the subsidy appears to have increased survival
rates for firms that initially had low-capital and low profitability.
We use the data generated by the experiment to differentiate between competing views of urban
labor markets for small firms. A combination of detailed survey data and an analysis of
heterogeneous treatment effects yields no evidence that owners are learning more about their
ability to manage workers, and suggests that search is not excessively costly for such firms.
Complementary treatments providing either capital or training show that the lack of long-term
effect does not appear to be due to lack of complementary capital or skills. Instead, the estimated
return to additional labor during the subsidy period appears similar in magnitude to the subsidy
offered, suggesting additional workers bring no more value to the firm than their unsubsidized
labor cost. As such, our results imply that labor markets appear to be functioning reasonably well
for microenterprises, and do not appear to be the constraint to their growth that some theories
might suggest.
This paper contributes to a recent experimental literature on frictions in urban labor markets in
developing countries. Much of this literature focuses on interventions to help particular jobseekers find jobs, by directly offering the job seekers wage subsidies (Galasso et al., 2004, Groh
et al. 2016, Levinsohn et al., 2014); and/or by trying to improve the search and matching process
through transport subsidies and skill certification (Groh et al, 2015; Abel et al, 2016; Abede et al,
2016). Some, but not all, of these studies have found modest improvements in formal
employment as a result of this assistance, consistent with constraints to workers finding jobs in
larger, more formal firms. These studies have not explicitly focused on helping workers find
employment in microenterprises, and have not typically found significant effects on informal
employment.
The literature examining labor market frictions from the firm side is much less developed, with
several recent studies beginning after this paper. Cohen (2016) develops a structural model using
3"
"

data from our earlier capital experiment in Sri Lanka and finds, under specific assumptions, that
microenterprises do seem to be constrained in expanding labor as their capital grows. Bertrand
and Crépon (2016) find that firms with between five and 300 employees in South Africa hire
more workers when offered labor law advice that explains to them that firing restrictions are not
as burdensome as many firms think, suggesting constraints on labor expansion for SMEs. In
work most closely related to ours, Hardy and McCasland (2015) randomly place apprentices with
small firms in Ghana, and find firms retain this extra labor for at least six months, and earn
higher profits in doing so. Their context, in which employees typically pay for entry-level
positions in order to get trained, differs from the standard labor market contractual form in most
developing countries (including Sri Lanka). If their results persist over time, this may explain the
difference in results.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 outlines different theories of why
small firms might be labor constrained, and the implications for the impact of a wage subsidy;
Section 3 details the experimental design and intervention; Section 4 discusses take-up; Section 5
provides the results; Section 6 investigates different mechanisms leading to these results; and
Section 7 concludes.
2. Theory: Why Might Small Firms Be Labor-Constrained, and How Could a
Temporary Subsidy Have Lasting Impacts on Firm Employment?
The most common firm size in many developing countries, including Sri Lanka, is one – an
owner with no paid employees. What explains the small size of these firms, and how might we
expect a temporary wage subsidy to change this firm size?
2.1 Classic complete markets model
Consider first the standard complete markets model of firm size of Lucas (1978), where
differences in employment size among firms facing the same output production technology f(.)
reflect differences in their management ability and productivity, θ. A firm facing a wage rate for
workers w, and an interest rate on capital r, will choose capital, K and labor, L to maximize
profits f(θ,K,L) – wL – rK. Firms are small and are assumed to be price-takers, who can sell all
output they produce at a price normalized to 1. This yields the familiar first-order conditions in

4"
"

which the optimal levels of capital (K*) and of labor (L*) are chosen such that marginal products
of labor and capital are equal to the wage rate and interest rate respectively2:
!! !, ! ∗ , !∗ = !

(1)

!! !, ! ∗ , !∗ = !

(2)

If managerial ability is a complement, rather than a substitute for capital and labor, then in this
model firms with zero workers are those with low managerial ability.
Consider a temporary wage subsidy in this model. This lowers the effective wage rate for
additional workers from w to w’. Resolving the first-order conditions (1) and (2) at this lower
wage will result in firms choosing a higher levels of employment L’, and producing more output,
and therefore more sales and higher profits in the short-run. However, once the subsidy ends, w
returns to its previous level, and – so long as θ is unchanged by the intervention – output, profits,
and employment return to their pre-subsidy levels.
2.2 Standard model with credit constraints
Now consider credit market constraints which limit the ability of firm owners to borrow to
finance capital investments. Let A be the wealth of the business owner. This wealth can be
leveraged in financial markets by some amount (b-1), with b≥1 being a measure of borrowing
constraints. The capital constraint is then K≤bA. Then the new equilibrium levels of capital, K**,
and L** solve:
!! !, ! ∗∗ , !∗∗ = !

(3)

!! !, ! ∗∗ , !∗∗ = ! + !"

(4)

Where λ is the Lagrange-multiplier on the borrowing constraint. In this set-up, equilibrium
output and equilibrium capital are lower than in the no constraint case (K**<K*), but L** may be
greater than or lower than L* depending on the shape of the production function: firms may
substitute capital for labor and end up with more employment than in unconstrained states, or
they may find labor less productive without complementary capital and so hire less labor than in
unconstrained states.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
2
For simplicity of exposition we assume the owner’s own labor supply is inelastic here, but in our
empirical work will also examine the labor supply response of the owner to our interventions."
5"
"

The wage subsidy treatment should then have a similar impact as in the standard model without
constraints, except that the presence of credit constraints may limit the ability of the firm owner
to adjust capital upwards to provide the capital needed for additional labor to work with. This
would act to reduce the responsiveness of firms to a wage subsidy in the short-run. There should
again be no long-run impact.3 An exception to this prediction of no long-run impact may occur if
firms face a lower-bound of profitability below which they shut down if they can’t borrow. The
short-term wage subsidy, by temporarily providing a period of higher profits, may allow the firm
to survive shocks that would otherwise cause them to close down, and thereby remain in business
(de Mel et al, 2012).
2.3 Labor market constraints
The motivation for a wage subsidy instead lies in the idea that there are firms for whom it would
be beneficial to hire more workers, but have not done so due to various constraints on hiring.
There are several possible reasons the labor market may not clear, and why a short-term subsidy
may therefore have a lasting impact.
The first set of frictions are those involved in identifying, hiring, and firing workers in an
environment where firm owners are unsure of worker types. For example, the search and
matching theory of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) features firms with vacancies who find it
difficult to match with qualified workers. If small firm owners find it hard to identify good
workers they can trust, or find it socially or financially costly to fire them if they are bad, then
this cost of hiring will deter some firm owners from hiring workers who, if they turn out to be
good matches, will increase firm profits. A wage subsidy can subsidize these hiring costs and
lead firms to take chances on new workers. This will increase employment in the short run, and
since firms will retain workers who are good matches, also have a long-term impact on
employment.
A related possibility is that firm owners may not know their own type (θ), as in Jovanovic
(1982). Let !θ*"be the managerial ability cutoff at which the unconstrained optimum is to hire a
worker. Let ! be the belief a firm owner has about their own ability. If we consider a distribution
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
3

If the firm is credit constrained and the wage subsidy increases profits in the short run, these profits may be reinvested, with a resulting long-term effect. But the upper bound on the additional profits in this case is the amount of
the subsidy. In our case, that is 28,000 LKR, while the median (mean) capital stock excluding land and buildings
among the firms in our sample is 160,000 (345,000) LKR.

6"
"

of initial beliefs about own managerial ability, then all owners with initial beliefs ! ≥!θ*" will
have tried hiring a worker before, and either found the worker to be productive and kept the
worker, or not to have been productive and not have kept the worker. The pool of firm owners
who have not previously hired a worker will then consist of owners with low actual managerial
ability, as well as those with high actual managerial ability who believe they have low ability.
The wage subsidy induces some of these owners to take on a worker while the subsidy is in
effect. If this enables them to learn their ability type, then some of these firm owners will
discover they were incorrect in their beliefs and retain the worker after the subsidy ends.
A third set of labor market constraints may arise from the combination of job-specific human
capital and either formal or informal minimum wages that prevent untrained workers being paid
their low marginal product (or even being charged to learn on-the-job as in the apprenticeship
system studied in Hardy and McCasland, 2015). Workers may be less productive in their first
few months while they learn the specifics of the job, with productivity increasing over time
through on-the-job training. For example, one of the firms in our study was a wedding
videographer, and said it took two months of training before a new worker could be sent out to
film a small wedding by himself. In the standard model above, the firm would pay a new worker
his or her marginal product, so would pay a low (perhaps even zero or negative) wage at the
beginning, and then a higher wage once productivity increases. However, poverty constraints,
minimum wage laws, and social norms may limit the ability of workers to take low initial wages
to compensate for their low initial productivity. This imposes the constraint w≥m on the
optimization problem, where m is this lower bound on the wages that can be paid. A short-term
subsidy can compensate firms for the low productivity of workers during this training period,
and for the fixed costs of hiring workers. If the productivity of workers increases during the
period wages are subsidized (Bell et al, 1999), then they may be sufficiently productive after the
subsidies end that firms are willing to pay them wage w≥m and keep them employed.4
A fourth possibility is that of non-convexities in hiring labor: firms may be only able to hire a
worker full-time, or not at all. As a result, some of the firm owners with 0 workers may have
optimal firm sizes of say 0.4 workers. Given the integer constraint, these firms may be more
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
4
" Given enough friction in labor markets, firms may be able to recapture initial losses by paying wages
below the marginal product of labor after workers become more productive. But movement of workers
across firms may prevent this. "
7"
"

profitable without a worker than with a worker. The subsidy may change this optimal in the
short-term to be closer to one worker, leading to hiring. The model would predict that, all else
equal, firm owners with higher management ability will be closer to the threshold, and so be
more likely to respond to the intervention. However, since the wage subsidy doesn’t change this
non-convexity, employment afterwards should return back to the original level.
The first three sources of labor market frictions offer the possibility that some firms are small
because of these frictions, and that a short-term subsidy may have lasting impacts on firm size.
However, if labor markets function reasonably well, then we would predict a subsidy to have no
lasting impact on employment. The above theories also offer predictions for which types of firms
may respond more, at least in the short-run, to a subsidy – those with higher management ability
if non-convexities are an issue, younger firms and those with no previous experience with
workers if learning one’s type is an issue, and wealthier firms if credit constraints bind and
capital is needed to make new workers productive.
3 Experimental Design and Data Collection
3.1 The Sample
We aimed to select a random sample of urban microenterprises with two or fewer paid
employees, owned by males aged 20 to 45 and operating in non-agricultural sectors. We chose to
focus on male-owned enterprises because our previous work with capital grants showed that
male-owned businesses appeared to have more growth potential, with female-owned firms facing
additional constraints (de Mel et al. 2008, 2009). We took a random sample of firms, rather than
screening on interest in hiring workers, in order to understand whether the average
microenterprise is labor-constrained.
To attain this sample of firms, we selected Grama Niladhara (GN) divisions within Colombo,
Kandy, and the Galle-Matara areas, and went door-to-door listing households from a random
starting point. The listing collected information on each adult active in the labor force, and was
used to screen on age, self-employment status, and sector to select firms for our sample. This
was then followed by a baseline survey which collected details of the business and the owner.
The first phase of this occurred in April 2008 (see Appendix 1 for a timeline) as part of a larger
panel survey that also included other urban areas in Sri Lanka. We then returned in October 2008
and conducted a booster listing exercise and survey in neighboring GNs in order to attain a larger
8"
"

sample for our intervention, re-interviewing those interviewed in the original sample. After
dropping those firms that had closed since the first baseline, this gave a sample of 1533 firms.
Appendix 2 provides more details on the sampling methodology.
3.2 The Intervention
Our main intervention consists of a temporary wage subsidy to firms with the purpose of
encouraging owners to hire an additional full-time employee. The April 2009 survey – taken
before anyone was made aware of the wage incentive program – asked for information about
each employee currently working at the enterprise. In early July, we notified those assigned to
the wage incentive treatment that we would pay a flat amount of 4000 LKR per month for a
period of six months if they hired an additional employee working at least 30 hours per week,
and a flat amount of 2000 LKR per month for a further two months. The employee had to be
someone living outside the owner’s household and could not be an immediate family member
(spouse, parents, siblings, and children). Participants were told that payments would start in
August 2009 and, regardless of when the worker was hired, end by May 2010. In other words,
workers had to be hired by 1 October, 2009 for the full amount of the subsidy to be paid. The
subsidy represents about half of the earnings of a typical unskilled worker. It is also
approximately half the minimum wage, which in Sri Lanka is set by Wage Boards and ranged
from approximately 7,000 to 8,000 LKR per month during the time of the intervention. Note that
the minimum wages only apply to formally registered workers.
Several studies of the impacts of wage subsidies on workers in developing countries have found
employers reluctant to register hired workers formally in the social security system where they
would have to pay labor taxes (e.g. Galasso et al, 2004; Groh et al, 2016). Since the vast majority
of microenterprises in Sri Lanka do not register their workers (de Mel et al, 2013), we did not
make legal registration of workers a requirement of the program. Once we were notified by the
participant that a worker had been hired, we sent a research assistant to conduct an interview
with the new employee. We also conducted a short interview with the owner focused on the
search and hiring process. Research assistants then made occasional unannounced visits to the
enterprise to make sure the employee was working. In a few cases, the research assistants were
unable to confirm that the employee was in fact working full time. In all such cases, within a few
visits the owner notified us that the employee was no longer working, and we removed the
9"
"

subsidy. We believe this process and these spot checks were sufficient to root out minimize
‘phantom’ employees.
In order to determine whether the effectiveness of the wage subsidy differs with the availability
of complementary inputs, we also carried out two supplementary interventions. The first was a
savings intervention, in which individuals were offered a savings account in which we matched
deposits made up to a specified amount. This took place before the wage subsidies started, and
the goal of this intervention was to enable firm owners to build up a balance of savings, which
they could then use to supplement the worker with any additional capital required to make this
worker more productive. The second was a business training intervention, which also took place
before the wage subsidies started. Firm owners were offered the ILO’s Improve Your Business
(IYB) training, to allow for the possibility that better business practices are needed in order to be
able to successfully employ additional labor. Appendix 3 describes these supplementary
interventions in more detail.
3.3 Randomization and Balance
After the baseline survey was conducted with those in the booster sample, we stratified firms into
six strata using geographic region (Colombo, Kandy, or Galle/Matara) and sector (retail or
manufacturing and services). Within each stratum we then randomly assigned 18.7% to the
control group (286/1533), 16.3% (250/1533) to get the wage subsidy program alone, 19.3%
(297/1533) to get the wage subsidy and the supplementary savings program, 19.3% (297/1533)
to get the wage subsidy and the supplementary training program, 7.3% (112/1533) to get the
supplementary savings program alone, 9.2% (141/1533) to get the supplementary training
program alone, and 9.8% (150) to get the supplementary training and savings programs.
Given the number of groups and the irregular sample sizes across groups, it was not possible to
stratify further within strata in doing the randomization.5 In order to improve balance further on a
set of key variables likely to be related to business outcomes we therefore employed a rerandomization procedure. We re-randomized 1000 times and in each randomization conducted
an F-test for equality of means across the seven treatment groups for a set of 13 baseline
variables listed in Table 1, including profits, ability, management practices, number of
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
5

We choose to put more observations in treatment groups where we were concerned that take-up would be more of
an issue, in order to have sufficient observations in each cell with which to examine intervention take-up.

10"
"

employees, and business assets. One potential pitfall for this approach can arise from outliers, so
we also included dummy variables for profits and assets in the top or bottom 5 percent to reduce
the possibility that balance on means was disguising large outliers. We then took the maximum
F-statistic across these 13 variables, and then choose the random assignment from among the
1000 allocations that had the minimum maximum F-statistic. In all reported regressions, we
control for the baseline measures of these variables and for the full set of strata dummies, which
Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) show gives the correct size and power after re-randomizing.
For the majority of this paper we use the sample of 286 pure control enterprises and 250
enterprises assigned to the wage subsidy treatment alone. Table 1 shows that we achieved
balance at baseline on a set of important observable variables: we are unable to reject the null
hypothesis that these observables are jointly orthogonal to treatment status (p=0.734). In
addition, we follow Imbens and Rubin (2015) in considering the normalized difference
!! − !! /

!! ! + !! ! /2 as a measure of balance, where !! and !! ! are the sample mean and

variance of the variable for the treatment group (j=T) and control group (j=C) respectively.
These normalized differences provide a scale-invariant measure of the difference in locations,
and show good balance, with the largest differences less than 0.2 standard deviations. Appendix
3 also shows balance for the supplementary interventions.
Table 1 helps provide a descriptive picture of the owners of these firms and their businesses. The
average owner is 35 years old, has finished 10 years of schooling, and works 58 hours a week in
their business. Most firms do not have any paid employees, with only 11 percent having at least
one paid worker, and an average of 0.17 paid workers per firm. The businesses are mostly
informal (only one-third are registered for tax purposes), with 40 percent in retail (e.g. groceries,
hardware, plastic products), and the remainder in manufacturing (e.g. tailoring, brasswork,
carpentry, food production) and services (e.g. electricians, vehicle repair, haircutting,
transportation). In 2008, mean monthly profits were 14,184 LKR (approx.. US$130) on 46,434
LKR (approx.. US$430) of monthly sales.6
3.4 Follow-up Surveys and Attrition
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
6

"The exchange rate averaged 108 LKR per USD in 2008, was in the 110-115 range from 2009 to 2011, and then
averaged 128 LKR per USD in 2012, 129 in 2013, and 130 in 2014."

11"
"

After the two rounds of baseline, we conducted six-monthly surveys every April and October
from 2009 through 2012, followed by additional surveys in April 2013 and April 2014.
Altogether this provides 12 rounds of data, including 2 to 3 rounds pre-intervention, 2 rounds
during the intervention, and then 7 rounds post-intervention covering four years after the subsidy
ended. Each survey round collected operating data for the previous month, along with details of
worker hiring and other information. Appendix 4 describes in more detail how key variables
were measured. For firms which closed down, we collected information on the current activities
of the owner, while for those who could not be interviewed we attempted to obtain basic
information on whether the business still existed and the number of employees through
observation and discussions with neighbors and family members.
The multiple rounds of follow-up surveys offer several advantages over standard firm studies
which rely on a single follow-up. First, they enable us to trace out the trajectory of impacts, to
determine whether the treatment effects vary over time. Second, by pooling together data from
multiple waves, we can average out seasonality and increase power (McKenzie, 2012). Third,
they give us multiple chances to interview firm owners, since owners who may not be available
one round may be able to be interviewed in a subsequent round. In order to benefit from all three
advantages, we pool together rounds 4 and 5 to capture average effects during the intervention,
rounds 6 and 7 to capture average effects in the first year after the subsidy ended, rounds 8 and 9
to capture average effects in the second year after the subsidy ended, and rounds 10, 11, and 12
to capture average effects in years 3 and 4 after the subsidy.
Survey attrition was low for a panel of this length with microenterprises. Round by round
attrition rates averaged 5.6 percent for whether the business was in operation, and 9 percent for
whether it had a paid worker (see Appendix 5). Table 2 provides summary information on data
availability by time period and treatment status after we pool together several data rounds as
described above. Data are available for 95 percent of the firms during the intervention period,
95-97 percent in the first year after the subsidy, 92-99 percent in the second year after the
subsidy, and 96-98 percent in years 3 to 4 post-subsidy. There is no significant difference in
attrition rates by treatment status, except for the second year post-treatment where we have
slightly higher data availability for the control group. The last four columns of Table 1 also show
that the sample responding to the last survey round remains balanced in terms of observable
12"
"

baseline differences. Given the lack of significant differences in attrition by treatment status, and
that attrition does not appear to differentially select firms on observables, we maintain a missingat-random assumption in our analysis for those attriting.
An important point of context is that the period of our study coincided with a period of rapid
general economic growth in Sri Lanka. When we began our study in 2008, per-capita GNI (in
constant 2011 PPP international dollars) was 7,598.7 In May 2009, just before our wage subsidy
intervention period began, the 25-year civil war ended, and the Sri Lankan economy grew at 8 to
9 percent per year over the 2010 to 2012 period, with per-capita GNI reaching 10,396 in 2014,
the year of our last survey. We are therefore testing the return to additional labor in a growing
economy, where firms may be expected to have opportunities to potentially grow.
4 Take-up and Who Did They Hire?
4.1 Take-up
During the eight months the incentive program was active, 60 of the 250 firms offered only the
wage subsidy took it up (24 percent). The take-up rates were not statistically different (p=0.622)
in the wage subsidy plus savings (24.2%), and for the wage subsidy plus training (21.2%)
treatment groups, giving a total of 196 firms that used the subsidy for at least one month.
Conditional on using the subsidy, the median firm used it for seven out of the eight possible
months and received a total of 24,000 Rs. in subsidy. Only 17 percent of those using the subsidy
used it for 4 or fewer months, and 68 percent used it for 6 months or more.
Table 3 examines the correlates of the take-up decision, building on early analysis presented in
de Mel et al. (2010) which only had take-up data through to November 2009. We conduct probits
of the probability of using the wage subsidy voucher for the wage subsidy only treatment group,
and for all treatment groups offered the wage subsidy. The first column examines firm
characteristics, the second owner characteristics, and the third both together. We see that take-up
rates are lower in Colombo than in the southern cities of Galle and Matara, with Kandy in
between. One possible reason is that wage rates are higher in Colombo, so the flat-rate wage
subsidy may cover a lower proportion of the worker’s wage there. We find that firm
characteristics have very little predictive power for which firms take-up the intervention: there
are no significant differences in take-up for those that already had paid workers, for those firms
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
7

Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank.

13"
"

that were formally registered, for firms that had more assets at baseline, or by firm age. Instead
the skills of the owner appear to matter more. More highly educated owners, and those
employing better business practices at baseline are more likely to use the subsidy.
4.2 Who did they hire?
In October 2009, we surveyed both the workers hired under the subsidy program and the
employers who hired them. These surveys provide data on the characteristics of the workers and
the methods the owners used to find them. The hired workers are 31.5 years of age and have 9.8
years of schooling on average. Close relatives of the owners and those living in the owner’s
household were not eligible to be hired, but 31.3 percent of hired workers are related to the
owner in some way; 15.6 percent are female. Most (83.4 percent) were known to the owner
before the hiring, and almost half (48.4 percent) say they live within 1 kilometer of the business.
Workers report being paid 1,860 LKR per week, with just under one-third of them being paid the
subsidy amount or less.8 The excess hiring of relatives is concentrated among lower-profit firms,
with 41 percent of hires by firms with lower than median baseline profits being related,
compared with only 20 percent of hires by firms with above median baseline profits (p=0.08).
These low profit firms are also the ones paying the lowest wages: 60 percent of their hires are
paid the subsidy amount or less, compared with only 4 percent of the hires by higher-profit firms
(p<.01).
To provide context, we can compare these characteristics with two other groups of hired
workers. The first is workers who were working for control firms in April 2010, and who were
hired between 2009 and 2010.9 We have more limited data on these employees, but we find that
they are slightly older (33.6 years of age) and less likely to be female (9.4 percent). They are
much less likely to be related to the owner (9.4 percent) and are paid a higher wage (3,217 LKR
per week). A second comparison come from surveys conducted in April 2013 and 2014. From
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
8

"There is no significant difference in reported hours worked between those paid 1000 LKR (51.6 hours) per week or
less and those paid more than this amount (52.8).
9
" This period encompasses the subsidy period, but is longer so that we have a somewhat larger sample. Among
employees at control firms, 32 were hired in 2009 and 21 in 2010. Note that since this sample is workers employed
in 2010, it does not include workers hired but no longer working for the enterprise. We note also that this survey
provides more limited information about the employees, and that wages are reported by employers (rather than
employees and in categories of daily wages, 0-199, 200-399, etc. We estimate average wages from these responses
by using the midpoint of the categorical response, which may over- or under-state the level relative to the continuous
response given in the survey of hired workers. ""

14"
"

these surveys, we use data on workers hired by the firms eligible for the subsidies in the three
years following the subsidy period. Compared with the workers hired under the subsidy program,
the workers hired later by the same pool of firms are slightly older (32.6 years) and less likely to
be female (10.0 percent), though neither of these differences is statistically significant. They are
much less likely to be related to the owner (10.0 percent), a difference which is significant at the
1 percent level. They are also slightly less likely to have known the owner previously (71.4
percent) and to live within one kilometer of the business (35.7 percent), though these differences
are not statistically significant at conventional levels. They are paid much more (3,350 LKR per
week, deflated to fall 2009 prices). On the whole, the characteristics of workers hired postsubsidy are quite similar to those hired in 2009-10 by the control firms. Hence, it appears that
workers hired under the subsidy are similar except that they are more likely to be related to the
owner, and they are paid a lower wage.
We also asked owners which of 10 methods they used to locate the employee hired through the
subsidy program. Employers relied mostly on networks, with asking friends (50 percent),
neighbors (33 percent), immediate family (21 percent) and extended family (18 percent) for
referrals the most common responses. Advertising the position was very rare, used by only 1
percent of the employers, while contacting former employees (7.7 percent), and contacting
friends (9.3 percent) and relatives (6.7 percent) directly about the job were used with
intermediate frequency. On average, employers used two of the methods. For comparison, in the
April 2013 survey, we asked those eligible for the subsidy program how they found employees
hired in the two years after the subsidy period. We find similar patterns though the search
intensity is somewhat higher, with employers using just over 2 methods. With the post-subsidy
hires, employers were more likely to say they advertised (9.6 percent) and contacted former
employees (17.2 percent), but referrals through networks of family, neighbors and friends remain
the most common search methods by very large margins.
5 Results
We first examine whether the wage subsidy changed the survival rates of firms, since, to the
extent it did, we need to control for this in examining impacts on employment, profitability and
sales. As noted above, our estimation aims to combine the advantages of combining multiple
follow-up rounds to increase statistical power with also a desire to explore the trajectory of
15"
"

impacts. We therefore use data for the control group and wage subsidy only treatment group to
estimate treatment regressions using the following specification for outcome Y for firm i in
period t=3,…,12:
!!,! = ! + !! !"#$%! ∗ !"#! + !! !"#$%! ∗ !"#$%&! + !! !"#$%! ∗ !"#$1! + !! !"#$%! ∗
!"#$2! + !! !"#$%! ∗ !"#$3!"4! +

!"
!!! !! 1

! = ! + !′!! + !!,!

(5)

Where Treat is a dummy variable for whether they got the wage subsidy treatment or not; Pre
indicates the pre-treatment, post-baselines round 3, During indicates the two survey rounds 4 and
5 when the wage subsidy was in effect, and Year1, Year2, and Year3to4 indicate the survey
rounds corresponding to 1 year, 2 years, and 3 to 4 years post-intervention; 1 ! = ! are a set of
survey round time dummies; X is a set of controls for the randomization strata and for the
baseline variables used in randomization (Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009); and the error term !!,! is
clustered at the firm level. The baseline controls include the baseline values of many of our key
outcomes of interest, making this an Ancova specification, but where the baseline value of the
outcome of interest is not in X, we also include it as an additional control when available. Our
interest is then in the trajectory of treatment effects as given by !! to !! . To account for multiple
testing across periods we test the equality !! = !! = !! = !! to test whether the treatment
effects are stable, and !! = !! = !! = !! = 0 to test whether we can reject that there is no
treatment effect after the intervention. !! provides a placebo test, similar to a further balance test,
since it uses pre-intervention data.
Note that the treatment effects we estimate are intent-to-treat effects, which is the impact of
being offered the wage subsidy. This is the relevant parameter for understanding the policy
impact of wage subsidy vouchers. We then turn to estimating the impact of actually hiring an
additional worker in section 5.4.
5.1 Impact on Survival
Table 4 examines the impact of the wage subsidy on firm survival. Businesses temporarily close
and then re-open again, so survival here is defined in terms of whether the owner is selfemployed at the time of the survey round, and includes the case of the owner shutting down one

16"
"

business and starting another one.10 Survival rates are reasonably high in the control group: 95.8
percent of firm owners are operating their businesses during the intervention period (one year
after baseline), 88.8 percent one year after the intervention, and 83.4 percent three to four years
later. However, recall that data on operating status are not available for 3 percent of firms in the
three to four-year period, and these firms may have also closed. We therefore consider two other
definitions of survival for robustness. The first assumes that if a firm is surveyed and found to be
closed, and then attrits from future surveys, that is has remained closed. The second measure
makes the assumption that all attriting firms are closed.
Figure 1 shows graphically the survival pattern round by round, and shows a clear widening of
the gap between the treatment and control group over time. Table 4 shows that there is no
significant impact on firm survival during the intervention, but significant impacts in all three
time periods afterwards. Those that received the subsidy were 5.8 percentage points more likely
to still be self-employed in our last follow-up rounds. This effect remains significant at the 10
percent level when we use either of our alternative definitions of survival. We discuss possible
reasons for the survival impact in section 6, after having seen the impacts of the subsidies on
employment, profitability and sales.
5.2 Impact on Employment
To account for this impact on survival, we code firms which are closed as having zero
employment, zero profits, and zero sales in our analysis. This enables us to examine the full
unconditional impact on these outcomes in a way which is not subject to selectivity concerns
present in comparing only firms in operation. We later also provide comparisons of treatment
and control profits and sales conditional on survival.
Figure 2 shows the time pattern of whether firms have any paid workers, and of the average
number of paid workers (truncated at 5 workers, the 99th percentile during the intervention
period). We see the treatment and control group have similar employment in the baseline and
survey pre-intervention, and that the treatment group hires more workers than the control during
the intervention period. This gap halves in the year following the intervention but is still
noticeable, and then the employment of the two groups looks similar in the last four survey
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
10

See Appendix 4 for a discussion of alternative approaches to defining survival. All yield qualitatively similar
results.

17"
"

rounds. A further point to note is that the control group is slowly growing employment over time,
so the counterfactual is one in which some firms would be hiring even without the subsidy.
The first two panels of Table 5 examine whether this impact is significant. We see during the
subsidy period there is a positive and statistically significant increase in both the likelihood of
having any paid workers, and in the number of workers hired. The 14 percentage point increase
in the likelihood of having any paid workers is relative to a control mean of 27 percent during
this time, so the subsidy has resulted in a 52 percent increase in the likelihood of having a worker
during this period. The impact on the number of paid workers is 0.20 workers, relative to a
control mean of 0.48 workers, so again represents a sizeable increase in relative terms. The
impact on having a paid worker remains positive and significant, at 11.1 percentage points, in the
year after the intervention, but then falls to near zero and is not statistically significant in either
the second or third and fourth years. The impact on the number of paid workers also shows 0.12
workers more in the year after the intervention, although this gap is not statistically significant,
and then falling further over time to be near zero and not significant in the longer-term.
Figures 3 and 4 delve into the employment changes in more detail by examining the churn in
employment. Figure 3 looks at the probability a firm increases or decreases the number of paid
workers it has between survey rounds. We see treated firms are more likely to be adding
workers during the intervention period, but less likely to be adding workers than the control
group between rounds 7 and 10. Immediately after the intervention the treatment group is more
likely to be reducing the number of workers it has in the six months immediately following the
end of the subsidy. Figure 4 examines how many workers are being changed. We see almost all
of the action is at the margin of a single worker. As the subsidy begins, the treatment group is
more likely to be adding a worker, and once the subsidy ends, it is more likely to be subtracting a
worker. We see that 78 percent of the control group have no change in worker numbers between
rounds, so that approximately one in five control group firms are adding or subtracting workers
from one round to the next. Since this is churn over a six month period, it suggests that many
control group firms are able to adjust their employment rapidly.
The next two panels of Table 5 examine econometrically this churn. We see a positive and
significant impact on the likelihood of adding a worker during the subsidy period, but a negative
and significant impact on the likelihood of adding a worker during the period two years after the
18"
"

intervention. That is, post-subsidy, firms in the treatment group are slower to add workers during
a period when firms in the control group are growing. In contrast, the impact on subtracting
workers is not as dramatic as seen in Figures 3 and 4, and while positive immediately after the
intervention, is not statistically significant. Graphically we see that this subtraction effect occurs
in the six months immediately after the subsidy ends, and by averaging over the first year we
average in also the lower chance of subtracting a worker between 6 and 12 months postintervention.
The final two panels of Table 5 consider whether the change in paid workers is changing the
other two labor inputs in the business: the owner’s own time, and unpaid labor. On average,
firms have only 0.2 unpaid workers, and treatment has no significant impact on this number
during any of our follow-up periods. The point estimates on own hours are positive, but small
and not statistically significant during the intervention. The positive effect is significant for the
two- and three-to-four-year follow-up periods, and reflects the greater survival of firms at this
stage. Taken together, these results show that the subsidized labor is not substituting for other
types of labor the business is already using, but represents a net increase in labor input during the
subsidy period.
Appendix 6 explores the extent to which the wage subsidy changes which firms have workers.
The evidence suggests that the new firms induced to hire an employee because of the subsidy,
but who would not have hired one if they had been in the control group, are smaller and less
profitable firms, and less likely to be found in Colombo. There is little selectivity on owner’s
characteristics. Conditional on hiring a worker, those in Colombo are more likely to have kept
the worker on, with no significant differences in other firm or owner characteristics. By the time
of the last survey, when we have seen the proportion of firms to have employees is similar in
both groups, the some of these lower profitability treated firms no longer have a worker, while
some of the lower profitability control firms have started hiring one. The result is that baseline
profit levels, and other firm characteristics, are similar for the sample of treatment and control
firms with workers at the time of the last survey. The one remaining difference is in terms of
geography, where a smaller share of the treated firms with employees are in Colombo compared
to the control group.
5.3 Impact on Profitability and Sales
19"
"

We next examine how the wage subsidy and additional labor affected business profits and sales.
There are two important issues that affect measurement of the treatment effect on these
outcomes. The first, as discussed above, is the treatment impact on business survival postintervention. We consider both unconditional profits and sales (where firms not in operation are
coded as having zero profits and zero sales), and conditional measures (conditioning on the
business operating). Comparing outcomes for treated and control firms will only yield unbiased
estimates of the impact on conditional profits and sales if survival is not selective on
characteristics that predict these outcomes. We cannot reject that survival is independent of
baseline characteristics (a joint test of orthogonality for the sample still self-employed in round
12 has p-value 0.562), so this may be a reasonable assumption in our case. Otherwise the
conditional regressions should be viewed as descriptive, rather than causal. Second, both profits
and sales have long right tails: the 99th percentile conditional on operating is six to eight times
the mean, and kurtosis values of 14 to 20 (compared to 3 for a normal distribution). We use two
approaches to reduce the dependence on the top tail. The first is to consider transformations
which place less weight on the top tail: the inverse-hyperbolic sine transformation of
unconditional values, and the log transformation of conditional values. The second is to estimate
quantile regressions.11
Table 6 presents the estimated treatment effects on these different measures, while Figures 5 and
6 graph the quantile treatment effects for round 4 and round 12 (during the intervention, and in
our last follow-up round four years later). For profits we see no significant effect during the
intervention period for any of the four measures, and the quantile treatment effects on both
conditional and unconditional profits are fairly constant and also not significant across the
distribution. The 95 percent confidence interval for the OLS treatment effect for unconditional
profits is (-1766, 3118), while for the 50th percentile it is (-1208, 3140). This is relative to a
control mean of 16603 LKR, so represents a range of -11% to +19%. The impact on profits
continues to be insignificant in all three post-intervention periods for three out of four measures
in Table 6, and we can’t reject the hypothesis that all treatment effects are jointly zero. The
exception is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. This shows a positive treatment effect,
which arises from the survival effect at the bottom of the distribution, with positive treatment
effects for lower quantiles. Conditional on operating, this effect is not significant.
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
11

We control for the same baseline controls in the quantile regressions as in the OLS treatment regressions.

20"
"

For sales we likewise see no significant treatment effect during the intervention using any of the
four measures, nor using the quantile treatment effects. The 95 percent confidence interval for
unconditional sales is (-8525, +19401), or (-14%, +32%) relative to the control mean. Like
profits, the inverse-hyperbolic sine transformation of sales then shows a significant treatment
effect in the post-intervention period, reflecting the impact on survival. We find a marginally
significant effect on unconditional sales in year 2, and on log sales in year 1 post-intervention,
but in both cases cannot reject that all treatment effects are jointly zero.
5.4 Return to Labor
We now can combine the impact on the number of workers with the impact on profits to obtain
an estimate of the return to additional labor in these microenterprises. For comparison, we begin
by using the pooled cross-sections from the control group sample to estimate for firm i in periods
t=2,…,12:
!"#$%&'!,! = ! + !! ∗ !!,! +

!"
!!! !! 1

! = ! + !′!! + !!,!

(6)

Where L is the number of paid workers, and we control for time dummies, the variables used to
form strata for randomizing, and the baseline variables used in re-randomization as before. The
standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Column 1 of Table 7 shows this estimate using the
unconditional level of profits as the outcome, while column 5 uses log profits (conditional on
operating). We see an additional worker is significantly associated with higher profits, with firms
with one more worker earning 6674 per week more profits, or 24 percent higher profits.
The standard concern with such an estimate is that there are unobserved features of the firm that
are correlated with both profitability and how many workers the firm hires. For example, more
productive firms may earn more and use more labor. We can control for time-invariant
unobserved firm characteristics by adding firm fixed effects to equation (6). Columns 2 and 6 of
Table 7 do this. Adding these fixed effects reduces the magnitude of the coefficient on labor to
4844 or 13 percent, which is still statistically significant. However, this will still overstate the
return to labor if there are time-varying unobservables which lead firms to both hire more
workers and be more profitable: for example, a positive demand shock may cause the firm to be
able to sell more and hire more workers to meet this demand.

21"
"

Our experiment provides a estimate of the causal effect of hiring an additional worker. Since the
intervention period is the only period during which we see a significant increase in the number of
workers, we estimate equation (6) only during the intervention period (t=4 and 5), and
instrument L with assignment to the wage subsidy treatment. Columns 3,4, and 7 of Table 7 then
report the IV estimates, under the assumption that the wage subsidy only affects profits through
the additional labor it induces. The point estimates are smaller than the fixed effects in levels,
and similar in size to the fixed effects estimates in logs; however the standard errors are much
larger. The point estimates suggest a return of 2400 to 3000 LKR per month per additional
worker hired. In panel B we also include the other treatment groups which received wage
subsidies in an effort to reduce these standard errors, and get a 95 percent confidence interval of
(-5310, +7612) for the impact on profits conditional on operating. Recall that the wage subsidy
was 4,000 LKR per month during this time, and is not included in the measure of profit being
reported by the owner. This point estimate would suggest that the net return to keeping these
workers are their current wages would be negative for once the subsidy was removed.
6 Mechanisms
The wage subsidies induced firms to hire additional workers during the intervention period, but
did not have a lasting impact on employment, nor a significant impact on profits and sales. They
did however make firms more likely to survive. We examine possible explanations for these
impacts in this section.
6.1 Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects
Our theory suggests several possible channels through which a short-term subsidy may have a
lasting impact on employment. We examine the heterogeneity of treatment effects to provide
some insights into whether these different channels appear to be operating in practice. To do this,
we add interactions between the treatment variables and a particular baseline covariate X to
equation (5), along with controlling for the baseline value of X, and interactions between X and
the survey round effects. The results are then presented in Table 8, which tests for heterogeneity
in the impact on the number of paid workers for different Xs.
If the subsidy allows firm owners to learn about their management type, θ, then we would expect
the impacts to be greater for younger firms (where the owners have had less time to learn their
type), and for firms whose owners have never hired a worker before. The first two columns of
22"
"

Table 8 show that there is no significant heterogeneity with respect to either variable. Moreover,
the coefficients, indicate that that those who had hired workers before were more likely to hire
workers in response to the intervention the opposite sign to what the learning-about-type theory
would predict.
Column 3 of Table 8 examines heterogeneity with respect to baseline business practices.
Consistent with the higher take-up seen in Table 3, we see that firm owners with more
management ability were more likely to hire workers in response to the subsidy during the
intervention. A one standard deviation improvement in baseline practices (5.9) is associated with
a 0.19 additional worker increase during the intervention, which is significant at the five percent
level. However, like the aggregate effect, this effect dissipates over time and there is no longterm effect. Our theory section noted that higher managerial ability firms might be more
responsive to subsidies because of non-convexities in hiring labor. Our wage subsidy required
firms to hire a full-time worker, so the margin for adjusting labor was lumpy. Better managed
firms should be closer to the threshold of hiring a whole worker, so may have responded more.
An alternative explanation is that firm owners with higher management ability could better
understand the short-term gains possible through the subsidy.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 8 then examine heterogeneity with respect to wealth. If firms need
capital to make new workers productive, then the theory predicts that treatment effects should be
higher for firms which have more access to capital. We see no heterogeneity with respect to
either baseline capital stock, nor to household wealth at baseline.
Finally, in columns 6 and 7 of Table 8 we examine whether coupling the wage subsidy with
additional treatments increases the impact. Column 6 considers the business training treatment.
The specification here adds to equation (5) the pure treatment effects of business training in each
of the time periods (not shown), and then the interactive treatment effect of receiving both the
wage subsidy and business training. We cannot reject that the treatment effect is the same for
those who get business training. Column 7 likewise shows there is no differential effect for those
who get the savings treatment. These results are consistent with the interactions with baseline
variables in showing that the lack of long-run effects don’t seem to be due to lack of capital or
lack of business skills.
6.2 Survey Evidence
23"
"

Our survey data provide additional information which can help us interpret the results in Tables
5 through 8. The fact that subsidies have a temporary effect and that there is little evidence that
the increase in profits is greater than the subsidy amount suggests that labor markets work
without major frictions for the micro enterprises in our sample. This picture is consistent with the
view that urban informal labor markets working reasonably well. One of the advantages of
experiments is that they create shocks to opportunities that allow researchers to observe how
actors respond. The survey data provide details that help us understand the aggregate responses
we observe in Tables 5-8.
We begin by looking at responses as they relate to key aspects of the heterogeneity examined in
Table 8.
•

Learning about type and managerial ability: Did owners learn about their types, for
example, did they learn about their ability to manage workers? Among those with a
worker hired under the program who left, we asked which among several reasons the
worker left. One option was that the owner had come to realize he was not able to
properly manage the worker. Across several rounds and more than 30 such cases, this
reason was only ever given once. There is a somewhat larger sample of owners who were
eligible for the subsidy but never hired a worker. In October 2009, we asked these owners
whether any of 12 reasons for not hiring were important in their case. Only 13.3 percent
of the owners said concern about their ability to manage an employee was a reason for
not hiring. The far more common responses for not hiring related to a lack of demand for
labor, including that the additional employee would not be profitable (43.4 percent), that
the enterprise does not require an additional employee (26.5 percent, and that the subsidy
is not large enough (13.3 percent). Together, these data suggest that learning about
managerial ability is not a central issue among these firms; the lack of hiring appears
mainly to reflect a lack of demand for labor. However, we note that a sizeable number of
respondents not hiring workers stated that they had not yet found the right employee
(22.3 percent) or that they lacked the capital required to make the employee productive
(27.1 percent). Hence, these data do indicate some potential role for search frictions and
capital constraints.

24"
"

•

Importance of access to capital: Among those not hiring workers, responses from the
October 2009 survey indicate that only 40 percent would need to make a capital
investment to make the additional employee profitable. Among these 40 percent, a
majority (56 percent) say that a lack of capital is an important reason they did not hire
anyone under the program. Note that the likelihood an owner reports that capital is a
reason for not hiring is independent of either baseline profits or capital stock. Those with
low profits and low capital stock are no less likely to hire under the program, though as
we noted in Section 4.2 above, they are more likely to hire relatives and workers at very
low rates of pay. In April 2010, we asked about the same issue with a different framing,
asking how much capital would be required to make a new employee “as productive as
(s)he could be.” Only 7 percent of respondents said “zero” to this question, but 43 percent
said 15,000 LKR or less, a level which is approximately one month’s profit for the
average firm. Only 22 percent said that more than 90,000 LKR – six months’ average
profit – would be required. Though suggesting that a lack of capital plays a role in some
cases, these data are consistent with the lack of any additional effect when the savings
subsidy program is combined with the wage subsidy program.

The survey data also yield some information on several other constraints suggested by theory.
•

Newly-hired employees have lower productivity: This, combined with either formal or
informal minimum wages might require that wage payments exceed the marginal
contribution of the employee for some period of time. In those circumstances, the subsidy
may induce firms to hire when they are otherwise unable to pay an interim wage that
reflects the lower marginal productivity of workers during the initial period working in
the firm. In April 2010, we asked owners how long they thought it would take a hired
worker to become fully productive. The median response was one month, and the mean
4.1 months; 86 percent said the period would be six months or shorter, suggesting that the
subsidy was long enough to fully cover the learning period for the majority of the sample.
In October 2011, we asked owners how long it took for the most recent worker they had
hired (if there was one) to be profitable for the enterprise. Focusing on employees hired
after the subsidy period, half the owners said the employee was profitable right away, and
another 38 percent said they were profitable within the first month. Only 2 percent said it
25"

"

took six months or more. Hence, the survey data do not suggest that the time taken to
integrate an employee is long enough to explain the patterns we see in the data.
•

The relevance of search costs: In October 2009, three months after the wage subsidy
offer was made, we asked those eligible for the wage subsidies a series of questions
related to search. At the time of the survey, 29 percent of those eligible had hired an
employee, indicating they were able to find someone fairly quickly. Another 43 percent
indicated that they had no intention of hiring an employee.12 Among the remaining 29
percent of owners who indicated they were still searching and expected to hire an
employee, only 38 percent (representing 11 percent of the sample) indicated that a reason
for not hiring was that they had not found the right employee. The majority indicated
instead that at present the additional employee would not be profitable given the subsidy
level. These data suggest that search costs are not a main constraint for the majority of
owners in our sample. This conclusion is supported by data from a survey of owners of
small and medium sized businesses conducted around the same time.13 In April 2009,
among 160 owners with five or fewer employees, the median owner said it would take
seven days to locate an employee if s/he wanted to hire one; the mean search period was
14 days. Moreover, these owners said they could hire a worker for a median of 400 LKR
per day, or 2000 LKR per week, just above the average wage the employees hired under
our subsidy program report being paid. That search costs are important for only a small
percentage of owners of small firms is consistent with long-held views that labor markets
work relatively well among informal firms. This is perhaps not surprising given that most
workers are hired to do relatively routine, physical tasks. Our owners say that the sex of
the worker and physical strength of the worker are the two most important characteristics
of workers they consider hiring, with education the least important of the characteristics
listed. Search tends to be local, with a majority of workers hired being previously known
to owners and living within one kilometer of the business.14 We read these responses

"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
12

" These owners said in response to later questions that their business would not support or benefit from an
additional employee. Only 11 percent of them indicated that the inability to find the right employee was a reason for
not hiring."
13
"The SME survey was conducted in urban areas throughout Sri Lanka, but a majority of respondents come from the
same urban areas in which we conducted the experiment. The survey is described in Appendix 4
14
The local nature of search holds both in these data and in data from a separate survey of wage workers. In the
wage worker survey, among 171 workers in firms with 4 or fewer employees, 61 percent say they knew the owner

26"
"

together with the response reported earlier just under a quarter of the owners eligible for
the wage subsidy report not being able to find the right worker 3 months after learning of
their eligibility as indicating that search frictions are important for a minority of the
owners, but are not a main cause of not hiring.
Finally, the excess hiring that was created by the subsidy largely disappears within a year of
withdrawing the subsidy. In most of the surveys conducted after the intervention, we asked the
employers whether the employee hired under the program was still working for them, and if not,
why they were not. The most common response was that the worker quit, given just over half the
time. In those cases, the owner reports taking over the worker’s tasks himself in 59 percent of the
cases, hiring another employee 29 percent of the time, and having a family member do the work
in 12 percent of the cases.

6.3 Why was there a survival impact?
The only long-term impact of the wage subsidies appears to be on firm survival, with no impact
on paid employment, sales or profitability. The evidence presented above suggests that the
survival impact is not coming through relieving labor market constraints on firms. Instead, the
most likely explanation for the survival effect appears to be that the subsidy provided firms with
extra profits during the intervention period, and this small amount of additional capital allowed
firms to survive shocks that would otherwise shut them down. De Mel et al. (2012) show onetime grants of 10,000 and 20,000 SLK helped small firms survive. If workers earn their marginal
product, then the maximum subsidy for a firm was 28,000 SLK. These firms are larger on
average than those in De Mel et al. (2012), so this amount is equivalent to less than two months
baseline profits. If it were to have an effect, it should therefore be for the smallest firms.
Appendix 7 provides heterogeneity analysis that shows the survival effect is larger for firms with
below median baseline capital and below median profitability, although results are at most
significant at the 10 percent level. We therefore view this evidence as suggestive, but consistent
with the survival effect coming through a credit rather than labor market channel.
7 Discussion and Conclusions
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
before beginning work, and 45 percent say they live within one kilometer of the business. The wage worker surveys
is described in Appendix 4.""

27"
"

Microenterprises in developing countries face many potential constraints to growth, and
understanding which of these constraints are binding is crucial for designing policies to address
them. Moreover, as firms with fewer than five employees are the source of livelihoods for the
majority of urban workers in most low- and middle-income countries, binding constraints to their
growth may have important aggregate effects on economies. This is particularly true with regard
to employment growth. Compared with a larger literature on capital and entrepreneurship
training, there is a paucity of research on the functioning of the informal labor markets most
relevant to these firms. We use a shock to wages, implemented through temporary subsidies
offered when enterprises hire new workers, to measure frictions in urban informal labor markets
in Sri Lanka.
Data from the experiment suggest that labor markets function with modest frictions for these
firms. The effects of the subsidy are consistent with well-functioning neo-classical labor markets.
Firms respond to the subsidy by hiring additional workers, but the excess hiring dissipates
completely within a year of so of the removal of the subsidies. Complementary experiments
loosening credit constraints and providing entrepreneurship training do not change the effects of
the temporary subsidies. We conclude that hiring frictions are not an important constraint to firm
growth in our setting.
An obvious question is how much the results from this experiment generalize to the broader
development context. We suspect that many characteristics of this labor market hold in most
urban areas in developing countries. Workers remain unregistered and hiring is generally
unregulated. The work performed by employees in small enterprises involves relatively more
brawn and less creative energy. Employees are hired from local areas and there is usually a low
degree of separation between employer and employee before hiring. There are other aspects of
the context which are likely less usual. Our experiment coincided with the end of a long civil war
in Sri Lanka, and a period of rapid growth. Compared with other low- and middle-income
countries, our samples of both microentrepreneurs and wage workers show relatively high levels
of generalized trust.15 How much these more distinctive features of the context drive the results
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
15

"In April 2009 surveys. 32 percent of wage workers and 27 percent of entrepreneurs said that “most people can be
trusted.” Though this may seem low, it compares with rates in the general population in most Sub-Saharan African
and Latin American countries, where less than 20 percent of the population respond similarly. [Calculations by
authors using WVS data downloaded from http://www.worldvaluessurvey.org .]""

28"
"

is difficult to say. We would hope this might be resolved by future work examining labor market
frictions in different contexts.
References
Abebe, Girum, Stefano Caria, Marcel Fafchamps, Paolo Falco, Simon Franklin, and
Simon Quinn (2016). “Curse of Anonymity or Tyranny of Distance? The Impacts of Job Search
Support in Urban Ethiopia” Mimeo.
Abel, Martin, Rulof Burger and Patrizio Piraino (2016) “The Value of Reference Letters
– Experimental Evidence from South Africa”, Mimeo. Harvard.
Bell, Brian, Richard Blundell, and John Van Reenen (1999) “Getting the Unemployed
Back to Work: The Role of Targeted Wage Subsidies.” International Tax and Public Finance,
6(3): 339–60.
Bertrand, Marianne and Bruno Crépon (2016) “Teaching Labor Laws: Results from a
randomized control trial in South Africa”, Mimeo.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie (2009) “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in
Practice in Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
1(4): 200-232.
Cohen, Alex (2016) “Constraints on Labor and Land and the Return to Microcredit and
Microinsurance”, Mimeo.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2008). “Returns to
Capital: Results from a Randomized Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4):
1329–72.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2009) “Are Women more
Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 1-32.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2010) “Wage Subsidies
for Microenterprises.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 100(2): 614-18.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2012) “One-time transfers
of cash or capital have long-lasting effects on microenterprises in Sri Lanka.” Science, 335(24):
962-66.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2013) “The Demand for,
and Consequences of, Formalization Among Informal Firms in Sri Lanka.” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 5(2): 122-50.
Emran, M. Shahe, AKM Mahbub Morshed and Joseph Stiglitz (2008) “Microfinance and
Missing Markets”, Mimeo.
Fields, Gary (1975) “Rural-Urban Migration, Urban Unemployment and
Underemployment and Job-Search Activity in LDCs.” Journal of Development Economics, 2:
165-87.
Freeman, Richard (2010) “Labor Regulations, Unions, and Social Protection in
Developing Countries: Market Distortions or Efficient Institutions?” pp. 4657-4702 in D. Rodrik
and M. Rosenzweig (eds.) Handbook of Development Economics Volume 5, Elsevier.

29"
"

Galasso, Emanuela, Martin Ravallion and Agustin Salvia (2004) “Assisting the
Transition from Workfare to Work: A Randomized Experiment.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 58(1): 128-142
Groh, Matthew, Nandini Krishnan, David McKenzie and Tara Vishwanath (2016) “Do
wage subsidies provide a stepping stone to employment for recent college graduates? Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment in Jordan.” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Groh, Matthew, David McKenzie, Nour Shammout, and Tara Vishwanath (2015)
“Testing the importance of search frictions and matching through a randomized experiment in
Jordan”, IZA Journal of Labor Economics, 4:7, 2015
Hardy, Morgan and Jamie McCasland (2015) “Are Small Firms Labor Constrained?
Experimental Evidence from Ghana.” Mimeo.
Imbens, Guido and Donald Rubin (2015) Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and
Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1982) “Selection and the evolution of industry.” Econometrica 50(3):
649-70.
Levinsohn, James, Neil Rankin, Gareth Roberts. and Volker Schöer (2014) “Wage
subsidies to address youth unemployment in South Africa: Evidence from a randomised control
trial”, Mimeo.
Lucas, Robert (1978) “On the size distribution of business firms.” Bell Journal of
Economics 9(2): 508-23.
McKenzie, David (2012) “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in
experiments.” Journal of Development Economics, 99(2): 210-21.
Mortensen, Dale, and Christopher Pissarides, (1994) ‘‘Job Creation and Job Destruction
in the Theory of Unemployment.’’ Review of Economic Studies 61, 397–415.
Rauch, James (1991) “Modelling the Informal Sector Formally.” Journal of Development
Economics, 35: 33-47.
Rosenzweig, Mark (1988) “Labor markets in low-income countries”, pp. 713-62 in H.
Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan (eds.) Handbook of Development Economics. North-Holland:
Amsterdam
Stiglitz, Joseph (1974) “Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and Unemployment
in LDC's: The Labor Turnover Model”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 88(2): 194-227.
Zenou, Yves (2008) “Job Search and Mobility in Developing Countries: Theory and
Policy Implications.” Journal of Development Economics, 86: 336-35.

30"
"

.8

.85

.9

Proportion self-employed

.95

1

Figure 1: Impact on Firm Survival over Time

2

4

6

Survey round

Wage subsidy treatment

8

10

12

Control

Notes: vertical lines indicate period during which wage subsidy was in effect. Round 2 is
baseline for half the sample and first follow-up for the other half.

31"
"

Figure 2: Impact on Employment

Number of Paid Workers

0

.1

.2

.4

Number of paid workers

.2

.3

Proportion with a paid worker

.6

.4

.8

Proportion with a Paid Worker

2

4

6
8
Survey Round

Wage Subsidy Group

10

12

2

Control Group

4

6
8
Survey Round

Wage Subsidy Group

10

12

Control Group

Notes: vertical lines show intervention period. Number of workers truncated at 5 workers. Round
2 is baseline for half the sample and first follow-up for the other half.

32"
"

Figure 3: Employment Churn

Subtracted a worker

.1

Proportion subtracting a worker

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

Proportion adding a worker

.25

.2

.3

Added a worker

2

4

6
8
Survey round

Wage Subsidy Group

10

12

2

Control Group

4

6
8
Survey round

Wage Subsidy Group

10

12

Control Group

Notes: vertical lines show intervention period. Addition and subtraction of workers are defined in
terms of changes in the total number of paid workers the firm has between one survey round and
the next.

33"
"

Figure 4: Churn in the Number of Workers

.6
.4

Fraction

0

.2

.4
0

.2

Fraction

.6

.8

Change in Workers R5 to R6

.8

Change in Workers R3 to R4

-4

-2
0
2
4
Change in Number of Workers
Treatment

6

-5

Control

0
Change in Number of Workers
Treatment

5

Control

Notes: R3 to R4 is the change in the number of workers between the last pre-intervention survey
and first survey during the wage subsidy. R5 to R6 is the change in the number of workers
between the last survey during the intervention and first survey after the intervention.

34"
"

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

0

10000 20000

Round 4 Conditional Profits

5 10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

Percentile

Round 12 Unconditional Profits

Round 12 Conditional Profits

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

0
-20000

5 10

20000 40000

Percentile

Conditional Profits

20000 40000

5 10

-10000

Conditional Profits

0

10000 20000

Round 4 Unconditional Profits

0
-20000

Profits

-10000

Profits

Figure 5: Quantile Treatment Effects on Profits in Round 4 (During Intervention) and Round 12 (4 years later)

5 10

Percentile

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

Percentile

Notes: solid line shows quantile treatment effects, with 95% confidence interval around it. Dashed line indicates OLS treatment effect. Quantile regressions
control for baseline profits, randomization strata, and the set of re-randomized variables. Unconditional profits include zeros for firms not operating; conditional
profits
are
conditional
on
the
business
still
operating.

35#
#

5 10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

0

100000

Round 4 Conditional Sales

-100000

0

Conditional Sales

Round 4 Unconditional Sales

5 10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

Round 12 Unconditional Sales

Round 12 Conditional Sales

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

0
-100000

5 10

100000

Percentile

Conditional Sales

Percentile

0
-100000

Sales

100000

-100000

Sales

100000

Figure 6: Quantile Treatment Effects on Sales in Round 4 (During Intervention) and Round 12 (4 years later)

5 10

Percentile

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9095

Percentile

Notes: solid line shows quantile treatment effects, with 95% confidence interval around it. Dashed line indicates OLS treatment effect. Quantile regressions
control for baseline profits, randomization strata, and the set of re-randomized variables. Unconditional profits include zeros for firms not operating; conditional
profits
are
conditional
on
the
business
still
operating.

36#
#

Table&1:&Balance&at&Baseline&and&Endline
Control
Re#randomized,Variables
Number7of7Paid7Workers
Education7(Years)
Raven7Test7Score
Digitspan7Recall7Score
Total7Assets
Total7Assets<1500LKR
Total7Assets>935000LKR
Monthly7Profits
Profit7Data7Missing
Monthly7Profits<2000LKR
Monthly7Profits>30000LKR
Business7Practices7Score
From7booster7sample
Stratification,Variables
Retail7Sector
Colombo
Kandy
Additional,Variables,
Any7paid7worker7at7baseline
Monthly7Sales
Owner's7Age
Business7is7Registered7for7Taxes
Weekly7hours7worked

Full7Sample
Treatment

p0value

Normalized
Difference

Present7in7Round712
Control
Treatment
p0value

0.19
10.35
3.34
6.42
239893
0.06
0.05
13862
0.03
0.06
0.04
8.27
0.52

0.16
10.25
3.34
6.36
250563
0.02
0.06
14552
0.02
0.03
0.06
8.76
0.53

0.498
0.641
0.983
0.628
0.768
0.062
0.864
0.509
0.348
0.179
0.257
0.343
0.841

00.059
00.040
0.002
00.042
0.026
00.164
0.015
0.057
00.082
00.118
0.098
0.082
0.017

0.18
10.35
3.31
6.43
246815
0.06
0.06
13916
0.03
0.06
0.04
8.32
0.53

0.13
10.23
3.28
6.39
248026
0.02
0.06
14485
0.02
0.03
0.06
8.78
0.54

0.255
0.604
0.874
0.786
0.771
0.022
0.733
0.448
0.486
0.240
0.342
0.429
0.906

00.092
00.050
00.015
00.031
0.003
00.218
0.005
0.047
00.058
00.099
0.074
0.079
0.032

0.39
0.47
0.47

0.38
0.44
0.48

0.857
0.436
0.893

00.016
00.068
0.012

0.39
0.46
0.48

0.39
0.41
0.50

0.974
0.317
0.736

00.001
00.105
0.041

0.12
41175
35.43
0.31
57.94

0.10
52435
35.16
0.32
59.31

0.388
0.048
0.644
0.827
0.379

00.075
0.171
00.040
0.019
0.076

0.12
42079
35.34
0.31
58.23

0.08
52142
35.37
0.32
58.55

0.119
0.070
0.995
0.916
0.940

00.129
0.152
0.006
0.008
0.018

Sample7Size
286
250
262
Joint7orthogonality7p0value
0.734
Note:7present7in7round7127denotes7information7on7whether7they7have7a7paid7worker7is7available7in7the7last7survey7round.

37#
#

Normalized
Difference

230
0.649

Table&2:&Data&Availability&by&Treatment&Status&and&Timing
Before
During
After9Subsidy
Subsidy Subsidy
Year1
Year2
Year3+
Panel&A:&Data&on&Operating&Status&Available
Control9Group
0.958
0.951
0.983
0.986
0.976
Wage9Subsidy9Treatment
0.980
0.956
0.976
0.964
0.972
pGvalue
0.148
0.787
0.596
0.099
0.799
Panel&B:&Data&on&Having&a&Paid&Worker&Available
Control9Group
0.839
0.951
0.965
0.962
0.962
Wage9Subsidy9Treatment
0.888
0.956
0.948
0.920
0.956
pGvalue
0.102
0.787
0.333
0.040
0.748
Panel&C:&Data&on&Profits&Available
Control9Group
0.808
0.944
0.965
0.965
0.962
Wage9Subsidy9Treatment
0.832
0.956
0.944
0.920
0.956
pGvalue
0.467
0.529
0.241
0.024
0.748
Notes:9Before9Subsidy9refers9to9round939data9between9baselines9and
intervention.9PGvalue9is9from9tGtest9of9equality9of9response9rates9between
control9and9wage9subsidy9treatment.9Proportions9shown9indicate9that9data
are9available9for9at9least9one9survey9round9during9the9specified9timing9window.
Profits9and9Workers9are9set9to9zero9for9firms9which9are9closed9down.

38#
#

Table&3:&Correlates&of&Take0up
Wage@Subsidy@Only@Sample Any@Wage@Subsidy@Treatment
'0.084
'0.102*
0.001
'0.016
(0.055)
(0.055) (0.030)
(0.030)
Colombo
'0.196**
'0.134 '0.210***
'0.155***
(0.092)
(0.094) (0.054)
(0.055)
Kandy
'0.067
'0.037 '0.145***
'0.117**
(0.091)
(0.092) (0.054)
(0.054)
Formally@registered
'0.006
'0.014
0.030
0.016
(0.060)
(0.057) (0.031)
(0.031)
Any@paid@worker@at@baseline
0.089
0.042
0.034
0.004
(0.086)
(0.083) (0.046)
(0.046)
Above@median@assets
'0.018
'0.038
0.004
'0.019
(0.056)
(0.053) (0.030)
(0.030)
Firm@five@years@or@younger
0.067
0.066
0.026
0.025
(0.054)
(0.053) (0.029)
(0.030)
Owner's@education@(years)
0.020*
0.016
0.014** 0.012*
(0.011) (0.011)
(0.006) (0.006)
Baseline@business@practice@index
0.011*** 0.011***
0.011*** 0.010***
(0.004) (0.004)
(0.002) (0.003)
Owner's@age
'0.002
0.001
0.001
0.002
(0.004) (0.004)
(0.002) (0.002)
Sample@Size
250
250
250
843
843
842
Pseudo'R2
0.044
0.050
0.083
0.020
0.036
0.047
Notes:@coefficients@are@marginal@effects@from@probit@estimation.@Robust@standard@errors@in@
parentheses.@*,@**,@and@***@denote@significance@at@the@10,@5,@and@1@percent@levels@respectively.
Retail

39#
#

Table&4:&Impact&on&Firm&Survival
Sample
Size
Panel&A:&Self9employed&in&Survey&Round
Assigned>to>Treatment

Before
Subsidy

5005

During
Subsidy

Year1

After>Subsidy
Year2
Year3+

p0value
equality

p0value
all>zero

00.005
00.009 0.056*** 0.074*** 0.058**
0.004
0.006
(0.023) (0.018) (0.021) (0.025) (0.027)
Control>Mean
0.927
0.958
0.888
0.858
0.834
Panel&B:&Self9employed,&assuming&that&firms&which&close&and&are&never&observed&again&have&stayed&closed
Assigned>to>Treatment
5044
00.006
00.010 0.054** 0.066** 0.056*
0.009
0.014
(0.023) (0.018) (0.021) (0.026) (0.028)
Control>Mean
0.927
0.958
0.888
0.855
0.817
Panel&C:&Self9employed,&assuming&that&all&attritors&are&closed
Assigned>to>Treatment
5139
00.008
00.012 0.052** 0.058** 0.055*
0.015
0.029
(0.023) (0.018) (0.022) (0.028) (0.030)
Control>Mean
0.888
0.879
0.820
0.827
0.788
Notes:>robust>standard>errors>in>parentheses,>clustered>at>the>firm>level.>All>regressions>control>for>randomization
strata,>variables>used>for>re0randomization,>>and>contain>survey>round>dummies.
>*,>**,>***>indicate>significance>at>the>10,>5,>and>1>percent>levels>respectively.
p0values>are>for>test>that>the>treatment>effect>is>equal>in>the>during,>year>1,>year>2,>and>years>3>to>4>periods;>and>that>the>treatment
effect>is>zero>in>all>four>periods.

40#
#

Table&5:&Impact&on&Employment
Before
Sample2size Subsidy
Panel&A:&Number&of&Paid&Workers
Assigned2to2Treatment

4824

Control2Mean
Panel&B:&Any&Paid&Worker
Assigned2to2Treatment

4824

,0.077
(0.082)
0.48

During
Subsidy

Year1

0.204***
(0.075)
0.48

0.124
(0.078)
0.45

After2Subsidy
Year2
Year3+
0.047
(0.080)
0.51

,0.023
(0.084)
0.60

p,value p,value
equality all2zero
0.043

0.027

,0.014 0.140*** 0.111*** 0.024
,0.002
0.000
0.000
(0.036) (0.035) (0.034) (0.035) (0.032)
Control2Mean
0.25
0.27
0.24
0.28
0.29
Panel&C:&Added&a&Worker&Between&Survey&Rounds
Assigned2to2Treatment
4614
,0.008 0.109*** 0.015 ,0.041** ,0.003
0.000
0.000
(0.036) (0.024) (0.020) (0.020) (0.017)
Control2Mean
0.19
0.11
0.10
0.14
0.13
Panel&D:&Subtracted&a&Worker&Between&Survey&Rounds
Assigned2to2Treatment
4614
,0.022
,0.007
0.017
0.028
,0.005
0.413
0.546
(0.016) (0.019) (0.022) (0.020) (0.016)
Control2Mean
0.05
0.11
0.14
0.10
0.11
Panel&E:&Own&Hours&Worked&in&the&Business
Assigned2to2Treatment
4882
,0.580
0.664
2.919
3.932* 4.440** 0.423
0.189
(2.261) (1.910) (1.978) (2.076) (1.960)
Control2Mean
47.3
51.3
44.0
45.0
42.8
Panel&F:&Number&of&Unpaid&Workers&in&Business
Assigned2to2Treatment
4785
,0.045
0.008
,0.026
0.022
0.008
0.646
0.776
(0.047) (0.035) (0.044) (0.038) (0.037)
Control2Mean
0.21
0.18
0.26
0.17
0.22
Notes:2robust2standard2errors2in2parentheses,2clustered2at2the2firm2level.2All2regressions2control2for2randomization
strata,2variables2used2for2re,randomization,2the2baseline2value2(except2for2panels2C2and2D2on2churn),2and2contain
survey2round2dummies.2*,2**,2***2indicate2significance2at2the210,25,2and212percent2levels2respectively.
Regressions2are2unconditional,2and2assign2zero2to2the2outcome2for2firms2not2operating.
p,values2are2for2test2that2the2treatment2effect2is2equal2in2the2during,2year21,2year22,2and2years232to242periods;2
and2that2the2treatment2effect2is2zero2in2all2four2periods.
41#
#

Table&6:&Impact&on&Profits&and&Sales
Before
During
After2Subsidy
p,value p,value
Sample2size Subsidy Subsidy
Year1
Year2
Year3+ equality all2zero
Panel&A:&&Unconditional&Profits&(Truncated&at&99th&Percentile)
Assigned2to2Treatment
4638
897
676
1863
1861
1483
0.798
0.523
(1487)
(1246)
(1159)
(1454)
(1179)
Control2Mean
14572
16603
16557
18710
17854
Panel&B:&Inverse&Hyperbolic&Sine&of&Profits
Assigned2to2Treatment
4638
,0.022
0.203
0.590** 0.754*** 0.635** 0.265
0.086
(0.284) (0.217) (0.242) (0.284) (0.296)
Control2Mean
9.21
9.38
8.97
8.86
8.56
Panel&C:&Profits&Conditional&on&Business&Operating&(Truncated&at&99th&Percentile)
Assigned2to2Treatment
4159
1124
871
1017
633
530
0.987
0.931
(1539)
(1269)
(1174)
(1499)
(1219)
Control2Mean
15954
17356
18658
21975
21588
Panel&D:&Log&Profits&Conditional&on&Business&Operating
Assigned2to2Treatment
4120
0.076
0.045
0.061
0.011
0.005
0.812
0.835
(0.070) (0.058) (0.059) (0.061) (0.056)
Control2Mean
9.39
9.45
9.55
9.71
9.72
Panel&E:&&Unconditional&Sales&(Truncated&at&99th&Percentile)
Assigned2to2Treatment
4731
,4486
5438
6950
16652*
7256
0.457
0.417
(7326)
(7124)
(7763)
(8846)
(9410)
Control2Mean
51783
60638
61625
69673
72910
Panel&F:&Inverse&Hyperbolic&Sine&of&Sales
Assigned2to2Treatment
4731
,0.046
0.196 0.740*** 0.882*** 0.677** 0.128
0.032
(0.299) (0.237) (0.252) (0.307) (0.319)
Control2Mean
10.16
10.33
9.91
9.72
9.47
Panel&G:&Sales&Conditional&on&Business&Operating&(Truncated&at&99th&Percentile)
Assigned2to2Treatment
4247
,4757
6636
4355
13817
4904
0.584
0.573
(7811)
(7504)
(8325)
(9574) (10801)
Control2Mean
56577
63361
69061
81830
88142
Panel&H:&Log&Sales&Conditional&on&Business&Operating
Assigned2to2Treatment
4226
,0.009
0.103
0.140*
0.091
0.072
0.834
0.479
(0.087) (0.074) (0.079) (0.078) (0.081)
Control2Mean
10.41
10.44
10.49
10.73
10.73
Notes:2robust2standard2errors2in2parentheses,2clustered2at2the2firm2level.2All2regressions2control2for2randomization
strata,2variables2used2for2re,randomization,2the2baseline2value2(except2for2panels2C2and2D2on2churn),2and2contain
survey2round2dummies.2*,2**,2***2indicate2significance2at2the210,25,2and212percent2levels2respectively.
p,values2are2for2test2that2the2treatment2effect2is2equal2in2the2during,2year21,2year22,2and2years232to242periods;2
and2that2the2treatment2effect2is2zero2in2all2four2periods.

42#
#

Table&7:&Return&on&Labor
LEVEL:OF:PROFITS
Associations:in
Control:Group
Treatment:IV:estimates
Cross
Panel
Unconditional Conditional
Section
Data
Profits
Profits
Panel&A:&Using&Wage&subsidy&Only&Treatment&for&IV
Number:of:paid:workers
6674***
4844***
2403
3054
(557)
(575)
(6055)
(5697)
Sample:Size
4959
4959
Panel&B:&Using&all&groups&which&received&a&wage&subsidy&for&IV
Number:of:paid:workers

951

905

897
(3530)

1151
(3297)

LOG:OF:PROFITS
Associations:in
IV
Control:Group Treatment
Cross
Panel
Effect
Section
Data
0.216*** 0.122***
(0.015) (0.017)
4429

4429

0.138
(0.279)
884
0.140
(0.155)

Sample:Size
1993
1888
1851
Notes::robust:standard:errors:in:parentheses,:clustered:at:the:firm:level.
*,:**,:***:indicate:significance:at:the:10,:5,:and:1:percent:levels:respectively.
Regressions:control:for:time:fixed:effects,:randomization:strata,:and:controls:used:in:reUrandomization.
Columns:1,:2,:5,:and:6:use:control:group:only.:Columns:3,4:and:7:use:wage:subsidy:only:and:control:groups:in:panel:A,
and:all:groups:receiving:a:wage:subsidy:in:panel:B.

43#
#

Table&8:&Heterogeneity&in&Impact&on&Number&of&Employees
Before&Subsidy
.0.178
.0.068
(0.114)
(0.062)
During&Subsidy
0.102
0.170**
(0.107)
(0.069)
Year&1&After
0.133
0.105
(0.100)
(0.082)
Year&2&After
0.021
.0.010
(0.105)
(0.081)
Years&3.4&After
.0.043
.0.046
(0.106)
(0.089)
Interaction*with
Before&Subsidy*Interaction
During&Subsidy*Interaction
Year&1&After*Interaction
Year&2&After*Interaction
Years&3.4&After*Interaction

Young
firm
0.224
(0.159)
0.227
(0.149)
.0.019
(0.158)
0.057
(0.162)
0.045
(0.172)

previously
hired
0.026
(0.258)
0.215
(0.228)
0.120
(0.209)
0.265
(0.235)
0.133
(0.227)

.0.127
(0.146)
.0.079
(0.128)
.0.135
(0.147)
.0.137
(0.148)
.0.046
(0.145)

.0.078
(0.112)
0.136
(0.096)
0.059
(0.106)
.0.068
(0.109)
.0.069
(0.121)

.0.111
(0.123)
0.155
(0.115)
0.075
(0.126)
.0.025
(0.136)
.0.072
(0.134)

business
practices
0.006
(0.014)
0.033**
(0.014)
0.030**
(0.015)
0.022
(0.016)
0.002
(0.016)

above
median*capital
0.016
(0.166)
0.145
(0.152)
0.144
(0.157)
0.255
(0.161)
0.105
(0.166)

low*household
wealth
0.051
(0.163)
0.078
(0.150)
0.082
(0.156)
0.120
(0.164)
0.083
(0.169)

.0.087
(0.083)
0.191**
(0.075)
0.112
(0.079)
0.035
(0.081)
.0.032
(0.084)

.0.073
(0.083)
0.210***
(0.076)
0.129*
(0.078)
0.052
(0.081)
.0.017
(0.084)

also*assigned
business*training
0.090
(0.145)
.0.016
(0.123)
.0.071
(0.139)
0.089
(0.139)
0.059
(0.135)

also*assigned
savings*treatment
0.068
(0.139)
0.040
(0.131)
0.089
(0.142)
0.045
(0.148)
0.066
(0.155)

Sample&Size
4824
4824
4824
4824
4824
8742
8433
P.value&to&test&interactions&all&zero
0.377
0.788
0.063
0.565
0.989
0.677
0.986
Notes:&robust&standard&errors&in&parentheses,&clustered&at&the&firm&level.&All&regressions&control&for&randomization&strata,&variables&used&for
re.randomization&and&survey&round.&Columns&1&to&5&also&control&for&baseline&value&of&interacting&variable&and&interaction&between&this
interacting&variable&and&survey&round.&Columns&6&and&7&also&control&for&business&training&and&savings&treatment&effects&respectively.
*,&**,&***&indicate&significance&at&the&10,5,&and&1&percent&levels&respectively.
Young&firms&are&less&than&5&years&at&baseline;&low&household&wealth&is&based&on&a&principal&component&of&household&assets.&See&appendix&4.

For Online Publication
Appendix 1: Timeline
April 2008 Round 1 - Screening Survey and Baseline I
October 2008: Round 2- Booster Sample and Baseline II
April 2009: Round 3
August 2009: Wage Subsidies Begin
October 2009: Round 4 (During Intervention)
April 2010: Round 5 (During Intervention)
May 2010: Wage Subsidies End
October 2010: Round 6
April 2011: Round 7
October 2011: Round 8
April 2012: Round 9
October 2012: Round 10
April 2013: Round 11
April 2014: Round 12

Supplementary Treatments:
Savings Treatment began November 2008, ended August 2009
Business Training Treatment: June-July 2009

Appendix 2: Further Details on Sampling
About half of our sample for this project comes from a larger panel survey which is
representative of all urban areas in Sri Lanka outside the northern province. From this panel
survey, we selected 717 male self employed workers with 2 or fewer paid employees in urban
areas in Sri Lanka: Colombo, Kandy and the Galle-Matara area. This part of the sample was
constructed through a listing exercise conducted in early 2008. We selected a total of 18 Division
Secretariat (D.S.) Divisions in the three urban areas. Within each D.S. Division we then selected
10 (in Colombo and Kandy) or 5 (in Galle/ Matara) Grama Niladhara (GN) divisions and listed
45#
#

50 households starting from a random point.16 Because we needed a larger sample for the
interventions, in October 2008 we selected a set of GNs neighboring those in the original panel
survey. We used a similar screening survey to identify male self-employed workers with fewer
than 2 paid employees, boosting the sample by 816 individuals. Because of the way they are
constructed, both subsamples are representative of the areas from which they are taken.
However, there are some differences in the manner of constructing them, so we add a control for
the enterprises in the booster sample in each of the regressions.17
Appendix 3: Details of Supplementary Interventions
Savings Intervention: In November 2008 we notified those assigned to the savings treatment that
they had been selected to participate in a program designed to encourage them to build savings
balances. The participants were not told about the other two interventions in November even if
they had been assigned to one of the other two treatments. As a part of the savings incentive
program, we offered to make the initial deposit in a savings account at the National Savings
Bank (NSB) and then to match deposits made into that account up to a certain limit each month
and at a pre-announced match rate. The account would remain ‘locked’ until 1 August 2009. The
initial match rate was set at 50 percent for deposits of up to 1000 Sri Lankan Rupees (LKR)18
made by the end of December. The match rate was kept at 50 percent through July, but the
maximum amount we would match was increased to 2000 LKR in January and to 4000 LKR in
May, 2009. In July, we raised the match rate to 100% and the maximum to 5000 LKR. Finally,
just before the accounts were unlocked, we added 5000 LKR to every account, regardless of
previous deposit patterns. The participants received regular passbooks for the accounts, and
deposits could be made at any NSB branch. But the accounts were all opened through a single
branch in Gampola so that the branch manager there was able to ensure that money was
withdrawn before 1 August only if the participant faced an emergency situation. After the
accounts were unlocked on 1 August, the participants were free to move the accounts to any
#############################################################
16

# The G.N. Division is the smallest of the four administrative levels in Sri Lanka: Provinces (9), Districts (25),
Divisional Secretariat (DS) Divisions (324), and Grama Niladhari (GN) Divisions (14,008).#
17
#We find no differences in the operating characteristics of the enterprises (sales, profits, etc.) but the owners in the
original sample have about a half year less schooling and have been in business for about three-quarters of a year
longer.#
18

1000 LKR was approximately US$8.75 in mid-2009, $8.85 in mid-2010, $9.14 in mid-2011, and $7.49 in mid2012.

46#
#

NSB branch, or to withdraw the money. At that point, we lost access the administrative data, and
hence are unable to track when money was withdrawn.
Training Intervention: This treatment was a training program based on the International Labor
Organization’s Improve Your Business (IYB) program. IYB is a five day program intended to
generate growth in microenterprises. The modules covered are marketing, buying, costing, stock
control, record keeping, and financial planning. We asked that the training also include
additional material on hiring and managing employees, as employment generation is a key
outcome of interest in the project. The training was provided by the Sri Lankan Business
Development Centre (SLBDC),19 a Sri Lankan non-profit training institution established in 1984.
SLBDC is the most experienced provider of ILO entrepreneurship programs in Sri Lanka, having
offered the first training on the island in 2001. All of the SLBDC training staff involved in the
project were university qualified and trained under the national-level SIYB training programs
conducted by the ILO. Each had a minimum of five years experience delivering SIYB training.
Therefore, any failure to find impacts should not be due to low quality trainers or inexperience
with the materials. Those selected for training were offered a stipend of 1000 LKR and an
additional bonus of 1500 LKR paid at the end if they attended all five days. The stipend was
meant to cover transport and the opportunity cost of not working in the business on the training
days.
Appendix Table 3 shows that assignment to these supplementary interventions is balanced
compared to the control group and wage subsidy only groups in terms of baseline observable
characteristics.

#############################################################
19
#http://www.slbdc-lk.org/#
47#
#

Appendix(Table(3:(Balance(for(Supplementary(Treatments
Control
Wage((
Group
Subsidy
Re#randomized,Variables
Number(of(Paid(Workers
0.19
0.16
Education((Years)
10.35
10.25
Raven(Test(Score
3.34
3.34
Digitspan(Recall(Score
6.42
6.36
Total(Assets
239893
250563
Total(Assets<1500LKR
0.06
0.02
Total(Assets>935000LKR
0.05
0.06
Monthly(Profits
13862
14552
Profit(Data(Missing
0.03
0.02
Monthly(Profits<2000LKR
0.06
0.03
Monthly(Profits>30000LKR
0.04
0.06
Business(Practices(Score
8.27
8.76
From(booster(sample
0.52
0.53
Stratification,Variables
Retail(Sector
0.39
0.38
Colombo
0.47
0.44
Kandy
0.47
0.48
Additional,Variables,
Any(paid(worker(at(baseline
0.12
0.10
Monthly(Sales
41175
52435
Owner's(Age
35.43
35.16
Business(is(Registered(for(Taxes
0.31
0.32
Weekly(hours(worked
57.94
59.31
Sample(Size

286

250

Wage(Subsidy((Wage(Subsidy((
&(Savings
&(Training

Training((
Only

Savings((
Only

F?test((
p?value

0.20
10.32
3.32
6.35
232635
0.03
0.04
14010
0.03
0.03
0.06
8.24
0.54

0.15
10.54
3.12
6.39
203654
0.03
0.03
12947
0.03
0.04
0.04
8.59
0.56

0.23
10.52
3.28
6.27
236665
0.01
0.04
13282
0.02
0.03
0.06
9.24
0.54

0.25
10.43
3.35
6.21
258261
0.05
0.05
13861
0.02
0.04
0.01
8.35
0.46

0.507
0.659
0.687
0.681
0.430
0.135
0.743
0.491
0.624
0.896
0.002
0.440
0.435

0.38
0.47
0.47

0.38
0.46
0.47

0.38
0.49
0.48

0.38
0.47
0.47

1.000
0.898
1.000

0.13
49142
36.19
0.32
60.77

0.09
41785
34.91
0.31
60.41

0.15
46768
34.28
0.31
57.20

0.12
34496
34.38
0.40
59.78

0.385
0.013
0.049
0.478
0.496

297

298

141

112

Appendix(Table(3:(Balance(for(Supplementary(Treatments
Control
Wage((
Group
Subsidy
Re#randomized,Variables
Number(of(Paid(Workers
0.19
0.16
Education((Years)
10.35
10.25
Raven(Test(Score
3.34
3.34
Digitspan(Recall(Score
6.42
6.36
Total(Assets
239893
250563
Total(Assets<1500LKR
0.06
0.02
Total(Assets>935000LKR
0.05
0.06
Monthly(Profits
13862
14552
Profit(Data(Missing
0.03
0.02
Monthly(Profits<2000LKR
0.06
0.03
Monthly(Profits>30000LKR
0.04
0.06
Business(Practices(Score
8.27
8.76
From(booster(sample
0.52
0.53
Stratification,Variables
Retail(Sector
0.39
0.38
Colombo
0.47
0.44
Kandy
0.47
0.48
Additional,Variables,
Any(paid(worker(at(baseline
0.12
0.10
Monthly(Sales
41175
52435
Owner's(Age
35.43
35.16
Business(is(Registered(for(Taxes
0.31
0.32
Weekly(hours(worked
57.94
59.31
Sample(Size

286

250

Wage(Subsidy((Wage(Subsidy((
&(Savings
&(Training

Training((
Only

Savings((
Only

F?test((
p?value

0.20
10.32
3.32
6.35
232635
0.03
0.04
14010
0.03
0.03
0.06
8.24
0.54

0.15
10.54
3.12
6.39
203654
0.03
0.03
12947
0.03
0.04
0.04
8.59
0.56

0.23
10.52
3.28
6.27
236665
0.01
0.04
13282
0.02
0.03
0.06
9.24
0.54

0.25
10.43
3.35
6.21
258261
0.05
0.05
13861
0.02
0.04
0.01
8.35
0.46

0.507
0.659
0.687
0.681
0.430
0.135
0.743
0.491
0.624
0.896
0.002
0.440
0.435

0.38
0.47
0.47

0.38
0.46
0.47

0.38
0.49
0.48

0.38
0.47
0.47

1.000
0.898
1.000

0.13
49142
36.19
0.32
60.77

0.09
41785
34.91
0.31
60.41

0.15
46768
34.28
0.31
57.20

0.12
34496
34.38
0.40
59.78

0.385
0.013
0.049
0.478
0.496

297

298

141

112

Appendix 4: Measurement of Key Variables
Our key outcomes are measured as follows:
Survival: we examine survival in terms of whether the individual is self-employed at the time of
the survey. This includes those who have shut down their business and started a new one. It is
directly measured by asking whether they are engaged in self-employment on the survey, and
through direct observation and asking family and neighbors for those firms which attrit. Where
the original respondent cannot be located, beginning in round 7 (April 2011) we ask family
members or neighbors whether the individual still operates the business they previously
operated. When the alternative respondent says no, we ask what them what the initial respondent
is presently doing. In our baseline specifications, we use responses from the first but not the
second to define the survival variable. We do this because we believe the information on whether
the original business is still operating is likely to be more reliable. An alternative approach would
be to use both responses to define whether the individual still operates any business. The results
from this approach are qualitatively similar, though the treatment effect in the second year after
treatment is slightly larger in magnitude. Regressions using this alternative definition are
available from the authors on request.
Number of Paid Workers: this is the number of permanent workers plus the number of casual and
daily workers reported on the survey. It is truncated at 5 workers (the 99th percentile) to reduce
the influence of outliers, and coded as 0 for firms that do not survive.
Any paid worker: defined as having at least one paid worker.
Added a worker between survey rounds: defined as the number of paid workers in round t
exceeding that in round t-1. It therefore measures net, rather than gross, worker flows.
Subtracted a worker between survey rounds: defined as the number of paid workers in round t
being less than in round t-1.
Own hours reported in the business: the number of hours worked in the business in the last
week, truncated at the 99th percentile, and coded as 0 for individuals not self-employed.
Number of unpaid workers in the business: Number of unpaid workers reported by the firm
owner.
49#
#

Firm profits: these are monthly, and were asked directly of the owner as “the total income of the
business during each of the last month after paying all expenses including wages of employees,
but not including any income you paid yourself”. This follows the wording and recommendation
of De Mel et al. (2009).20 We consider several transforms of profits to deal with outliers and firm
closure. This includes unconditional profits (which put zeroes in for closed firms) truncated at
the 99th percentile, the inverse hyperbolic sine of profits, truncated profits conditional on the
business operating, and log profits conditional on operation. Nominal values were deflated to
real values using the Consumer Price Index for Colombo, gathered by the Sri Lankan
Department of Census and Statistics.
Firm sales: these are firm sales in the past month, deflated into real terms using the CPI. As with
profits, we consider several transforms of the raw data to account for outliers and firm closure,
with the variables defined analogously to profits.
Business Practices score:
The total score – the composite business practice score -- ranges from a minimum of -1 to a
maximum of 29. The total is the sum of the following component scores: the marketing score,
the stock score, the records score, and the financial planning score.
The marketing score ranges from 0 to 7, and it is calculated by adding one point for each of the
following that the business has done in the last 3 months:
&

Visited at least one of its competitor’s businesses to see what prices its competitors are
charging
& Visited at least one of its competitor’s businesses to see what products its competitors
have available for sale
& Asked existing customers whether there are any other products the customers would like
the business to sell or produce
& Talked with at least one former customer to find out why former customers have stopped
buying from this business
& Asked a supplier about which products are selling well in this business’ industry
& Attracted customers with a special offer
& Advertised in any form (last 6 months)
The stock score ranges from -1 to 2, and it is calculated by subtracting one point
& If the business runs out of stock once a month or more
And adding one point for each of the following that the business has done in the last 3 months
#############################################################
20

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2009) “Measuring Microenterprise Profits: Must
We Ask How the Sausage Is Made?”,Journal of Development Economics, 88(1): 19-31.

50#
#

&
&

Attempted to negotiate with a supplier for a lower price on raw material
Compared the prices or quality offered by alternate suppliers or sources of raw materials
to the business’ current suppliers or sources of raw material
The records score ranges from 0 to 8, and it is calculated by adding one point for each of the
following that the business does
&
&
&
&

Keeps written business records
Records every purchase and sale made by the business
Able to use records to see how much cash the business has on hand at any point in time
Uses records regularly to know whether sales of a particular product are increasing or
decreasing from one month to another
& Works out the cost to the business of each main product it sells
& Knows which goods you make the most profit per item selling
& Has a written budget, which states how much is owed each month for rent, electricity,
equipment maintenance, transport, advertising, and other indirect costs to business
& Has records documenting that there exists enough money each month after paying
business expenses to repay a loan in the hypothetical situation that this business wants a
bank loan
The financial planning score ranges from 0-12, and it is calculated by adding up to three points
for each of the following two questions
&

How frequently do you review the financial performance of your business and analyze
where there are areas for improvement
& How frequently do you compare performance to your target
o Zero points for “Never”
o One point for “Once a year or less”
o Two points for “Two or three times a year”
o Three points for “Monthly or more often”
And adding one point for each of the following that the business has
&
&
&
&
&
&

A target set for sales over the next year
A budget of the likely costs your business will have to face over the next year
An annual profit and loss statement
An annual statement of cash flow
An annual balance sheet
An annual income/expenditure sheet

Wage worker and SME surveys
We also make use of data from surveys of wage workers and larger firms. The wage worker
survey was conducted in all urban areas in Sri Lanka at annual intervals from 2008-2011. The
51#
#

initial sample was drawn from a listing of households in randomly selected Grama Niladhari
divisions. The SME survey of larger firm owners selected surveyed firms with between 5 and
250 workers (including the owner). This sample was drawn from a listing of visible enterprises
conducted for other purposes by the Sri Lanka office of AC Nielsen. We surveyed owners first in
April 2008, and resurveyed in April 2009 and April 2010. The questions from the wage worker
and SME surveys that we used in the analysis for this paper are described in the text.

Appendix 5: Round by Round Survey Attrition Rate
Appendix Figure 5 shows the attrition rate by round, in terms of whether we have information on
whether the business is still open/the owner is self-employed, and in terms of whether we can
measure whether the enterprise has paid workers. Starting in round 7 we added a module which
collected information from relatives, friends, and neighboring businesses if the business was not
able to be interviewed, resulting in a reduction in attrition at that time. The attrition rate averages
5.6 percent for data on whether the business is operating, and 9 percent for data on whether the
business has paid workers. Attrition rates are balanced for treatment and control in most waves,
and in the last round we have data on employment for all but 8 percent of firms.

52#
#

0

.05

.1

Cumulative attrition in round

.15

Attrition rate on self-employment data

2

4

6

Survey round

SE data - Treat
Employment data - Treat

8

10

12

SE data - control
Employment data - control

Appendix 6: Does treatment change which firms have workers?
Appendix Table 6.1 compares the baseline characteristics of the subsample of treatment and
control firms which have a paid employee in round 4 (during the intervention), and in round 12
(the last survey round). This comparison allows us to see the extent to which the wage subsidy
changes which firms have paid workers. We see little selectivity in terms of owner’s education,
raven, and digit span scores. During the intervention, the firms hiring workers who would not
have done so if they were in the control group appear to be smaller (lower profits, lower total
assets) and outside of Colombo. However, by the time of the last survey, the profit difference has
disappeared, and only the geographic difference remains.

53#
#

Appendix(Table(6.1:(Does(Treatment(Change(Which(Firms(Have(Workers?
Have1a1Worker1in1Round14
Have1a1Worker1in1Round112
Control
Treatment p,value
Control
Treatment p,value
Number1of1Paid1Workers
0.43
0.27
0.157
0.47
0.30
0.213
Education1(Years)
10.17
10.33
0.682
10.60
10.63
0.943
Raven1Test1Score
3.19
3.23
0.891
3.08
3.08
0.985
Digitspan1Recall1Score
6.51
6.55
0.858
6.56
6.50
0.816
Total1Assets
332819
280911
0.483
320187
349938
0.752
Total1Assets<1500LKR
0.01
0.02
0.750
0.03
0.02
0.633
Total1Assets>935000LKR
0.09
0.06
0.584
0.10
0.13
0.609
Monthly1Profits
20500
15473
0.029
17927
17759
0.953
Profit1Data1Missing
0.01
0.02
0.750
0.03
0.02
0.633
Monthly1Profits<2000LKR
0.03
0.01
0.394
0.07
0.02
0.129
Monthly1Profits>30000LKR
0.09
0.07
0.778
0.06
0.08
0.600
Business1Practices1Score
8.79
10.19
0.146
9.64
10.30
0.541
From1booster1sample
0.53
0.58
0.523
0.49
0.53
0.602
Retail1Sector
0.31
0.34
0.762
0.36
0.28
0.324
Colombo
0.50
0.33
0.024
0.47
0.30
0.037
Kandy
0.46
0.56
0.203
0.44
0.61
0.055
Any1paid1worker1at1baseline
0.29
0.18
0.105
0.29
0.17
0.102
Monthly1Sales
57161
67089
0.414
49053
61765
0.276
Owner's1Age
36.93
35.01
0.046
36.65
35.00
0.122
Business1is1Registered1for1Taxes 0.37
0.26
0.139
0.35
0.27
0.307
Weekly1hours1worked
59.20
60.07
0.741
56.83
57.13
0.916
Notes:1characteristics1are1baseline1characteristics.1P,value1compares1whether1characteristics1of1firms
having1a1paid1worker1in1round141(during1the1intervention),1and1in1round1121(last1survey)1are1similar
for1the1treatment1and1control1groups1using1a1t,test1of1equality1of1means.

Appendix Figure 6 explores further how the baseline profitability of those hiring workers during
the intervention period compares in the treatment and control groups, and to those who already
had workers and those who never hired a worker amongst the treatment group. We see the
treatment brings into hiring workers firms with lower profits than those hiring workers in the
control group, and than those who already had workers in the treatment group. Those hiring
workers in the treatment group have a similar baseline profits distribution to those who never
hire a worker during the intervention period.
Appendix Figure 6: Treated Firms Hiring Workers During Intervention Were Lower
Profit Firms

54#
#

.00008
.00006

Among treated, who hires workers?

.00002

.00004

Probability Density

.00003
.00002
0

0

.00001

Probability Density

.00004

.00005

Firms with Workers in Round 4

0
0

20000
40000
60000
Baseline Profits

80000

20000
40000
60000
Baseline profits

80000

Always had worker

Treatment

Newly added worker

Control

Never have worker

Appendix Table 6.2 then looks within the treatment group to see how the baseline characteristics
of those who hire a worker during the intervention period and then reduce employment again
compare to those who hire a worker and maintain this new employment level for at least a year
after. The same is done for the control group, although only 8 control firms hire a worker and
then don’t reduce employment again afterwards. We see few significant differences, suggesting
that those who keep the worker look quite similar on observable baseline characteristics to those
which do not. The one difference is again in terms of geography: although firms in Colombo
were less likely to respond to the wage subsidy, those that did hire workers were more likely to
keep them on afterwards than those in the other cities.

55#
#

Appendix(Table(6.2:(Do(the(characteristics(of(firms(which(hire(and(keep(workers(differ(from(those(which(hire(and(let(go?
Wage%Subsidy%Treatment%Group
Control%Group
Hire%and%
Hire%and
Hire%and%
Hire%and
Let%Go
Keep
p/value
Let%Go
Keep
p/value
Number%of%Paid%Workers
0.23
0.43
0.309
0.36
0.38
0.944
Education%(Years)
10.38
9.87
0.434
10.00
10.38
0.683
Raven%Test%Score
3.11
2.91
0.694
2.91
3.88
0.202
Digitspan%Recall%Score
6.50
6.17
0.339
6.16
6.88
0.164
Total%Assets
287603
244850
0.651
240620
571325
0.132
Total%Assets<1500LKR
0.02
0.09
0.110
0.00
0.00
%%%%%%%%%.
Total%Assets>935000LKR
0.06
0.04
0.740
0.07
0.13
0.574
Monthly%Profits
15167
15036
0.969
17197
19921
0.618
Profit%Data%Missing
0.02
0.04
0.450
0.00
0.00
%%%%%%%%%.
Monthly%Profits<2000LKR
0.02
0.00
0.552
0.04
0.00
0.552
Monthly%Profits>30000LKR
0.06
0.04
0.740
0.04
0.00
0.552
Business%Practices%Score
9.81
8.17
0.315
8.22
10.88
0.227
From%booster%sample
0.59
0.65
0.627
0.53
0.50
0.865
Retail%Sector
0.36
0.17
0.101
0.27
0.63
0.046
Colombo
0.31
0.57
0.032
0.49
0.63
0.487
Kandy
0.58
0.30
0.024
0.44
0.38
0.721
Any%paid%worker%at%baseline
0.16
0.13
0.769
0.22
0.25
0.866
Monthly%Sales
56787
57263
0.981
49618
61307
0.552
Owner's%Age
35.41
34.30
0.509
35.60
38.38
0.250
Business%is%Registered%for%Taxes
0.31
0.22
0.393
0.29
0.25
0.826
Weekly%hours%worked
59.94
58.74
0.770
57.51
62.50
0.482
Sample%Size
64
23
45
8
Notes:%Hire%and%Let%go%indicates%the%firm%hired%a%worker%during%the%intervention%period%(rounds%4%and%5),%but%then%lowered%
the%number%of%employees%compared%to%the%previous%round%in%one%of%round%4,%5,%or%6.%Hire%and%Keep%indicates%they%hired%a%
worker%and%did%not%then%reduce%their%number%of%employees%in%the%first%year%after%the%intervention.

Appendix 7: Heterogeneity in Survival Impact
We estimate equation (5), adding treatment interactions, the baseline value of the interacting
variable, and the interactions between this interacting variable and survey round. We do this for
the outcome of business survival, and report the results in Appendix Table 7. The first column
shows no heterogeneity in the treatment effect on survival with respect to baseline business
practices. The second column shows that firms with initially low capital have a higher treatment
effect for survival. The interactions of treatment with above median baseline capital are
significant at the 10 percent levels in years 2, and years 3 and 4. The magnitude of the
coefficients is almost enough to entirely offset the treatment effect, suggesting the treatment
effect only occurs for low capital firms. Appendix Figure 7 shows this graphically: the control
group sample with low baseline assets dies at a faster rate over time than the control group
sample with high baseline assets, whereas the death rates for the low asset treated are similar to
56#
#

those of the high asset treated and the high asset control. Nevertheless, a joint test that all
interactions are zero cannot reject the null hypothesis. Column 3 likewise shows higher point
estimates for the treatment effect on survival for firms with initially low profitability, with
negative, but not statistically significant, interaction effects with having above median profit.
Appendix(Table(7:(Heterogeneity(in(Survival
Before&Subsidy
.0.011
(0.046)
During&Subsidy
0.006
(0.031)
Year&1&After
0.052
(0.038)
Year&2&After
0.083*
(0.046)
Years&3.4&After
0.065
(0.049)
Interaction*with
Before&Subsidy*Interaction
During&Subsidy*Interaction
Year&1&After*Interaction
Year&2&After*Interaction
Years&3.4&After*Interaction

business
practices
0.001
(0.004)
.0.002
(0.003)
0.000
(0.004)
.0.001
(0.004)
.0.001
(0.005)

0.017
(0.038)
.0.012
(0.030)
0.075**
(0.032)
0.114***
(0.038)
0.104***
(0.040)

.0.023
(0.034)
.0.012
(0.028)
0.069**
(0.030)
0.097**
(0.038)
0.059
(0.040)

above
above
median*capital median*profit
.0.051
0.033
(0.046)
(0.048)
0.005
0.006
(0.035)
(0.037)
.0.042
.0.026
(0.041)
(0.043)
.0.085*
.0.045
(0.049)
(0.051)
.0.097*
.0.000
(0.052)
(0.054)

Sample&Size
5005
5005
5005
P.value
0.962
0.368
0.785
Notes:&robust&standard&errors&in&parentheses,&clustered&at&the&firm&level.&
All&regressions&control&for&randomization&strata,&variables&used&for&re.randomization,
survey&round,&baseline&value&of&interacting&variable&and&interaction&between&this
interacting&variable&and&survey&round.&
*,&**,&***&indicate&significance&at&the&10,5,&and&1&percent&levels&respectively.

57#
#

Appendix Figure 7: Heterogeneous Survival Effects by Baseline Capital

.8

.85

.9

.95

Proportion Still Selfemployed

1

Survival over time by Baseline Capital

2

4

6
8
Survey Round

Treated: High Assets
Treated: Low Assets

10

12

Control: High Assets
Control: Low Assets

Note: High Asset and Low Asset are defined as having above and below the baseline median
capital stock level respectively.

58#
#

