NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TO WORK FOR YOURSELF, FOR OTHERS, OR NOT AT ALL? HOW DISABILITY
BENEFITS AFFECT THE EMPLOYMENT DECISIONS OF OLDER VETERANS
Courtney Coile
Mark Duggan
Audrey Guo
Working Paper 23006
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23006

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

This research was supported by a grant from the Sloan Foundation (2015-13875) and by the U.S.
Social Security Administration through grant #1 DRC12000002-04 to the National Bureau of
Economic Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA,
any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER, nor of the Sloan Foundation. We are
grateful to seminar participants at Stanford University, U.C. Berkeley, and the U.S. Treasury
Department Office of Economic Policy for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Courtney Coile, Mark Duggan, and Audrey Guo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

To Work for Yourself, for Others, or Not At All? How Disability Benefits Affect the Employment
Decisions of Older Veterans
Courtney Coile, Mark Duggan, and Audrey Guo
NBER Working Paper No. 23006
December 2016
JEL No. J22
ABSTRACT
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Disability Compensation (DC) program provides
disability benefits to nearly one in five military veterans in the US and its annual expenditures
exceed $60 billion. We examine how the receipt of DC benefits affects the employment decisions
of older veterans. We make use of variation in program eligibility resulting from a 2001 policy
change that increased access to the program for Vietnam veterans who served with “boots on the
ground” in the Vietnam theater but not for other veterans of that same era. We find that the
policy-induced increase in program enrollment decreased labor force participation and induced a
substantially larger switch from wage employment to self-employment. This latter finding
suggests that an exogenous increase in income spurred many older veterans to start their own
businesses. Additionally, we estimate that one in four veterans who entered the DC program due
to this policy change left the labor force, estimates in the same range as those from recent studies
of the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program.
Courtney Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu
Mark Duggan
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
mgduggan@stanford.edu

Audrey Guo
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
amguo@stanford.edu

Nearly one-third of American men age 55 and above are veterans of U.S. military

service. In 2015, the labor force participation rate of male veterans age 55 to 64 was 10
percentage points lower than that of comparable non-veterans, 62 vs. 72 percent. This

represents a significant reversal from earlier years. In 2001, for example, the participation

rate of older male veterans was actually 0.4 percentage points higher than that of their nonveteran counterparts (68.2 versus 67.8 percent). 1

There are several possible reasons for the emergence of this gap, including

differences in health or in labor market experiences during the recent recession. Another

candidate is the growth in the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs’ Disability Compensation
(DC) program. The DC program provides benefits to veterans with service-connected
disabilities, in order to compensate them for expected earnings losses due to disability. The

DC program has grown rapidly in recent years, with the share of veterans receiving benefits
rising from 9 percent in 2001 to 19 percent by 2015 and program expenditures reaching $60

Billion by the end of this period 2 As Coile, Duggan, and Guo (2015; hereafter CDG) discuss,

this growth in the DC program is due in part to a 2001 liberalization of medical eligibility
requirements, when diabetes was made a service-connected condition for Vietnam-era
veterans with “boots on the ground” (BOG), a military term for Armed Forces who served in

the Vietnam theater, due to concerns about a possible link between the herbicide Agent

Orange exposure (used extensively by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War) and
diabetes.

1 Calculations from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Employment Situation of Veterans, 2015 and August 2003
editions (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/vet.nr0.htm -- Table 2b;
http://www.bls.gov/news.release/history/vet_06282002.txt-- Table 2).

Calculation from Veterans Benefits Administration’s Annual Benefits Report, 2015 and 2001 editions, and
from VetPop Model 2014.

2

1

The availability of DC benefits, which are not subject to either income or payroll

taxation, may affect veterans’ employment decisions. While DC benefits for the vast majority
of recipients do not decline with earnings, the receipt of benefits – which varied from $133
to $2,907 per month in 2016 depending on severity of disability – would be expected to

decrease labor supply through an income effect. This possibility highlights a classic tradeoff

in disability insurance program design. Benefits provide valuable protection against the loss
of earnings that may result from disability.

However, due to the difficulty of accurately

determining disability status, access to benefits may also discourage labor supply among

some that are capable of working. An empirical literature going back at least to Parsons

(1980) has sought to estimate the share of Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)

recipients that would have worked in the absence of benefits. More recently, Maestas,

Mullen, and Strand (2013) estimate that nearly 30 percent of marginal SSDI recipients could
have worked.

The receipt of disability benefits may also affect veterans’ decisions regarding

whether to be self-employed or work for others. Government programs that provide a
guaranteed steady stream of income, even at a relatively low level, may encourage workers

to choose self-employment by reducing the risk associated with leaving wage employment.

Olds (2016a, 2016b) finds that eligibility for two government programs that provide in-kind

benefits, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and State Children’s Health
Insurance Program (SCHIP), is associated with an increase in the probability of self-

employment. In related work, Gottlieb, Townsend, and Xu (2016) find that a Canadian

reform that expanded job-protected leave for women who recently had a child led to a
significant increase in entrepreneurship.

2

While these studies suggest that the DC program might affect the employment

decisions of veterans, the literature on the DC program itself is very limited, particularly in

light of the program’s size and recent growth. CDG (2015) show that patterns in the labor

force participation of veterans and non-veterans over time are consistent with a role for the

DC program, as the timing of the decline in veterans’ labor force participation lines up with
DC program growth, especially when looking by age group.

However, it is difficult to rule out the possibility that participation could be trending

differently for veterans and non-veterans for reasons unrelated to the growth of the DC
program. Autor, Duggan, Greenberg, and Lyle (2016; hereafter ADGL) compare changes in

labor supply after 2001 for BOG and non-BOG (or NOG) veterans of the Vietnam era; since
the Agent Orange decision only affected BOG veterans, NOG veterans can function as a

control group. Using this approach, they estimate that DC benefit receipt reduces the

probability of being in the labor force by 18 percentage points. An important limitation of
the ADGL study is that – given the construction of their analysis sample - they are only able

to follow veterans through 2007, when the oldest veterans in their sample are age 61. As a
result, their study period ends before much of the post-2001 growth in the program is

realized and before the most common retirement ages of 62 and beyond. Their outcome

measures are also limited to individual earnings, so they are unable to examine transitions
to self-employment or any effects on spousal labor supply.

Like ADGL, our study makes use of quasi-experimental variation in program eligibility

arising from the 2001 Agent Orange decision, which expanded DC eligibility for Vietnam
veterans serving in theater (BOG) but not for other veterans of this era, to estimate the effect
of the DC program on employment.

We have a number of contributions relative to the
3

previous literature. We use the Veterans Supplement to the Current Population Survey
(CPS), allowing us to analyze data through 2015 and to follow affected veterans through their
sixties and beyond. This is potentially important because the effects of the Agent Orange

decision may be strengthening over time as DC enrollment continued to grow after 2007 and

because veterans close to retirement age may be more responsive to benefit receipt.
Additionally, we look at a wider range of employment outcomes than ADGL, including
working in self-employment versus working for others, as well as whether DC receipt affects

spousal labor supply and family income. Our sample also includes veterans of all service
branches rather than just the Army as in ADGL.

We have several key findings. First, DC receipt rises by 10.3 percentage points more

for BOG Vietnam-era veterans than for their NOG counterparts in the decade or so between
the Agent Orange decision and the last part of our sample period (2010-2015). This confirms

that the decision dramatically increased access to DC benefits for BOG veterans. Second,
labor force participation falls by 2.5 percentage points more for BOG veterans than for NOG

veterans over this period, consistent with the hypothesis that DC benefit receipt reduces
employment. Importantly, we find that there is an even larger shift in type of employment,

with the probability of self-employment actually rising by 4.1 points and the probability of

working for others falling by 6.5 points for BOG relative to NOG veterans over this period.

There are also larger decreases in hours and earnings for BOG veterans.

There are no

significant effects of DC program growth on spousal labor supply, but there is a decline in

total family earnings and income. Our findings are generally robust to the inclusion of
controls for differential trends in outcomes for BOG and NOG veterans prior to the Agent
Orange decision.

4

Overall, our estimates suggest that 24 percent of marginal DC beneficiaries (veterans

gaining DC benefits as a result of the policy change) would have been in the labor force during

the 2010-15 period in the absence of DC benefits. Multiplying our estimate for the effect of
DC enrollment on the marginal recipient by the increase in DC enrollment among Vietnam-

era veterans born between 1944 and 1953, we estimate that nearly one-third of the

differential decline in labor force participation among veterans from these cohorts since
2001 is attributable to the growth of the DC program.

In the remainder of the paper, we first provide some background on the DC program

and on previous studies relevant to our work. We then discuss our empirical strategy, data,
and results. We conclude with a discussion of the possible policy implications of our work
and directions for future research.
I. Background on the DC Program

The DC program pays benefits to veterans with medical conditions that were caused

by or aggravated during their military service. DC recipients also have prioritized access to

medical care from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). DC benefits are not subject to
income or payroll taxes and are indexed to the Consumer Price Index. The receipt of labor

earnings does not reduce DC benefits for most recipients; in fact, DC benefits can be received

simultaneously with earnings, SSDI benefits, Social Security old age benefits, and (in some

cases) a military pension. 3

Benefits are reduced against labor earnings for beneficiaries with the “Individual Unemployability”
designation, as discussed below. The rules for concurrent receipt of military retirement pay and DC benefits
are complex. Prior to 2003, retirement pay was essentially reduced dollar-for-dollar against DC benefits. Since
2003, some dual eligibles (those whose disabilities arose from combat or who retired with 20 or more years of
service and a CDR of 50 percent or above) have been able to collect both benefits concurrently without offset.

3

5

To apply for DC benefits, a veteran first submits an application to a regional office of

the Veterans Benefit Administration (VBA). The veteran can claim multiple conditions on the

application. The regional office collects information about the veteran’s military service and
previous health care utilization from the VHA and private providers. This information is

used by a Rating Board to decide whether each condition is service-connected, and if so, to
set a disability rating for it between 0 and 100 percent using established guidelines. 4 Often

some conditions are approved and others rejected, and the veteran can appeal a rejection or
an unexpectedly low rating. The average DC recipient from the Vietnam era had 3.7 service-

connected disabilities in 2015. The most common approved conditions for veterans of this

era are tinnitus, hearing loss, post-traumatic stress disorder, and diabetes, each affecting
around 30 percent of DC recipients (Veterans Benefits Administration, 2015).

The ratings for approved conditions are used to determine the veteran’s combined

disability rating (CDR), using a formula that is similar to adding the individual ratings but

has a maximum of 100 percent. 5 The monthly benefit depends only on the CDR and family

status, not on past earnings. This reflects Congressional intent to provide compensation for
Of the nation’s 2 million military retirees, about 400,000 currently benefit from these exemptions, while
roughly 600,000 face an offset (https://www.cbo.gov/budget-options/2013/44744).
Ratings are in 10 percent increments (0, 10, 20, etc.), though for any given condition, the Board is typically
deciding between a few possible ratings, such as 0, 30, or 60 percent. If a veteran is awarded a 0 percent rating
for a service-connected disability, he does not receive cash benefits but does qualify for prioritized medical care
through the VHA. However, receiving a 0 percent rating for multiple conditions can result in a 10 percent
disability payment (Economic Systems Inc., 2004).

4

If only one condition is approved, the CDR is simply the rating for that condition. If two conditions are
approved, then the rating is equal to R1 + (R2 * (1 – R1)), with R1 and R2 equal to the rating for conditions 1 and
2, and the CDR is rounded to the closest 10 percent increment. For example, if a veteran had one condition
rated at 40 percent and a second at 20 percent, then the CDR would be rounded down from 52 to 50 percent. If
the second condition had a 30 percent rating, the CDR would be rounded up from 58 to 60 percent. When there
are three or more ratings, then the CDR formula is defined similarly, with the rating for the third condition
multiplied by 1 – (R1 + (R2 * (1 – R1)).
5

6

the average, not individual, loss in earnings capacity due to disability (Economic Systems

Inc., 2004). The monthly benefit amount is an increasing function of the CDR, with benefits
rising more or less linearly from the 10 percent ($133 per month in 2016) to 90 percent

($1,743 per month) rating, before jumping to $2,906 per month for those with a 100 percent
rating. 6 If his disabilities preclude substantial gainful employment, a veteran with a CDR

between 60 and 90 percent may receive the 100 percent CDR benefit even though his CDR is

lower, through the Individual Unemployability (IU) designation. 7 The fraction of DC
recipients with an IU designation rose from 5 percent in 2000 to 9 percent by 2013 (CBO,

2014). IU designees do face a loss of benefits if they have labor earnings, as being unable to
work is a condition of their higher benefit receipt.

DC recipients can raise their monthly benefit over time if they successfully apply for

new health conditions or for a higher rating for existing conditions. ADGL (2016) find that

average real monthly benefits for Vietnam-era Army veterans who first received benefits in

2000 increased by 77 percent over the next six years, from $976 to $1,725,. The CDR for DC
recipients rarely declines and the payments typically continue until death. 8

Benefits for recipients with families are modestly higher. For example, a veteran with a 60 percent CDR would
receive a monthly benefit of $1,059 if single, $1,156 if married, and $1,227 if married with children.
6

To be eligible for the IU designation, the beneficiary must either have one condition rated at 60 percent or
more or have a CDR of 70 percent or more along with at least one condition that has at least a 40 percent rating.
for
See
http://www.benefits.va.gov/COMPENSATION/claims-special-individual_unemployability.asp
additional information about the IU designation.
7

While the VA can require medical reexamination for DC recipients if it “determines there is a need to verify
either the continued existence of the current severity of a disability,” in practice the regulations governing
reexaminations would seem to ensure that benefits are fairly secure for most recipients. Of particular
relevance here, reexaminations are prohibited for veterans over 55 years of age, except in unusual
circumstances. www.benefits.va.gov/warms/docs/regs/38cfr/bookb/part3/s3_327.doc

8

7

While the medical eligibility criteria for the DC program are generally the same for all

veterans and do not change much over time, a major departure from this occurred in July

2001, when the VA liberalized the program’s medical eligibility criteria to make diabetes a

presumptively service-connected condition for veterans who had served during the Vietnam
War era (August 1964 to April 1975) in Vietnam, Cambodia, or Laos.

This group

encompassed nearly 40 percent of all active duty armed forces who served during the

Vietnam War era (3.4 million out of 8.7 million). 9 The VA’s action was prompted by a high-

profile report that concluded there is “limited/suggestive” evidence of an association

between the use of herbicides such as Agent Orange and Type 2 diabetes (Institute of

Medicine, 2000). A presumptive service connection “relieves the veteran of the burden of
producing evidence that directly establishes service connection for a specific condition,” as
he need only show that he has the condition and served in the relevant time and place
(Panangala and Shedd, 2014). While the Agent Orange decision was likely the most

consequential change to medical eligibility for Vietnam-era veterans, there have been other

more recent changes, such as the 2010 addition of ischemic heart disease, Parkinson’s
disease, and B-cell leukemia to the set of service-connected conditions for BOG veterans, as

well as the elimination of the need to document specific events leading to post-traumatic
stress disorder for all veterans, also in 2010. 10

The DC program has expanded rapidly since the Agent Orange decision. As Figure 1

illustrates, the share of Vietnam veterans receiving DC benefits rose by 2 percentage points
9

http://www.va.gov/opa/publications/factsheets/fs_americas_wars.pdf

10 There are other conditions that are presumptively service-connected for Vietnam-era veterans, including
some granted this status before 2001, though they are much less common than diabetes. For a complete list,
see Appendix B of Panangala and Shedd (2014).

8

in the 15 years before the decision, from 7 to 9 percent, but has more than doubled in the 15

years since, to 19 percent in 2015. Not only has the number of beneficiaries (from all service

eras) grown rapidly over time, from 2.2 million in 1986 to 4.2 million in 2015, but the growth

has been concentrated in the higher CDRs, as seen in Figure 2. While the number of

beneficiaries with a 10 or 20 percent rating has been flat over the past 30 years at 1.2 million,

the number with a rating of 70 or above has grown five-fold, to almost 1.5 million, while the
number with a 50 to 60 percent rating has nearly tripled, to over 600,000.

This shift to higher CDRs has an extra effect on program expenditures (Figure 3), as

the monthly benefit amount is an increasing function of the CDR. Finally, Figure 4 shows that
real DC benefits grew more rapidly than real SSDI benefits between 1999 and 2015, by 63

percent versus 10 percent, and that the average monthly DC benefit is now higher than the

corresponding average SSDI benefit. The rapid rise in real DC benefits may reflect both that
new DC recipients have higher CDRs and that existing recipients are raising their CDRs over
time through appeals and applications for new conditions. In short, the tremendous growth

in the DC program among America’s veterans since 2001 underscores the need to
understand the program’s effect on employment decisions.
II. Previous Literature
Three strands of the past literature are relevant for our work. The first is the

literature on the employment effects of the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)

program, as this is the largest disability program in the US and one that has long been studied
by researchers. Several recent papers generate plausibly causal estimates of the effect of

SSDI receipt on employment by exploiting variation in the assignment of cases to disability
9

examiners and judges for review, as individuals vary in how strict they are in granting

benefits to applicants with similar health profiles. 11 Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2013) use

the initial assignment to a disability examiner, while French and Song (2014) use the
assignment to administrative law judges during the appeals process; Autor et al. (2015)
apply a similar strategy in the Norwegian context. Both US studies find that SSDI benefit
receipt reduces employment or labor force participation for the marginal applicant by a

similar amount, 26 to 28 percent. 12 Unfortunately, it is difficult to know how useful these
studies might be for predicting the effect of DC receipt on veterans’ employment. While there

are similarities between the two programs, there are key differences as well, for example the

existence of partial disability benefits in the DC program or the fact that DC benefits are not

reduced against earnings for most recipients. Moreover, there may be important differences
in the characteristics of applicants to the two programs.

More relevant to our study is the past literature on the DC program. However, as

noted earlier, this literature is quite limited. CDG (2015) use data from the March Current
Population Survey (CPS) for the period 1980 to 2014. They estimate models of labor force

participation that include a veteran indicator variable along with age and year indicators.

Their key question of interest is how the estimated coefficient on the veteran indicator
Papers that precede these recent studies but also contribute to our understanding of the employment effects
of SSDI include: Black et al, 2002; Autor and Duggan, 2003; Duggan et al, 2007; Chen and van der Klaauw, 2008;
von Wachter et al, 2011.
12 Maestas et al (2013) find that for the 23 percent of applicants estimated to be on the margin of program
entry, employment would have been 28 percentage points higher had they not received benefits. However, they
note that this finding may overstate the overall employment effect, since estimates of earnings capacity indicate
that the average work capacity of this group is far below their pre-disability earnings levels, on the order of
one-quarter to one-half of pre-application earnings. They estimate that the likelihood of engaging in substantial
gainful activity as defined by the SSDI program (having earnings in excess of $1,170 per month, using the 2017
threshold) would be 18 to 19 percentage points higher and the marginal program entrant would earn $3,800
to $4,600 more per year on average in the absence of SSDI benefit receipt.
11

10

changes over time, particularly for different age groups. They find that the participation of
male veterans age 25 to 74 has fallen by about 5 percentage points since the late 1990s

relative to that of their non-veteran counterparts. The timing of the decline lines up well
with the 2001 Agent Orange decision and other changes that facilitated access to the
program. This is particularly true when looking by age group – participation began to fall
shortly after 2001 in the older age groups that were populated by Vietnam-era veterans, but

fell only starting in 2010 for younger age groups, when similar changes affecting Gulf War
veterans went into effect. CDG also find that veterans have become more sensitive to

economic shocks in recent years, as the DC program has grown. While this study is highly

suggestive of a role for the DC program in veterans’ employment decisions, it cannot rule out
the possibility that other factors may have also contributed to the emerging gap in labor force
participation between veterans and non-veterans.

Autor et al. (2016, or ADGL) is the most relevant for our study, in that it also makes

use of variation in DC eligibility arising from the 2001 Agent Orange decision to estimate the
employment effects of the program. ADGL use administrative data to construct a large

sample of Army veterans born between 1946 and 1951. They find a sharp acceleration in
DC enrollment among BOG relative to NOG veterans following the 2001 policy change,

primarily due to an influx of new diabetes awards; by 2006, enrollment had risen by an

additional 7 percentage points for BOG veterans. They also document that participation fell

by an additional 2 percentage points between 2001 and 2007 for BOG vs. NOG veterans.
They estimate that 18 percent of individuals who became eligible for the DC program due to

the Agent Orange decision dropped out of the labor force, an effect about two-thirds as large
as estimates from the SSDI literature.

11

As noted earlier, the current study offers a number of innovations relative to ADGL.

First, we are able to use more recent data and data on older veterans, which may be
important if the Agent Orange decision’s impact has continued to grow over time or if the

labor supply of older workers is more responsive to benefit receipt. Additionally, our data

includes veterans from all service branches, and thus may better reflect the response of the
veteran population as a whole. Third, we can look at other employment outcomes beyond

own earnings, including spousal and household earnings and income. In lauding the

importance of examining family outcomes, Autor et al. (2015) note that there are relatively

few studies that consider labor supply responses to income changes in a household context,

in part because of the difficulty in identifying a shock to the income of one spouse that does

not directly affect the other spouse. The plausibly exogenous variation in DC access arising
from the Agent Orange decision may provide such a shock given that the vast majority (more
than 98 percent) of Vietnam-era veterans are male.

A fourth novel aspect of our study is that we explore the effect of DC receipt on the

decision of whether to be self-employed or work for others. This focus makes the literature
on entrepreneurship of interest here and so we review it briefly. As Olds (2016b) notes,

social insurance programs can support entry into entrepreneurship by freeing up resources

to fund business start-up costs (the “credit channel”) and by providing insurance against the
consumption shocks that may occur due to the greater volatility of self-employment income

(the “risk channel”). While we are not aware of any previous study that has looked at the
effect of DC receipt on self-employment, there are a number of papers that shed light on the

importance of these two channels.

12

Individuals with greater personal wealth may be more likely to start a business, as

they are more able to self-finance the initial capital investment. Evans and Leighton (1989)

and Evans and Jovanovic (1989) find that the probability of entering self-employment
increases with assets. To assess the causality of this association, Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994a,

1994b) and Blanchflower and Oswald (1998) use inheritance receipt as a shock to wealth

and find that the probability both of becoming and succeeding as an entrepreneur is
increasing in the size of the inheritance. But Hurst and Lusardi (2004) cast doubt on the role

of credit constraints by documenting that wealth affects entry into entrepreneurship only at

the very top of the income distribution, that wealth is not associated with an increase in the
relative likelihood of starting a business in a more capital-intensive industry, and that future

inheritances are as predictive of entrepreneurship as past inheritances. They conclude

“[borrowing] constraints are not empirically important in deterring the majority of small
business formation in the United States.”

Individuals with access to a steady source of income apart from their wages may also

be more likely to become entrepreneurs, due to the protection it offers against drops in
consumption. In two recent studies, Olds (2016a, 2016b) suggests that government policies

that provide in-kind benefits – food assistance through the Supplemental Nutrition

Assistance Program and health insurance through the State Children’s Health Insurance

Program – are associated with increases in the probability of entrepreneurship. Both studies

make use of changes in eligibility for the programs over time and data from the March CPS.

Olds concludes that SNAP and SCHIP eligibility have similar effects on the probability of self-

employment, raising it by 1 to 2 percentage points, or 15 to 20 percent.

13

Few studies have explored the effect of government programs that provide cash

rather than in-kind benefits on self-employment. Most cash assistance programs, unlike the

DC program, are limited to those with low incomes. Those who start successful new

businesses lose eligibility for benefits as their incomes increase, so it will be difficult to find

an empirical association between benefit receipt and entrepreneurship without access to

longitudinal data. Moreover, the programs that have been examined are not similar to the

DC program. The UK’s Enterprise Allowance Scheme of the 1980s provided cash benefits
for up to a year to unemployed people if they started a business (Parker, 2009), so receipt

was conditional on entering self-employment. Gottlieb et al. (2016) find that a Canadian

reform that extended job-protected maternity leave increased the probability that women
would start a business; while this study supports the idea that risk reduction is important,
there were no cash benefits involved. Bianchi and Bobba (2013) show that the Progresa

conditional cash transfer program in Mexico increased entrepreneurship, but these findings
may not translate to a developed country context.

In sum, the past literature suggests that the provision of cash benefits could increase

entrepreneurship by reducing consumption risk, but to our knowledge there are no
empirical studies that explore this for the DC program or other similar transfer programs.

Our paper therefore adds to the literature on entrepreneurship by providing an opportunity
to explore this hypothesis.

III. Data and Empirical Strategy
The data for the analysis comes from the Veteran’s Supplement to the Current

Population Survey (VETCPS), which is produced by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
14

Importantly for our strategy, this survey asks respondents detailed questions about their
military service, allowing for the identification of veterans who specifically served in theater
(“Boots on the Ground,” or BOG) during the Vietnam War. The supplement has been
administered in July, August, or September every other year from 1995 to 2009 and yearly

since 2009. This allows us to construct a sample that covers the period 1995 to 2015, which
includes several years before and nearly fifteen years after the Agent Orange decision.
A. Construction of Analysis Sample

One challenge in using the VETCPS arises in identifying service era consistently

throughout the sample period. Prior to 2005, respondents were only able to report one

service era. As a result, those who served in multiple eras, such as in both the Korean and
Vietnam wars, might not be identified as Vietnam-era veterans in the data.

To surmount this difficulty, we define Vietnam-era veteran for the purpose of this

paper as including all veterans with a year of birth (defined as survey year minus age at
survey) between 1944 and 1953, regardless of whether they report that they served in

Vietnam. To arrive at this choice, we first combine VETCPS data for those survey years where

respondents could indicate multiple service eras, 2005 to 2015. In Table 1, we report the
share of veterans in each birth cohort in these survey years that report serving during the
Vietnam War era. To maximize the probability that those in our sample served during the
Vietnam era while obtaining the largest sample possible, we implement a decision rule

where those cohorts in which at least 75 percent of veterans served during Vietnam are
included in the sample. The resulting sample includes the 1944 to 1953 birth cohorts; while

we use a 75 percent cutoff, the share serving in Vietnam is over 90 percent for most of these

cohorts. Since our sample definition could potentially classify non-Vietnam-era veterans as
15

NOG veterans, we test the robustness of our findings to limiting our sample to only reported
Vietnam-era veterans, and we obtain qualitatively similar results.

The structure of the CPS as a short panel allows us to create a large sample of person-

month observations. In the CPS, each respondent is surveyed for 4 consecutive months, out

of the survey for 8 months, and then surveyed again for 4 months. We include the matched

veterans’ responses from neighboring monthly CPS surveys, April to December. We are able

to do this for every year except 1995, resulting in a total of 125,711 observations for the
period 1995 to 2015. Of this sample 30,873 are unique individuals, and Appendix Figure 1
shows the age distribution of our sample. 13

The CPS is a useful data source for our project because it includes data on DC receipt

as well as on a wide range of employment outcomes. 14 We look at labor force participation
as well as its components, employment and unemployment.

We also decompose

employment into self-employment and working for others. We make use of data on usual
hours worked and earnings, as well as spousal earnings and family earnings and income.
Unfortunately, earnings data is only available for the 4th and 8th survey months (outgoing

rotation groups), so each veteran only has one earnings observation per year, resulting in a
smaller sample size for these regressions. Earnings are adjusted to 2014 dollars, and

individuals who are unemployed or out of the labor force receive a value of zero, while those
13 In the 2010-2015 surveys, the Veterans supplement was not collected for all respondents. Therefore, we
adjust our sample by dropping missing observations and up-weighting non-missing observations by an
adjustment factor determined by each respondent’s age group and period of military service, the same
methodology the Census Bureau used to create survey weights in 2015.

14 The data on labor market outcomes, DC receipt, and other measures is reported by the respondent or a family
member of the respondent. Previous work has found that individuals under-report enrollment in government
programs. Our examination of the CPS data suggests that the fraction of veterans reporting DC enrollment is
comparable to the fraction one would estimate using aggregate administrative data.

16

individuals who are working but fail to report earnings are dropped from the earnings

regressions (most notably, self-employment earnings are not recorded in the VETCPS so self-

employed individuals are dropped from earnings regressions). Our analysis of spousal and
family outcomes is limited to married veterans with non-missing earnings.

Figure 5 shows the composition of new and total DC recipients by single year-of-age

in 2015, with the shaded area including the cohorts in our sample born from 1944 to 1953.

As this figure shows, these cohorts make up a large share of total DC recipients. Additionally,
there are actually as many or more new DC beneficiaries from these cohorts in 2015 as from

any other age group, including much younger veterans of recent conflicts in the Middle East.
The fact that veterans in their late 60s continue to join the program in large numbers more

than a decade after the Agent Orange decision (and more than 40 years after the conclusion
of the Vietnam War) underscores the need to understand the DC program’s effects on
employment and well-being for many years beyond the 2001 policy change.
B. Empirical Strategy

Our empirical strategy exploits variation in DC eligibility arising from the 2001 Agent

Orange decision, which made diabetes a presumptively service-connected condition for

veterans who served with “boots on the ground” in theater during the Vietnam War era. This

policy change expanded access to DC benefits by virtually guaranteeing a successful outcome

for BOG veterans of this era with diabetes who were making their first application for DC
benefits or applying to add diabetes as a new condition.

Diabetes is a common health issue among the older population, with 12 percent of

those ages 45 to 64 and 22 percent of those ages 65 to 74 having diagnosed cases in 2014. 15
15

Source: http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/prev/national/figbyage.htm

17

A diagnosis of type 2 diabetes receives a disability rating of 10 percent from the VA if it is

manageable by diet alone, but this rises if disease management involves the use of insulin

(20 percent), regulation of activities (40 percent), hospitalizations or regular doctor visits

(60), and loss of weight and strength or other complications (100). 16 Moreover, as veterans
tend to apply with multiple conditions, even a veteran receiving a relatively low rating for

their diabetes would have a higher CDR if approved for other conditions such as hearing loss.

Thus, this policy change made it easier for some BOG veterans to receive a monthly benefit
of hundreds or thousands of dollars, while leaving the landscape unchanged for their NOG

counterparts. ADGL (2016) show that the share of Vietnam-era DC recipients with diabetes

as a service-connected condition was virtually zero until 2001 for both BOG and NOG

veterans; between 2001 and 2006, this share rose rapidly for BOG veterans but remained
negligible for NOG veterans.

We make use of this quasi-experimental variation in DC access by estimating models

of the following form for our sample of Vietnam-era veterans:

𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 + 𝛾𝛾0 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖 + � 𝛾𝛾𝑡𝑡 ∗ 𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵𝑖𝑖 + 𝑋𝑋𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 ′𝛽𝛽 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

where Y is an outcome measure such as DC receipt or employment for individual i in year t,

𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 includes both year and month fixed effects, and BOG is an indicator set to one if the veteran

served with boots on the ground. The next term represents the interaction between BOG
and year. Including a separate interaction term for each year for which we have a Veterans
Supplement (14 years in all) would generate imprecise estimates given our sample size.

16

The schedule for rating disabilities is available at: http://www.benefits.va.gov/warms/bookc.asp#p

18

Therefore, we group our data into four (non-equal) periods: 1995-1997, 1999-2001, 2003-

2009, and 2010-2015. We interact an indicator for each of these periods with BOG, except
for 1999-2001, which we use as the reference period as it includes the years immediately
before the decision took effect. 17

The coefficient on the main BOG variable captures the difference in outcomes

between BOG and NOG veterans in the reference period, while the coefficients on the

interaction terms allow us to see how the BOG-NOG difference evolves after the decision,

both in the short and medium term (2003-09) and in the long term (2010-15). The

interaction of BOG with the 1995-1997 indicator allows us to explore whether there is any

significant trend in the BOG-NOG difference prior to the Agent Orange decision. The period
during which we can look for a pre-trend is somewhat constrained by the fact that the
VETCPS begins in 1995. However, as an additional robustness check, we also include an

interaction between BOG and a linear year pre-trend in some specifications, and find that

our results are generally robust to the inclusion of this additional control (shown on only our
first results table, for conciseness). 18 Finally, X is a vector of individual characteristics,
including individual age fixed effects and race and education indicators. And because we

include matched observations from neighboring months of the CPS survey, we cluster our
regressions at the person level.

In Table 2, we provide summary statistics for the BOG and NOG veterans in our

sample, using data only for the years prior to the policy change (1995-2001). BOG veterans
make up 46 percent of our sample. The BOG sample is 88% white, 74% married, and a
The 2001 Veterans Supplement was collected in August, shortly after the VA’s “final rule” on the Agent
Orange decision on July 9, 2001. Thus data in the 2001 Supplement is unlikely to be affected by the decision.
18 The linear year trend is defined to be year-2001 until 2001 and 0 thereafter.
17

19

majority has either some college (25%) or a college degree (35%) The differences between
the average characteristics of the BOG and NOG samples are fairly small but often statistically
significant. In the analysis we include controls for race and education as well as a BOG

indicator that controls for differences in outcomes between BOG and NOG veterans in the
baseline period (1999-2001) that may occur for any reason. Our key identifying assumption

is that there is no other reason for outcomes for BOG and NOG veterans to be trending
differently over time after 2001 besides the growth of the DC program. We provide some
exploration of this issue with respect to health below.

C. Trends in Labor Force Participation Since 1995

Before moving to our results, we provide some additional motivation for our study

and choice of cohorts. Figure 6 shows trends over time in the labor force participation rate

of veterans and non-veterans in the 1944 through 1953 cohorts. The rates for veterans and

non-veterans are virtually identical from 1995 through the early 2000s, declining over time
(as expected) as the cohort ages. The drop for veterans is much more rapid thereafter,

however, such that the participation rate of veterans is 10 percentage points lower than that

of non-veterans by 2015. We can also examine how the participation rate for veterans and
non-veterans in a specific age group, 55 to 69, is changing over time, as seen in Figure 7.19
This figure adjusts for age to address the possibility of different age composition in the

veteran and non-veteran group. The two rates are very similar and rising until the early
2000s, but thereafter, the participation rate for non-veterans continues to climb while that

19 This age range includes the 1926 to 1940 cohorts in 1995 and gradually changes to include the 1946 to 1960
cohorts by 2015. One advantage of this comparison is that it allows one to explore whether veterans from an
earlier era (e.g. Korea War) tended to leave the labor force earlier than non-veterans, which could explain the
Figure 6 divergence. But it appears that this gap opens up only as the Vietnam-era veterans in our analysis
sample enter the 55 to 69 age range.

20

for veterans does not. Thus whether focusing on a specific birth cohort or age group, the

participation rates of veterans and non-veterans diverge after 2001. In our analyses below,

we explore whether growth in DC enrollment is an important contributor to this divergence.
IV. Results
We now turn to the empirical analysis, beginning with the results for DC receipt in

Table 3. We find that there is a baseline difference in DC receipt between BOG and NOG
veterans in the reference period (1999-2001), with BOG veterans being 8.0 percentage

points more likely to be receiving benefits and 2.8 points more likely to have a CDR of 50
percent or more in our preferred specification (column 2). This difference likely reflects that

those who served with boots-on-the-ground have more service-connected disabilities that
qualify them for benefits.

Of greater interest to us is how this difference is changing over time. We find that the

share of BOG veterans receiving benefits is 2.8 percentage points higher in the short-term
(2003-2009) and 10.3 points higher in the long-term (2010-2015) as compared to the
baseline difference. As year fixed effects pick up any trends over time in receipt that are

common to BOG and NOG veterans, these interaction terms show the differential increase

for BOG veterans. We similarly find that the probability of having a CDR of 50 percent or
above grows by an additional 3.9 percentage points in the short term and 8.7 points in the

long term for BOG veterans. These effects are very large relative to the share of the sample

receiving DC benefits, 15.3 percent, or to the share with a CDR of 50 percent or above, 6.1
percent. One likely explanation is that many BOG veterans who were already receiving DC

benefits enjoyed an increase after 2001 as a result of the policy change. Thus the number
21

receiving a high CDR reflects the effect both for new recipients and for incumbents who
benefit from a “promotion” to a higher CDR. The inclusion of controls for pre-trends has little

impact on the results and these coefficients are statistically insignificant. Overall, this table
confirms that the effect of the Agent Orange decision on DC receipt is large and growing
substantially over time.

In Table 4, we shift to employment outcomes. We find that BOG veterans are 2.9

percentage points less likely to be in the labor force in the reference period. This difference

grows by 1.1 points in the short term, though the effect is insignificant, and by 2.5 points in

the long term, an effect that is significant at the 10 percent level. Again, the coefficient on the

interaction of BOG and the earlier period (1995-97) show no indication of a differential trend
in participation for BOG vs. NOG veterans prior to the reference period.

As people can report that they are out of the labor force for various reasons, we also

explore how the growth of the DC program is associated with a rise in non-participation of
different types. We find that essentially all of the growth in non-participation occurs in

people reporting themselves as retired, while there is virtually no increase in people
reporting themselves as disabled or out of the labor force for other reasons. The result with

respect to disability is important because it casts doubt on an alternative explanation for our
findings, namely that the participation of BOG and NOG veterans trends differently over time

because the health of BOG veterans is deteriorating more rapidly. If this were the case, we
might expect BOG veterans to be increasingly likely to say they are out of the labor force due
to disability, but we do not find that. In results not shown here, we investigate whether BOG
veterans are increasingly likely to report that they have a work-limiting disability and also

22

find no evidence of this. 20 Thus, it seems quite likely that the greater labor force withdrawal
of BOG vs. NOG veterans after 2001 can be attributed to the growth of the DC program.

In Table 5, we look more closely at employment outcomes. The first and last sets of

columns show that the post-2001 decrease in labor force participation occurred entirely via

a decrease in employment, with no change in unemployment, although the interaction
between BOG and the 2010-15 period indicator in the employment model is not significantly

different from zero. Of even greater interest, the two middle sets of columns indicate that
the growth of the DC program after 2001 is associated with a 6.5 percentage point decrease

in the probability of BOG veterans working for others in the long term (2010-15) and a 4.1
point increase in the probability of self-employment. The shift into self-employment is quite
large relative to the 10.3 percentage point mean rate in the sample, and also relative to the
2.5 point decrease in participation.

To explore these results further, in Table 6 we break self-employment down into

incorporated and unincorporated self-employment; incorporating is generally viewed as

reflecting a more serious commitment to the new venture (Olds, 2016a). We find that the
probability of both incorporated and unincorporated self-employment rise for BOG vs. NOG
veterans in the long term, with increases of 1.4 and 2.7 points, respectively. We also look at

the rise by industry type, breaking out the two most common industries for the self-

employed in our sample, construction and professional/business services, from all other
industries. 21 We find that for BOG veterans, self-employment in professional/business
20 ADGL also have an interesting test of this alternative explanation, where they split their sample by year of
birth (YOB) and show that the break in outcomes between BOG and NOG veterans for both YOB groups occurs
after 2001 and not when veterans reach any particular age – the latter would be more likely if declines in
participation were health-related.
21 Appendix Figure 2 shows the industry breakdown for veterans both self-employed and working for others.

23

services rises by 1.3 points and in all other industries rises by 2.7 points; there is no
differential increase over time in self-employment in construction. By showing rises in

incorporated and unincorporated self-employment and in different industries, the results on

this table confirm that the shift to self-employment is an important part of veterans’

response to the growth of the DC program. And although self-employment earnings are not

observed in the VETCPS, Appendix Figure 3 compares the distribution of log annual earnings

for self-employed and not self-employed Vietnam-era veterans in the March CPS. While there
is a greater mass of zero earnings for the self-employed, their mean log earnings are
relatively close to the mean for other workers.

Finally, we turn to the effects of DC program growth on hours and earnings, as

reported in Table 7, and on spousal and household outcomes, as reported in Table 8. 22 In
the long-term (2010-15), usual hours per week falls by an additional 1.1 hours for BOG

veterans. Most of this decrease can be explained by the 2.5 percentage point drop in
participation reported on Table 3, which would cause usual hours per week to fall by 1 hour

if all veterans worked 40 hours per week. 23 This suggests that there may have been little
labor supply response on the intensive margin, which we confirm in results not shown here.

The probability of any weekly earnings falls by a significant 4.2 points for BOG veterans in

the long term, a bit more than the estimated participation effect, though this is estimated
using a smaller sample; mean weekly earnings fall by an insignificant $23, which can be

compared to a mean of $656, and log earnings fall as well. Overall, the earnings results
22 We were also interested in exploring the heterogeneity in the effects of DC program growth by education
level. Unfortunately, due at least in part to the size of our sample, the coefficients from models using education
sub-samples or interaction terms were too imprecisely estimated for us to be able to conclude much from this
exercise.
23 Only about ten percent of our sample works part-time.

24

confirm that there is a reduction in work for BOG veterans after the expansion of the DC
program.

The results for spousal earnings are suggestive of a decrease in spousal employment,

which is consistent with a positive shock to household income due to the growth of the DC

program. However, while the magnitudes of the coefficients are similar to those for the

veterans themselves, the coefficients are not statistically significant. The results on Table 8

do show a 2.7 percentage point increase in the long-term in the probability of having family

income less than $50,000 and a large decrease in log combined wages for BOG veterans, both
of which are statistically significant. The former suggests that even though families may be

receiving more in DC benefits, this is not sufficient to make up for the loss of earnings, leading

some families to fall below the $50,000 threshold.

To the extent that decreases in

participation are voluntary, this reflects families choosing to have lower income and more

leisure time or more time for unpaid caregiving as a result of the enhanced access to DC

benefits.

V. Discussion
In this study, we explore the effect of VA Disability Compensation benefits on

employment outcomes, exploiting variation in benefit access arising from the 2001 Agent

Orange decision, which affected only Vietnam-era veterans who served with boots-on-the-

ground in the Vietnam theater. We estimate that by the latter part of our sample period

(2010-2015), there was a 10.3 percentage point increase in program participation for the
BOG veterans as a result of the Agent Orange decision, which increased access to the DC

program. We further find that labor force participation fell by 2.5 percentage points for this
25

group (relative to the change for NOG veterans) by the end of the sample period. The implied

effect of program receipt for the marginal recipient is to decrease labor force participation
by an estimated 24 percentage points. 24 This effect is one-third larger than that previously

estimated by ADGL for the DC program, with the difference likely due to our study’s ability

to follow veterans for more years after the Agent Orange decision and to include older

veterans in the sample. The effect here on participation is similar to those estimated by
Maestas et al (2013) and French and Song (2014) for the SSDI program, despite significant
differences between the DC and SSDI programs both in program provisions and recipients’
characteristics. However, the implied effect of program receipt on earnings could be quite

different, as Maestas et al estimate that the marginal SSDI recipients in their sample would
have annual earnings of $3,800 to $4,600. The employed BOG veterans in our sample (prior

to the 2001 policy change) have median weekly earnings of around $1000 (in 2015 dollars).
Our other central finding is that the growth of the DC program was associated with a

significant shift away from working for others and into self-employment. Specifically, we

find that by the end of our sample period, there was a 4.1 percentage point increase in selfemployment for BOG veterans, whose DC eligibility may have been affected by the Agent

Orange decision. By the same logic used above, this implies that 40 percent of those induced
to go on the DC program by the easier access to DC benefits switched to self-employment.

This is a novel finding – while Olds (2016a, 2016b) finds that several in-kind benefit
programs are associated with an increase in entrepreneurship, ours is the first study to our

knowledge to find that an unconditional cash transfer program encourages recipients to
This follows ADGL (2016) and assumes no labor supply effect for those who would otherwise be on the DC
program but experienced an increase in monthly benefits due to an additional diabetes diagnosis.
24

26

start their own business. Further research to see if these results generalize to other benefit
programs offered to younger or non-veteran workers would be helpful.

Our estimates can be used to conduct a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation of the

share of the recent decline in the labor force participation of Vietnam-era Veterans that can

be attributed to the growth of the DC program. Between 2000 and 2013 (the mid-points of

our pre-policy reference period and final sample period, respectively), DC enrollment

climbed by 9.2 percentage points for NOG veterans and for 19.5 percentage points for BOG

veterans, according to our estimates. 25 We estimate that DC receipt decreases labor force

participation by 24 percentage points for the marginal BOG recipient, and we assume for the
purpose of this calculation that the labor supply response would be the same for NOG

recipients. Combining these values along with the share of BOG and NOG veterans in the
population, we estimate that the growth in the DC program led to a 3.2 percentage point

decline in the labor force participation of Vietnam-era veterans, of which 1.9 points is the
decrease in participation for BOG veterans and 1.3 points is the decrease for NOG veterans. 26

BOG veterans are only 40 percent of the veteran population, but have twice as large an

increase in DC receipt, and thus contribute more to the decline in participation. The gap in
participation between veterans and non-veterans rose by 10.6 percentage points during this

period, as calculated from the data underlying Figure 6. This suggests that the growth of the
The estimated increase for our sample may differ from that for all Vietnam-era veterans shown in Figure 1
given that some Vietnam-era veterans were born before 1944 and others were born after 1953. We obtain a
value of 9.2 by taking the average of the individual year coefficients for 2010-2015 from the DC receipt models
in Table 3 (year coefficients not shown on the table); as 1999-2001 is the omitted period, this represents the
growth in DC receipt for NOG veterans since this time. In these models, we estimate that DC enrollment grew
by an additional 10.3 percentage points for BOG veterans. This results in a total growth in DC enrollment of
19.5 percentage points for BOG veterans between 2000 and 2013.
25

These calculations are made as follows. For BOG veterans: 19.5% rise in DC enrollment x 24% participation
effect x 40% share in population = 1.87. For NOG veterans: 9.2% x 24% x 60% = 1.32.
26

27

DC program can explain nearly one-third of the gap in labor force participation between
older veterans and non-veterans that emerged during this period.

Our study provides new estimates of the potential importance of income effects of

unconditional cash transfers on labor force participation. Studies of the DC program offer a

unique opportunity to estimate income effects because benefits are not generally reduced

against earnings, as they are for many other government programs such as SSDI. Some policy
makers and public intellectuals have recently called for replacing some traditional welfare
and social insurance programs with an unconditional cash transfer to all families. Our

estimates may shed some light on the possible effects of such a policy, though we caution
that it is difficult to know how well our findings would generalize beyond the population we
study, which is an older veteran population. 27

We also note that our study provides only one piece of the evidence that would be

necessary to provide a complete welfare analysis of the DC program. Veterans who may be
induced to withdraw from the labor force by enhanced access to DC benefits consume more

leisure, which has a value to them that we do not estimate in our study. The increase in
leisure will have even greater value if these veterans are in poor health and have a high

disutility of work, as may be likely. The ability to shift to self-employment may reflect

another benefit of the DC program, newly discovered in this study. To the extent that failures

in credit markets or other market failures impede individuals’ ability to start a business and
the DC program eases these constraints, the value of this benefit also needs to be estimated
and incorporated in any welfare analysis. Another important piece of the puzzle is the

An additional caveat is that incentive (rather than just income) effects may be important for the 9 percent of
DC recipients with the IU designation or for any DC recipients hoping to qualify for IU benefits in the future.
27

28

interaction between the DC program and other government programs, particularly the SSDI

program. Muller et al (2014) find that many of the most disabled DC recipients were
receiving SSDI benefits prior to their DC award, a scenario that may affect the value of the
DC award to those recipients. The interactions between the DC and SSDI programs represent
a fruitful area for research, and one that we continue to pursue in ongoing work.

Programs such as DC where benefits may be collected even if recipients have labor

earnings have income effects but no substitution effects. 28 As a result, there are welfare

losses from raising the tax revenues needed to pay DC benefits, currently $60 Billion per
year, but not from the changes in veterans’ participation induced by the change in program
incentives. Furthermore, the moral hazard framing implicit in a study of the labor supply
effects of a social insurance program may be less appropriate if the goal of the DC program

is to compensate veterans for injuries suffered in service of the country rather than to make
up for specific disability-related earnings losses. Some features of the DC program, such as

the fact that benefits do not depend on the individual’s own past earnings and generally last

until death and that medical reexaminations are essentially prohibited past age 55, may be
viewed as more consistent with the former.

Clearly, much more work is needed to

understand all of the implications of this program, which serves a large and rapidly-growing
share of the veteran population with a correspondingly fast-rising price tag.

As we mention above, approximately 9 percent of DC recipients have the individual unemployability (IU)
designation, and therefore benefits would decline for this group if earnings increased substantially.

28

29

References
Autor, David H., Mark Duggan, Kyle Greenberg, and David S. Lyle (2016). “The Impact of
Disability Benefits on Labor Supply: Evidence from the VA’s Disability Compensation
Program,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8(3):31-68.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. (2003). “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the
Decline in Unemployment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):157-205.

Autor, David, Andreas Kostol, and Magne Mostad (2015). “Disability Benefits, Consumption
Insurance, and Household Labor Supply,” mimeo.

Bianchi, Milo and Matteo Bobba (2013). “Liquidity, Risk, and Occupational Choices,” Review
of Economic Studies 80(2):491-511.
Black, Daniel, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders (2002). “The Impact of Economic Conditions
on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust.”
American Economic Review 92(1) 27-50.
Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald (1998). “What Makes an Entrepreneur?”
Journal of Labor Economics 16(1):26-60.

Bound, John (1989). “The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants.”
American Economic Review 79(3): 482-503.
Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klauuw (2008). “The Work Disincentive Effects of the
Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s.” Journal of Econometrics 142: 757-78.

Coile, Courtney, Mark Duggan, and Audrey Guo (2015). “Veterans’ Labor Force
Participation: What Role Does the VA’s Disability Compensation Program Play?”
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105(5):131-146.

Duggan, Mark, Perry Singleton, and Jae Song (2007). “Aching to Retire? The Rise in the Full
Retirement Age and its Impact on the Disability Rolls.” Journal of Public Economics,
1327- 1350.

Economic Systems Inc. (2004). “VA Disability Compensation Program: Legislative History,”
report prepared for VA Office of Planning, Policy, and Preparedness.
Evans, David S. and Boyan Jovanovic (1989). “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial
Choice Under Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy 97(4):808-827.

Evans, David S. and Linda S. Leighton (1989). “Some Empirical Aspects of
Entrepreneurship,” American Economic Review 79(3):519-535.

30

French, Eric and Jae Song (2014). “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor
Supply.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2): 291-337.

Gottlieb, Joshua D., Richard R. Townsend, and Ting Xu (2016). “Experimenting with
Entrepreneurship: The Effect of Job-Protected Leave,” Tuck School of Business Working
Paper No. 2714577.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen (1994a). “Sticking it Out:
Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy
102(1):53-75.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen (1994b). “Entrepreneurial
Decisions and Liquidity Constraints,” RAND Journal of Economics 25(2):334-347.

Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi (2004). “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy 112(2):319-347.

Institute of Medicine (2000). Veterans and Agent Orange: Herbidice/Dioxin Exposure and
Type 2 Diabetes – Report of the Committee to Review the Evidence Regarding the Link
Between Exposure to Agent Orange and Diabetes. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand (2013). “Does Disability
Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal
Effects of SSDI Receipt,” American Economic Review 103(5):1797-1829.
]Muller, Scott, Nancy Early, and Justin Ronca (2014). “Workers Who Apply for Social
Security Disabled Worker Benefits After Receiving a Department of Veterans Affairs
Rating of “Total Disability” for Service-Connected Impairments: Characteristics and
Outcomes,” Social Security Bulletin 74(3):1-37.
Olds, Gareth (2016a). “Food Stamp Entrepreneurs,” Harvard Business School Working
Paper 16-143.

Olds, Gareth (2016b). “Entrepreneurship and Public Health Insurance,” Harvard Business
School Working Paper 16-144.
Panangala, Sidath and Daniel Shedd (2014). “Veterans Exposed to Agent Orange:
Legislative History, Litigation, and Current Issues,” Congressional Research Service
Report 7-5700.
Parker, Simon C. (2009). The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Parsons, Donald O. (1980). “The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation,” Journal of
Political Economy 88(1):117-134.
31

Von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester (2010). “Trends in Employment and
Earnings of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the SSDI Program” American Economic
Review 101(7): 3308-3329.

32

Figure 1: Growth in Vietnam Era DC Recipients, 1986-2015
20%

Percentage of Vietnam Era Veterans

18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

0%

Source: Statistical Abstracts of the U.S. (1986-1999), VetPop Model 2014, and VBA Annual Benefits Reports (1999-2015)

33

Figure 2: Growth in DC Beneficiaries by CDR, 1986-2015
1.6

Beneficiaries (in millions)

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

0
10 or 20 percent

30 or 40 percent

50 or 60 percent

Source: COIN CP-127 Reports (1986-1998); VBA Annual Benefits Reports (1999-2015)

34

70+ percent

Figure 3: Growth in DC Expenditures by CDR, 1999-2015

Expenditures (in billions of 2015 dollars)

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

10 or 20 percent
70 or 80 percent

30 or 40 percent
90 or 100 percent

Source: VBA Annual Benefits Reports (1999-2015) and BLS CPI-U

35

50 or 60 percent

Figure 4: Average Monthly Benefit for Vietnam Era DC Recipients,
1999-2015

Average Monthly Benefit (2015 Dollars)

1600
1400

$1467
Male Disabled Workers (SSDI)
$1,267

$1,398

1200
1000

$899

800
600
400
200
0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Source: VBA Annual Benefits Reports (1999-2015) and BLS CPI-U; Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Disability Insurance
Program, Table 36

36

Figure 5: VADC Compensation Recipients by Age, FY 2015

Our Veterans CPS analysis sample is aged 62 to 71 in 2015.
Source: VBA Annual Benefits Report, 2015

37

Figure 6: Labor Force Participation for Males Born 1944 - 1953,
by Veteran Status, 1995-2015
100%

91%
90%

90%
80%

86%
85%

70%
60%

45%

50%
40%

35%

30%

Non-Veterans

Veterans

Annual averages for males with YOB 1944-1953 (defined as survey year minus age) in monthly CPS surveys from January 1995
to December 2015.
38

62%

Figure 7: Age-Adjusted Labor Force Participation for Males Age
55-69, by Veteran Status, 1995-2015
59.9%

60%

58%

56%
53.4%
54%
53.0%

52% 52.8%
50%

Non-Veterans

Veterans

Includes all males aged 55-69 at time of survey in monthly CPS surveys from January 1995 to December 2015. Graphed are
estimated labor force participation rates after conditioning for year and age fixed effects. The baseline estimate for the 55-69 age
group is 53%.
39

Table 1: Distribution of Veterans by Year of Birth
YOB
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1944-1953

All Males
6348
6879
6984
7804
8686
8317
8428
9066
12032
11201
11185
11684
11906
12355
12548
13047
13394
13513
13910
13602
108722

% Veterans
43.2%
39.7%
39.7%
39.7%
41.2%
40.4%
42.4%
45.7%
47.1%
43.1%
37.5%
30.3%
25.3%
20.7%
18.2%
16.1%
14.8%
14.6%
14.7%
13.1%
34.2%

% (Vietnam Era | Vet)
32.9%
39.7%
50.0%
60.9%
74.4%
83.2%
92.0%
94.7%
97.3%
97.1%
95.3%
93.2%
91.0%
88.1%
78.8%
72.2%
64.4%
48.9%
25.3%
0.4%
92.3%

% (BOG | Vietnam Era)
53.4%
49.1%
50.1%
50.5%
42.7%
45.8%
47.6%
51.5%
51.0%
52.7%
49.7%
46.4%
41.3%
34.6%
28.4%
28.2%
25.4%
24.0%
24.4%
60.0%
46.9%

Sample includes males in Veterans Supplement of CPS (1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, and
2010-2015). Yeear of Birth defined as age at time of survey minus survey year. Veterans defined as having
previously served in the Armed Forces. Columns 3&4 are limited to 2005 and later. Vietnam era defined as
veterans who reported a service period of 1964-1975. BOG defined as Vietnam era veterans who reported active
duty in Vietnam/Cambodia/Laos (or surounding waters) any time from 1961 to 1975.

40

Table 2: Characteristics of Sample in Pre-Policy Period (1995-2001)
Variable
Northeast
Midwest
South
West
Age
White
Black
Hispanic
Married
HSgrad or less
College degree
Work-preventing Disability
In Labor Force
Weekly Earnings (2015 $)
VADC Receipt
CDR 50+
Served 5+ years
Military Service since 1990

BOG

NOG

Difference

18.8%
25.8%
29.7%
25.7%

20.5%
24.9%
31.1%
23.5%

-1.7**
0.9
-1.4
2.2**

Census Region

Demographics
50.20
88.4%
8.7%
3.6%
73.9%
40.4%
34.8%
7.3%
86.8%
917.35

Service-Related
14.8%
4.1%
16.8%
0.9%

49.73
89.5%
7.6%
2.5%
75.5%
36.6%
39.7%
5.0%
90.2%
992.28
6.3%
1.0%
15.9%
3.1%

0.47***
-1.1*
1.2**
1.1***
-1.5*
3.7***
-5.0***
2.3***
-3.3***
-74.93***
8.5***
3.1***
0.9
-2.2***

Sample includes 5,391 BOG and 6,198 NOG veterans from the Veterans Supplement to the CPS
(1995, 1997, 1999, 2001). BOG is defined as Vietnam era veterans who reported active duty in
Vietnam/Cambodia/ Laos (or surounding waters) any time from 1961 to 1975. Weekly earnings
data is only available for 4th and 8th month in sample, and equal zero for those not employed.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Table 3: DC Receipt for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015

BOG

(1)

DC Receipt
(2)

(3)

8.51***
(0.72)

7.98***
(0.94)

7.90***
(1.12)

BOG*(1995-97)

(4)

CDR ≥ 50%
(5)

(6)

2.75***
(0.40)

2.75***
(0.53)

2.98***
(0.60)

1.38
(1.46)

-0.00
(0.80)

BOG*(Year Pre-Trend)

-0.27
(0.34)

0.10
(0.18)

BOG*(2003-2009)

2.23**
(1.04)

2.76**
(1.21)

2.84**
(1.35)

3.94***
(0.64)

3.93***
(0.73)

3.71***
(0.78)

BOG*(2010-2015)

9.80***
(1.18)

10.33***
(1.32)

10.41***
(1.45)

8.72***
(0.78)

8.72***
(0.86)

8.49***
(0.90)

15.27

15.27

15.27

6.07

6.07

6.07

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.05

Mean of Dependent Variable
Observations
R-Squared

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted
with vetcps weights. Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. DC Receipt and CDR ≥ 50% are indicator variables equal to 100 for receiving DC benefits or having a combined disability rating of 50% or above.
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years
1995 and 1997; BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly.
There is no interaction between BOG and the sample years 1999 and 2001.
4. BOG*(Year Pre-Trend) is an interaction between BOG and a linear year trend (year-2001 until 2001 and 0 thereafter).
5. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

42

Table 4: Labor Force Participation for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015
In Labor Force
(1)
(2)
BOG

-2.75***
(0.75)

BOG*(1995-97)

-2.85***
(1.02)

Not in Labor Force: Disabled
(3)
(4)
2.18***
(0.57)

2.26***
(0.78)

0.24
(1.45)

Not in Labor Force: Retired
(5)
(6)
0.41
(0.42)

-0.21
(1.11)

0.35
(0.61)

Not in Labor Force: Other
(7)
(8)
0.16
(0.25)

0.17
(0.79)

0.24
(0.31)
-0.19
(0.52)

BOG*(2003-2009)

-1.17
(1.20)

-1.08
(1.38)

0.88
(0.84)

0.80
(0.99)

0.47
(0.89)

0.53
(0.99)

-0.18
(0.33)

-0.26
(0.38)

BOG*(2010-2015)

-2.54*
(1.30)

-2.45*
(1.48)

0.45
(0.84)

0.37
(0.99)

2.18*
(1.12)

2.24*
(1.20)

-0.08
(0.32)

-0.15
(0.36)

Mean of Dependent Variable

63.80

63.80

8.41

8.41

25.81

25.81

1.98

1.98

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

0.21

0.21

0.03

0.03

0.26

0.26

0.00

0.00

Observations
R-Squared

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted with vetcps weights.
Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. All dependent variables are indicator variables equal to 100. The means of In Labor Force and the three NILF variables sum to one.
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years 1995 and 1997;
BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly. There is no interaction between BOG and 1999 and 2001.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

43

Table 5: Type of Employment for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015
Employed
BOG

(1)

(2)

-3.43***
(0.80)

-2.93***
(1.08)

BOG*(1995-97)

Working for Others
(3)
(4)
0.07
(1.02)

1.35
(1.34)

-1.31
(1.57)

Self-Employed
(5)
(6)
-3.50***
(0.75)

-3.33
(2.06)

-4.28***
(0.97)

Unemployed
(7)
(8)
0.68**
(0.29)

2.02
(1.55)

0.09
(0.37)
1.55***
(0.60)

BOG*(2003-2009)

-1.41
(1.25)

-1.91
(1.45)

-2.76*
(1.46)

-4.04**
(1.70)

1.36
(1.01)

2.13*
(1.18)

0.23
(0.43)

0.83*
(0.49)

BOG*(2010-2015)

-1.87
(1.34)

-2.37
(1.52)

-5.23***
(1.45)

-6.50***
(1.69)

3.36***
(0.96)

4.13***
(1.14)

-0.68
(0.43)

-0.08
(0.48)

Mean of Dependent Variable

60.91

60.91

50.61

50.61

10.30

10.30

2.89

2.89

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

0.20

0.20

0.16

0.16

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

Observations
R-Squared

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted with vetcps weights.
Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. All dependent variables are indicator variables equal to 100; the means of Working for Others and Self-Employed sum to the share Employed.
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years 1995 and 1997;
BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly. There is no interaction between BOG and 1999 and 2001.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

44

Table 6: Types of Self Employment for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015
Incorporated
(1)
(2)
BOG

-1.47***
(0.46)

BOG*(1995-97)

-1.48**
(0.58)

Unincorporated
(3)
(4)
-2.03*** -2.79***
(0.62)
(0.81)

0.04
(0.97)

Construction
(5)
(6)
-0.36
(0.36)

1.98
(1.27)

-0.67
(0.47)

Professional/Business Services
(7)
(8)

-0.97**
(0.39)

0.79
(0.74)

-1.07**
(0.51)

Other Industries
(9)
(10)
-2.17***
(0.57)

0.28
(0.79)

-2.54***
(0.73)
0.96
(1.20)

BOG*(2003-2009)

0.63
(0.64)

0.64
(0.73)

0.73
(0.83)

1.49
(0.97)

0.12
(0.49)

0.43
(0.57)

0.34
(0.51)

0.44
(0.61)

0.90
(0.78)

1.26
(0.91)

BOG*(2010-2015)

1.43**
(0.58)

1.44**
(0.68)

1.93**
(0.79)

2.69***
(0.94)

-0.21
(0.44)

0.09
(0.53)

1.20**
(0.50)

1.30**
(0.60)

2.38***
(0.73)

2.74***
(0.86)

3.79

6.51

6.51

1.97

1.97

2.36

2.36

5.96

5.96

125,711

125,711

125,711

125,711

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

Mean of Dependent Variable 3.79

Observations
R-Squared

125,711 125,711
0.01

0.01

125,711 125,711
0.01

0.01

125,711 125,711
0.00

0.00

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted with vetcps weights.
Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. All dependent variables are indicator variables equal to 100, and the sum of Incorporated and Unincorporated equals the sum of Construction,
Professional/Business Services, and Other Industries.
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years 1995 and 1997;
BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly. There is no interaction between BOG and 1999 and 2001.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

45

Table 7: Hours and Earnings for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015
Usual Hours
(1)
(2)
BOG

-1.36***
(0.40)

BOG*(1995-97)

-0.70
(0.53)

Any Weekly Earnings
(3)
(4)
-2.41**
(0.98)

-1.72
(1.28)

-1.72**
(0.80)

Weekly Earnings
(5)
(6)
-62.06***
(19.25)

-1.82
(1.97)

-45.51*
(25.70)

Log Weekly Earnings
(7)
(8)
-0.19***
(0.07)

-43.73
(38.21)

-0.15
(0.09)
-0.13
(0.14)

BOG*(2003-2009)

-0.47
(0.59)

-1.12
(0.68)

-2.03
(1.49)

-2.72
(1.71)

-36.34
(26.91)

-52.91*
(31.86)

-0.14
(0.10)

-0.18
(0.12)

BOG*(2010-2015)

-0.48
(0.59)

-1.14*
(0.68)

-3.55**
(1.41)

-4.24***
(1.63)

-6.31
(24.28)

-22.86
(29.65)

-0.21**
(0.10)

-0.26**
(0.11)

Mean of Dependent Variable

24.40

24.40

56.34

56.34

655.81

655.81

3.86

3.86

125,711

125,711

28,037

28,037

28,037

28,037

28,037

28,037

0.21

0.21

0.22

0.22

0.18

0.18

0.24

0.24

Observations
R-Squared

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted with vetcps weights.
Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. Any Weekly Earnings is an indicator variable and the other dependent variables are continuous. Earnings data is only collected during the outgoing rotation month,
and self-employment income is not observed (self-employed are dropped). Earnings are adjusted to 2015 dollars, and equal to zero for non-employed.
Log Earnings takes the natural log of (1+Weekly Earnings).
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years 1995 and 1997;
BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly. There is no interaction between BOG and 1999 and 2001.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

46

Table 8: Spousal Employment Outcomes for BOG vs. NOG Veterans, 1995-2015
Family Income < $50K
(1)
(2)
BOG

-0.55***
(0.14)

BOG*(1995-97)

-0.60***
(0.18)

Spousal Weekly Earnings
(3)
(4)
0.27
(17.42)

0.12
(0.27)

13.24
(22.93)

Log Spousal Earnings
(5)
(6)
0.00
(0.09)

-34.18
(35.40)

0.13
(0.12)

Log(Own + Spouse Earnings)
(7)
(8)
-0.01
(0.06)

-0.35*
(0.19)

0.11
(0.08)
-0.32***
(0.12)

BOG*(2003-2009)

0.23
(0.19)

0.27
(0.22)

-50.97**
(24.19)

-63.93**
(28.44)

-0.14
(0.13)

-0.27*
(0.15)

-0.26***
(0.10)

-0.38***
(0.11)

BOG*(2010-2015)

2.65**
(1.27)

2.70**
(1.27)

-10.84
(22.47)

-23.80
(26.96)

-0.03
(0.12)

-0.17
(0.14)

-0.30***
(0.11)

-0.42***
(0.12)

Mean of Dependent Variable

15.56

15.56

440.84

440.84

3.55

3.55

5.29

5.29

92,830

92,830

19,348

19,348

19,348

19,348

19,348

19,348

0.27

0.27

0.06

0.06

0.11

0.11

0.23

0.23

Observations
R-Squared

Notes:
1. All specifications include year, month, and age fixed effects and indicators for White, Black, and HS graduate or less; regressions are weighted with vetcps weights.
Models are estimated as linear probability models.
2. Family Income <$50K is an indicator variable, and the other dependent variables are continuous. Earnings data is only collected during the outgoing rotation
month, and self-employment income is not observed (self-employed are dropped). Earnings are adjusted to 2015 dollars, and equal to zero for non-employed.
Log Spousal Earnings takes the nautral log of (1 + Spousal Weekly Earnings); Log(Own+Spouse) does the same for (1 + Spouse + Own).
3. BOG is an indicator variable for having Boots on the Ground. BOG*(1995-97) is an interaction between BOG and an indicator for sample years 1995 and 1997;
BOG interactions with 2003-2009 and 2010-2015 are defined similarly. There is no interaction between BOG and 1999 and 2001.
4. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***, respectively.

47

Appendix Tables

48

Figure A1: Age Distribution of Veterans CPS Sample
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
Total

1995
167
217
226
292
352
456
485
382
298
308

3183

1997

188
167
194
237
274
354
446
279
242
222

2603

1999

138
184
201
239
305
380
418
323
290
255

2733

2001

186
210
259
308
351
366
458
339
290
303

3070

2003

203
193
229
280
323
364
440
332
274
269

2907

2005

176
188
247
309
296
373
395
297
263
272

2816

2007

2009

159
173
210
280
331
343
434
296
244
264

2734

154
184
234
248
287
312
418
286
236
241

2600

2010

126
157
191
222
260
271
357
234
236
205

2259

2011

126
146
190
214
242
293
316
247
205
197

2176

2012

139
149
199
177
241
261
312
244
204
169

2095

2013

132
137
163
174
225
274
306
229
218
155

2013

2014

112
154
144
196
262
296
321
236
208
164
2093

2015

106
144
152
179
232
245
287
225
174
152
1896

Total
167
217
414
459
684
877
1146
1185
1511
1468
1416
1379
1477
1440
1390
1598
1517
1633
1677
1802
1775
1903
1620
1751
1488
1196
910
588
338
152
35178

All male veterans in VETCPS with YOB 1944-1953, where YOB is defined as age at time of survey minus survey year. The drop in sample size in years 2010 - 2015 is due to
nonresponse in the veterans supplement. We make up for this in our estimation by upweighting the remaining observations by age group and military service period.

49

Figure A2: Industries for Self-Employed and Other Workers, 2003 - 2015
Industry
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, Hunting
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Transportation and Utilities
Information
Financial Activities
Professional and Business Services
Educational and Health Services
Leisure and Hospitality
Other Services
Public Administration
Armed Forces

Non-Veteran
Self-Employed
Other
12.6%
0.4%
18.1%
4.4%
11.3%
4.4%
1.3%
8.7%
20.9%
6.4%
5.8%
5.8%
0.0%
0.0%

NOG
Self-Employed

1.7%
1.3%
8.4%
17.1%
13.9%
8.8%
2.3%
5.8%
9.7%
15.3%
5.0%
4.4%
6.4%
0.0%

11.1%
0.6%
17.8%
5.6%
11.0%
3.4%
1.2%
10.1%
21.5%
7.1%
3.6%
6.9%
0.0%
0.0%

Other
1.4%
1.2%
7.6%
17.1%
12.9%
11.3%
2.0%
5.5%
9.9%
13.2%
3.6%
4.1%
10.1%
0.0%

BOG
Self-Employed
13.7%
0.3%
16.8%
4.8%
13.1%
5.6%
0.7%
11.0%
19.4%
4.4%
3.6%
6.6%
0.0%
0.0%

Other
1.1%
1.3%
8.1%
17.8%
13.8%
13.7%
2.0%
4.7%
9.0%
11.9%
3.9%
3.4%
9.3%
0.1%

Sample includes INLF males with YOB 1944-1953 in the 2003 to 2015 VETCPS. YOB is defined as age at time of survey minus survey year, and Self-employed
is defined as either "self-employed incorporated" or "self-employed unincorporated" worker classification.

50

51

