                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON OVERALL FERTILITY

                                         Philip DeCicca
                                        Harry Krashinsky

                                       Working Paper 23003
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23003


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




We thank David Blau, Isaac Ehrlich, Daeho Kim, Randy Olson, Mel Stephens, Arthur Sweetman,
Casey Warman and seminar participants at McMaster University, SUNY-Buffalo, The Ohio State
University, Dalhousie University, University of Waterloo and NBER for helpful comments. We
are especially indebted to Phil Oreopoulos for helpful comments and sharing useful data with us.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Education on Overall Fertility
Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 23003
December 2016
JEL No. I1,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

Fertility rates have long been falling in many developed countries while educational attainment in
these countries has risen. We attempt to reconcile these two trends with a novel application of a
recent model to generate plausibly causal effects of education on these decreases in fertility.
Specifically, we find that education “compresses” the fertility distribution – women are more
likely to have at least one child, but less likely to have multiple children. We demonstrate that
the mechanism for this effect is through the positive impact of education on earnings and
marriage.


Philip DeCicca
Department of Economics
422 Kenneth Taylor Hall
McMaster University
Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4
CANADA
and NBER
decicca@mcmaster.ca

Harry Krashinsky
Centre for Industrial Relations
121 St. George Street
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 2E8
Canada
harry.krashinsky@utoronto.ca
I. Introduction

         Both birth rates and female educational attainment have changed dramatically over the

past half-century. In many developed countries between 1960 and 2010, total fertility rates have

fallen by one-third to over one-half.1 Over the same period, female educational attainment has

significantly increased. In the United States, for example, the fraction of women aged 25-29

with at least a bachelor’s degree increased threefold—from roughly 12 percent to about 35

percent. In addition to these trends, there are large differences in total fertility across women of

different education levels. Fertility among American women aged 40 to 50 years old in 2012

varied substantially by educational attainment—from about 2.6 for those with less than a HS

degree to about 1.8 for women with a bachelor’s degree and 1.7 for those with a graduate or

professional degree. Moreover, while just less than 12 percent of those with less than a high

school degree were childless, nearly one-quarter of women with a graduate or professional

degree had no children when surveyed. Such descriptive evidence, coupled with conceptually

plausible mechanisms, suggests there may be a causal relationship between female education and

lifetime fertility.

         Despite these suggestive trends, and a long standing interest by economists in the impact

of schooling on fertility, there exist relatively few studies that credibly estimate causal

relationships, particularly with data from the developed world. In this paper, we attempt to

estimate the causal impact of education on lifetime fertility, which we define as the number of

children a woman gives birth to by age forty. After reviewing the most relevant literature, we

present a model of fertility, based on a standard child quantity-quality framework, which

 In the United States, total fertility decreased from about 3.5 children per woman in 1960 to roughly 2.0 children in
1

2010, while Canada saw a decline in total fertility from 3.9 children in 1960 to 1.6 in 2010. In England and Wales,
the comparable rates are 2.7 in 1960 and 1.9 in 2010; in Ireland, 3.8 in 1960 and 2.1 in 2010; in Finland, 2.7 in 1960
and 1.9 in 2010; in the Netherlands, 3.1 in 1960 and 1.8 in 2010; in Italy, 2.4 in 1960 and 1.5 in 2010; in France, 2.9
in 1960 and 2.0 in 2010; in Germany, 2.4 in 1960 and 1.4 in 2010.
demonstrates that education may affect fertility differentially on extensive and intensive margins.

In other words, the model shows that education may have different impacts on the probability a

woman has any children (i.e., the extensive margin) and the number of children she has,

conditional on having children (i.e., the intensive margin) that work through changes in the price

of child quantity and child quality.

       We test this model using multiple waves of the Canadian Census. More precisely, we use

quasi-experimental variation in compulsory schooling laws (CSLs) to identify the causal impact

of education on each fertility margin separately. We find evidence that education “compresses”

fertility. That is, we find an extra year of CSL-induced schooling decreases the number of

children a given woman has, but increases the probability that a woman has any children. We

also find that additional CSL-induced schooling leads to a greater likelihood of marriage as well

as higher earnings for women. While the latter are interesting findings independent of their

connection to lifetime fertility, we argue they are consistent with the compressive fertility pattern

we observe. In particular, increased marriage should reduce the price of child quality which, in

turn, should decrease the likelihood of childlessness, while reducing the number of children

along the intensive margin.

       Our estimates are robust along many dimensions including several different

parameterizations of our compulsory schooling instrument, as well as robust to the inclusion of

school quality measures and region-specific trends that address a recent critique of the

compulsory schooling literature by Stephens and Yang (2014). Our results contribute to a small,

but growing literature that uses quasi-experimental variation in education to examine important

socioeconomic outcomes like fertility.
       In what follows, we provide background information on Canadian compulsory schooling

laws, discuss related studies and the present our theoretical model which draws substantially on

Galor (2012) and Aaronson, Lange and Mazumder (2015). In Section 3, we describe our data,

focusing on key definitions and also the relevant history of minimum school leaving ages which

provide the variation which we use to identify the impact of schooling on lifetime fertility.

Section 4 presents our empirical strategy which involves instrumental variables estimation. We

also discuss important issues regarding appropriate variance estimation when there are few

sources of independent variation: since minimum school leaving ages are province-specific and

since there are only ten Canadian provinces we implement the Wild Cluster Bootstrap procedure

described in Cameron and Miller (2015). Section 5 presents our findings. As noted, we find that

additional schooling has a “compressive” effect on lifetime fertility, reducing the likelihood of

childlessness while reducing the number of children a woman has conditional on having any.

Section 6 discusses our findings and their implications and concludes the paper.

II. Background

A. Canadian Compulsory Schooling Laws

       Compulsory schooling laws have existed in North America for well over a century. As

detailed below, their historical development in Canada and the United States is quite similar.

Other key similarities between the Canadian and U.S. educational systems include education

being a function of state/provincial governments that is delivered by local governments as well

as the use of similar, most often local, funding mechanisms in the relevant time periods (Katz,

1976). In what follows, we briefly describe the history of CSLs in Canada drawing heavily on

existing research (Phillips, 1957; Axelrod, 1997; Oreopoulos, 2005). We describe the law

changes we use for identification purposes in greater detail in Section 3.
         As in the United States, compulsory schooling laws in Canada were first enacted in the

latter part of the 19th Century (Katz, 1976). Early versions of these laws were subject to many

exemptions, most often based on the age of children, their necessity in supporting their families

and distance lived from school. These laws, however, became more binding over time as the list

of exemptions narrowed. Though an early adopter, the province of Ontario provides a good

example of the typical evolution of CSLs in Canada. In 1871, Ontario became the first province

in Canada to enact a compulsory schooling law, requiring children aged seven to twelve to attend

school for at least four months per year.2 Two decades later these ages were raised to between

eight and fourteen, and legislation introduced penalties for non-compliance as well as for hiring

school-aged children, though some exemptions remained. For example, children under ten were

exempted if they lived more than 2 miles from school while children ten and over were similarly

exempted if they lived more than 3 miles away. Moreover, there was lax enforcement of the law,

particularly in rural areas.3 By the mid-1950s, the Schools Administration Act raised the age of

school attendance to sixteen for all students in Ontario, though farm children over the age of

fourteen were exempted as were children who were deemed to be essential to their family’s

subsistence. Similar to other Canadian provinces, even these exemptions were lifted in the early

1970s, which is also consistent with many U.S. states (Katz, 1976). More recently, some

Canadian provinces have further increased the age of compulsory attendance: New Brunswick

raised it to eighteen in 2000, as did Ontario in 2007 and Manitoba in 2011. Again, note that this

2
  CSLs appeared in British Columbia shortly afterward in 1873 with most Canadian provinces enacting them by the
end of the first decade of 20th Century.
3
  The deference shown to rural areas, mostly based on their agrarian nature and extensive use of child labor, is also
apparent in the Adolescent School Attendance Act of 1921 whereby Ontario increased the compulsory age of
attendance from fourteen to sixteen years old, but only for young adults living in urban areas. Perhaps not
surprisingly, newly required fourteen and fifteen year olds were exempted from the law if they were employed at
home or for wages and if they possessed a parent-endorsed “certificate of employment”, which exempted youth
from minimum school leaving laws, were often obtained by passing equivalency tests, typically at the level of grade
7 or 8, but sometimes merely tested basic skills like reading or writing. These young adults were still required to
attend part-time instruction in the evenings, where such classes existed.
broad overview does not explicitly discuss the law changes we use in our analysis; instead we do

this in Section 3.

B. Literature review

        The literature on the relationship between family size and economic circumstances begins

with the work of Becker (1960, 1965), which proposed an analysis of fertility based upon the

view of children as durable goods, and documented a negative relationship between household

income and the number of children produced within a household. Becker and Lewis (1973),

Willis (1973) and Becker and Tomes (1976) further analyzed this phenomenon by proposing a

fundamental trade-off between the quantity and quality of children produced within a family.

Generally, models in these papers postulate that household utility,             , is a function of

three goods: n represents the number of children, w represents the quality of each child, and y is

an aggregate of all other goods. The budget constraint within the model is:                      ,

where py represents the price of the aggregate good, p is the price of nw, and I represents income.

The optimal choices in n and w reveal that there exists a trade-off between these two goods: an

increase in n raises the shadow price of w, and vice versa.

        The quantity-quality model has been empirically tested in a large set of papers, which can

be broadly classified into two groups. The first group of papers relate changes in child quantity

to parental investment in their children’s education, which is deemed to improve child quality.

Within this first group of papers, the evidence for a trade-off between quantity and quality has

been mixed. One subset of these papers has found a negative relationship between child quality

and quantity (c.f., Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1980; Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1987; Hanushek,

1992; Caceres (2006); Lee (2008); Li, Zhang and Zhu, 2008); Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 2009),

while a different subset finds less evidence for such a trade-off (c.f., Kessler, 1991; Black,
Devereux and Salvanes, 2005; Angrist, Levy and Schlosser, 2010; Black, Devereux and

Salvanes, 2010; Lucas, 2013; Qian, forthcoming).

        In the second group of papers, which is more relevant to our work, the central empirical

strategy for analyzing the quantity-quality trade-off hinged on factors that change the shadow

prices of children (as opposed to the quantity of children). Many of these papers have used

historical data, and unlike the first set of papers, exhibit a greater consensus on the presence of a

quantity-quality trade-off. Becker et. al. (2010) use nineteenth-century Prussian data and use an

IV strategy for educational attainment in order to create variation in the price of education (the

price of quality) and fertility, and they demonstrate that there is a negative causal relationship in

this regard. Schultz (1985) uses historical Swedish data to examine a plausible change in the

relative value of women’s time in the labor market due to a change in the price of the goods

produced by women and men. His IV strategy shows that the increased valuation of labor

market time reduces fertility, which is consistent with the quantity-quality model because an

increase in the opportunity cost of women’s time will increase the price of the quantity of

children produced within the family.4 Bleakley and Lange (2009) use the eradication of

hookworm disease at the beginning of the twentieth century as a plausibly exogenous decrease in

the price of quality of children. They argue that the eradication of hookworm raised the returns

to education for children who could, absent this disease, obtain higher education more easily and

improve the retention of training from education. As the quantity-quality tradeoff would

predict, a decrease in the price of quality should induce greater consumption of quality by




 Becker et. al. (1990) develop a theoretical model to demonstrate that, in the context of economic growth and
4

development, increased investment in educational attainment may lead to an equilibrium with smaller families –
directly in accordance with the quantity-quality model.
parents; the resulting increase in the quality will raise the price of quantity and thus cause a

decrease in overall fertility.

        A paper that uses more recent data is a study by McCrary and Royer (2011), which

examines the relationship between maternal education and fertility, in the context of a more

prominent focus on child health. Using data from California and Texas, these authors implement

a regression discontinuity strategy based on compulsory schooling laws (CSL). They find little

evidence of a relationship between increases in CSL-induced education and fertility.5 While

their data are very appropriate for examining the relationship between maternal education and

child health, they are more limited in examining fertility since they use natality data which, by its

nature, is comprised solely of those females who have given birth.

C. Model

        The most relevant papers to this study are Galor (2012) and Aaronson, Lange and

Mazumder (2014) (hereafter ALM). Galor (2012) provides the theoretical underpinning for

ALM to analyze the construction of Rosenwald schools in the U.S. south at the beginning of the

twentieth century. These two papers use a quantity-quality framework with a few small changes.

Specifically, the household maximizes its preferences based upon the following utility function

with three arguments subject to the budget constraint:



In this case, c represents goods and services consumed, n represents the number of children, and

e is the investment in the quality of the n children. The household can spend at most I in

household income on c, and the e amount of quality for all n children. Unlike the earlier models

in this literature, there are two prices that need to be paid in this process:            is a fixed cost for


5
  McCrary and Royer (2011) also find no relationship between such education and child health, which again is the
focus of their study.
raising children (and it is independent of the investments made into the children) and      is the

cost of investing in the quality of children.

       The interior solution for this problem is denoted by           , and the shadow prices of

quantity and quality are:




As was the case with the earlier models in this literature, these shadow prices still lead to a

quantity-quality tradeoff:

(1) There is a positive relationship between     and    , which implies that increased investments

in the quality of children (e) will raise the shadow price of having more children. As such, an

increase in the investment in child quality will tend to reduce the number of children in the

household.

(2) There is a positive relationship between     and    , which implies that additional children will

raise the shadow price of investment in child quality. As such, an increase in the number of

children in the household will tend to reduce investment in children in the household.

For the purpose of later exposition, it should be noted that this component of the model governs

the decision-making process for the intensive margin.

       The key insight from ALM is that the fertility literature (including Galor) often imposes

the Inada condition, which obscures the quantity-quality trade-off, because it requires households

to have at least one child. That is: the model considers the intensive margin (the number of

children in a family, conditional on having at least one child), but ignores the extensive margin.

To better understand the extensive margin, it is necessary to consider the relative utility of

having no children in the context of this model, and how it compares to the case where a
household has children. Let the value of remaining childless be captured by            , and let the

value of having the optimal non-zero number of children be represented by                    – note

that this value is negatively related to the two prices    and    . In this case, a woman will

choose to have children if              is larger than       .

    Within the context of this discussion, it is instructive to consider how changes in the model’s

parameters will impact both the intensive and extensive margins for fertility. In this case, there

are two effects of interest:

    (i)     If   decreases, then               will increase, while       will remain constant. This

            will make it more likely that a woman has at least one child – that is, a woman will be

            less likely to be childless given this change. Thus, a decrease in      has a positive

            effect on the extensive margin of fertility. However, the fall in this price will induce

            a substitution effect between e and n: e will increase, and n will decrease – this will

            cause a negative effect on the intensive margin for fertility. Overall, then, a decrease

            in    will compress fertility decisions for women: they will be more likely to have at

            least one child, but also more likely to have fewer children overall.

    (ii)    If   increases, then               will decrease, and this will decrease fertility on both

            the intensive and extensive margins. An increase in        makes it less likely that

                         will be larger than       (which remains constant as       increases), and

            the substitution effect will induce a decrease in n in favour of an increase in e.

    Having established points (i) and (ii), it is now possible to consider how changes in different

characteristics of women impact their fertility decisions. Typically, it has been argued that

improvements in labour market opportunities for women represent an increase in           , which

should decrease fertility on both the intensive and extensive margins. One of the most well-
recognized instances of improved labour market opportunities would come from an increase in

educational attainment – or an improvement in the quality of educational training – for women.

ALM also argue that an increase in the quality of schooling should reduce       , since it is easier

for parents to produce higher-quality children with access to better schools.

   With these notions in hand, ALM consider how access to Rosenwald schools altered fertility

for two cohorts of African-American women in the southern U.S.: the cohort of children who

had varying degrees of access to the Rosenwald schools, and their parents (who were too old to

access the schools). ALM argue that the construction of the Rosenwald schools should decrease

   for the parents since their children now have access to higher-quality schools. However, since

the parents’ education remains unaffected by the construction of these schools,       should remain

constant. In contrast, the Rosenwald schools should decrease       and increase     for the children

who had access to these schools, since their labor market opportunities have improved as a result

of these schools (as documented by Aaronson and Mazumder (2011)). By comparing the

fertility patterns of the children who either did or did not have access to the Rosenwald schools

with the fertility parents of their parents, ALM demonstrate that the schools “compressed”

fertility: children educated in the Rosenwald schools were more likely to have at least one child

compared to their parents, but (conditional on having at least one child) less likely to have as

many children as their parents. The Rosenwald schools generated opposing effects on the

extensive and intensive margins of fertility, as predicted by the Galor and ALM models.

       This paper contributes to the relevant literature in several ways. First, modern data from

a developed country, and not historical data or data from a developing country, will be analyzed

in conjunction with a policy change that is similar in spirit to ALM: increased educational

attainment for women due to changes in compulsory schooling laws. Although it has already
been argued that a change in CSLs would raise      , this paper’s second contribution will be the

documentation of this fact, while taking into account concerns about this effect that have been

raised by Stephens and Yang (2014) (hereafter SY). In their study, SY find that the inclusion of

region-specific trends or measures of school quality effectively reduce to zero instrumental-

variable estimates of the return to education for U.S. data. These findings cast at least some

doubt on the conclusions of earlier work on CSL-induced increases in formal schooling. We

address this critique by using Canadian data, while incorporating Canadian variables that

correspond to those used by SY. As will be seen, our estimates—both first stage and

structural—are robust to their inclusion, thus providing validation for the empirical strategy of

using CSL-induced changes in education to study increases in       .

       A third contribution of this paper is evidence we will present on the way in which

changes in one’s own educational attainment may also impact        . We will argue that that

increased educational attainment makes it more likely that a woman becomes and remains

married. In turn, this will decrease   if, compared to a single parent, a married parent faces a

lower price of investment in the quality of her child(ren), due to a couple’s increased joint

monetary resources and greater flexibility in non-work time, which increases the total parental

time which can be allocated to raising children. Indeed, existing research suggests that such

differences exist between married and unmarried families. Kendig and Bianchi (2008) find that

single mothers tend to spend less time in child care than married mothers, including routine care

as well as care deemed more intensive such as playing with or reading to children. Pencavel

(1998) finds that as husband’s education increases, women’s labour supply decreases, implying

intra-couple coordination of time devoted to the raising of children. In addition, single-parent

households exhibit relatively less involvement from the non-resident parent. Bianchi (2011)
shows that offspring in mother-only households receive relatively less paternal child care; this

gap has increased dramatically over the past decade, to roughly half of that spent by the father in

married households. While non-resident fathers may routinely spend time with children (e.g., on

weekends), Cooksey and Fondell (1996) show that resident fathers, particularly resident

biological fathers, tend to spend more time in their children than non-resident ones. To the

extent that investment in children is time-intensive, it follows that marriage reduces the cost of

such activities.

         Given this, we assert that an improvement in educational training of women will increase

    and decrease       . Although both of these price changes will have an unambiguously negative

effect on the intensive margin of fertility, they will have counteracting effects on the extensive

margin of fertility. It is possible, if the decrease in           is the dominant effect on the extensive

margin, that a change in educational training for women will have a “compressing” effect on

overall fertility – women will be more likely to have at least one child, but less likely to have

large families. Overall, this analysis of Canadian data will take place in a manner that is entirely

new to the literature to demonstrate this compressing effect for education.

III. Data

         The primary data for this study consist of women between the age of 40 and 65 from the

confidential6 extracts of the 1981 and 1991 decennial Canadian Censuses, which were necessary

for a number of reasons. First, in addition to the standard demographic variables, such as gender,

marital status, citizenship status and ethnicity, these extracts also contain information on an




6
  The confidential data sets were only accessible through secure sites, and contain information not collected for the
publicly-available extracts of the decennial censuses. In particular, the confidential files contain specific
information about earnings in the prior year, as well as specific amounts of education obtained by the household
member and an individual’s exact date of birth
individual’s province7 of birth as well as their exact date of birth; both variables are necessary to

examine the relationship between changes in compulsory schooling laws and educational

attainment. Second, they contain detailed labour market information. The confidential extracts

of the Census contain annual earnings from the prior year, as well as labour market participation

and weeks worked in the prior year, which will be used to determine the relationship between

years of education and labour market performance. Third, the Census asks a retrospective

question about fertility for all of its female respondents: what is the total number of children

you’ve had over your lifetime? From this, it is possible to determine a woman’s cumulative

lifetime fertility. All three sets of variables will permit a proper analysis of our adapted ALM

model: it will be possible to determine whether or not education is related to fertility, and

whether or not earnings and marital status are key mechanisms within this effect.

        To give a sense of the data, Table 1 displays the sample means of a variety of variables

for women in our sample with different levels of educational attainment: less than a grade six

education, educational attainment of grade seven or eight, some high school education (between

grade nine to eleven) or at least a high-school graduate’s level of education. These subsamples

were chosen to demonstrate the relative fertility, relative earnings and marital patterns of women

with different levels of education, especially over the levels of education that were impacted by

the instrument we selected.

        The first three rows of the table demonstrate well-documented facts about the cross-

sectional relationship between education and age, income and weeks worked. In the first row,

the monotonic decrease in average age as the educational attainment of the subsample increases

shows that younger cohorts of women have obtained relatively more education. Of particular

7
  A Canadian “province” is analogous to an American state. There are ten provinces in Canada, and three territories;
the sample analyzed within this study will include only data drawn from individuals born in one of the ten
provinces.
note for this study is the relationship between education and marital status. The second and third

rows show that the fraction of women currently married and the fraction who have ever been

married are increasing in educational attainment over the first three educational categories, but

decreases in the fourth column. As will be demonstrated later, the instrument we employ

induces changes in educational attainment between the first three columns, but not in the fourth;

as such, over the range of education that is influenced by our instrument, education is positively

related to both the propensity of being currently married as well as the propensity to have been

married at some time.

        Another notable relationship between educational attainment and total fertility is evident

in the fourth and fifth rows of the table. The fourth row demonstrates that the total number of

children to which a woman has given birth is negatively related to educational attainment.

However, the fifth row shows that over the range of education that is influenced by our

instrument (the first three columns of the table), there is a positive relationship between

educational attainment and the average proportion of women who have ever had a child. Within

the first three columns of these cross-tabulations, education has a compressing effect on fertility:

more education is related to a decrease in the total number of children to which a woman gives

birth, but an increase in the likelihood that she has at least one child.

        The last relationship of note is displayed in the last two rows of the table, which

document the average income and weeks worked for women across the four educational

categories. Since labour market attachment can decrease with age, these averages were

calculated for the same cohort in the first five rows, but ten years earlier (during prime working

years): the sample used to compute these averages consist of women between the ages of 30 and

55 from the 1971 and 1981 Canada Censuses. The increase in average earnings and weeks
worked as education rises, as shown in the second and third rows, echoes a well-documented

cross-sectional relationship. These cross-sectional relationships will be explored in greater detail

as we move to an instrumental variables framework, but as a preliminary analysis, they establish

that the data exhibit relatively standard patterns found in studies that analyze the effect of

education on different labour market outcomes.

           This study will also incorporate another set of variables from outside of the Census,

which include information on school quality, by province over time. In particular, we use three

different variables that measure different annual aspects of school quality: average per-capita

number of teachers in a province, annual per-capita spending on education by the provincial

government, and the annual per-capita number of schools in a province. These data were

provided to us by Phil Oreopoulos, and the specifics about their collection and definition are

detailed in Oreopoulos (2006b).

           In addition to the variables available in the Census extracts and the variables on school

quality, it is important for the sake of the analysis to delineate the sample chosen for this work.

In order to test the ALM model, it is necessary to assemble a sample of women whose child-

bearing is completed at the time of the data collection. Since younger women are relatively less

likely to have completed their child-bearing, the analysis focused on women who were at least 40

years of age at the time of the survey. Although this is an arbitrary cut-off, vital statistics

indicate that only approximately 0.5% of 40-year-old women from the 1980 and 1990 Censuses

gave birth after the age of 40,8 and although the results are not reported in this paper, the main

conclusions presented from the analysis are not substantively different if the cut-off age is




8
    http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/91-209-x/2013001/article/11784/c-g/fig04-eng.htm
raised.9 Finally, we limit the sample to women sixty-five years old and younger to avoid issues

of differential mortality that might be attributed causally to increased educational attainment.

IV. Empirical Strategy

         Though descriptive, the evidence in Table 1 suggests that lower educational attainment

impacts lifetime fertility. To more systematically investigate a relationship between schooling

and lifetime fertility, we specify the following model:



Here, β is the coefficient of greatest interest, as it represents the relationship between schooling

and fertility. Unless otherwise noted, all variables are aggregated from individual-level Census

data by calculating means for each birth cohort b, in each province p, and for each Census extract

c. The dependent variable (BIRTH) is either the proportion of women who have given birth to

at least one child by age forty (i.e., the extensive margin) or the average number of children for

those women who have given birth to at least one child by age forty (i.e., the intensive margin).

As described in the previous section, these variables as based on a question which asks women in

the Census, “what is the total number of children you’ve had in your lifetime?” Compared to

relying on household composition data, this information better addresses measurement issues

such as those that might be created by custody issues and child mortality, for example. They key

independent variable (EDUC) is defined as the average number of years of education attained by

sample women in each cohort-province-Census extract cell. Control variables (                            ) include:

age as well as its square, cube and quartic; controls for rural status, the percent employed in

manufacturing, married status, aboriginal status, and immigrant status; and fixed effects for

province of birth, year of birth and the census extract.

9
 In particular, the analysis was replicated with a cut-off age of 42 and 44, and the results are essentially the same as
will be reported.
       Further, we seek to ensure that our estimates are not prone to the issues identified in

recent work by Stephens and Yang (2014) who found that the IV return to education was not

significantly different from zero when controls such as school quality specific to the U.S. state

and year were included in the IV framework. To address this, we include three variables to

account for school quality within each province and birth cohort: the annual per-capita spending

by the provincial government on education, the annual per-capita number of schools in the

province, and the annual per-capita number of teachers in the province. In a separate model, we

include region-level trends, again designed to address the critique of Stephens and Yang (2014)

who found that U.S. results were sensitive to controlling for a South region indicator variable.

Finally, since we are concerned about potential within-province correlation of the errors, we

calculate standard errors using a Wild cluster bootstrap procedure – since Canada has only ten

provinces, Cameron et al. (2008, 2015) suggest this is the appropriate clustering approach.

       Despite the non-random assignment of education, we first estimate equation (1) via

Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). For completeness, we will present OLS estimates of β in the

following section, but understand fully that they do not have a causal interpretation, given the

clear endogeneity of the education variable. To better estimate a valid causal relationship, we

employ a two-stage least squares approach that relies upon compulsory schooling laws as an

instrument for educational attainment. Our first stage equation takes the following form:



Once again, b represents cohort of birth, p represents province, and c represents Census extract

year. Again, EDUCbpc represents the average years of education of sample women from a

particular province, p, born in a particular birth cohort, b, in a particular Census year, c. CSLbp

represents our compulsory schooling law instrument which, in our main models, is based on
province-determined minimum school leaving ages and is specific to particular birth cohorts,

Xbpc represents provincial level controls mentioned above including the three province level

school quality variables mentioned and θp, μb and ψc represent province, birth cohort and Census

year fixed effects, respectively, while νbpc is the error term. Since this specification includes

province and time related fixed effects, the coefficients on the CSL variables (λ) are identified by

both variation in CSLs across provinces as well as variation within-province over time. In our

main models, we specify the CSL instrument as a dummy variable equal to one if a particular

birth cohort may only drop out of the province’s educational system once they are either 15 or 16

years of age, and zero otherwise.10

           Given the multiple dimensions of CSLs as well as a lack of consensus on how best to

represent required schooling, we employ several different parameterizations of the CSL

instrument, including using the dropout age, total years of schooling required, entry age, as well

as combinations of these variables—as robustness checks on our instrument. We report these

estimates, which align closely with estimates from our main models, in the following section.

Again, due to the relatively small number of clusters in our data, we implement the Wild

bootstrap clustering procedure for the two-stage least-squares estimation approach, as discussed

by Davidson and MacKinnon (2010).


V. Estimates

A. Estimated effects of additional schooling on fertility

           We report our main estimates in Table 2. As discussed earlier, our model implies the

necessity of examining lifetime fertility separately on intensive and extensive margins. The first

three columns of Table 2 present estimates from models where the dependent variable is the


10
     Information on the specific timing for changes in these laws is presented in Appendix Table 1.
number of children greater than one (i.e., our intensive margin measure), while the last three

columns present models where the dependent variable is the percent of sample women with at

least one child (i.e., our extensive margin measure). Both three-column sets first present

estimates from a base model with controls listed in the table notes, the second column

specification adds the education quality variables discussed in the data section, while the third

column specification includes region-specific trends. Table rows are consistently defined across

the three outcomes where the first row represents the mean of the dependent variable and the

second row represents naive OLS estimates of the relationship in question. Rows 3-7 report IV

estimates with the estimates in Row 3 representing our preferred instrument set (i.e., “Dropout

Dummies”), while rows 4-7 report different parameterizations of the CSLs facing sample women

at the relevant ages and in the relevant province. Specifically, Row 4 uses a single variable to

represent the total required years of education (defined as the difference between the mandated

entry and drop-out ages), Row 5 uses a single variable to capture the mandated age at which an

individual may drop-out of school, Row 6 uses three dummy variables corresponding to cases

when the age at which children are required to attend school is 6, 7 or 8 years of age in a given

province and year, and Row 7 includes the three dropout dummies and three age-at-entry

dummies described above.

       Before discussing the IV estimates, however, we note that the first-stage relationship

between CSLs, parameterized as dropout indicators in our main models and in various other

ways and our schooling variable, is consistently strong. As seen in Appendix Table 4, all first-

stage F-statistics are greater than 10, with roughly half over 50, and most exhibiting the

appropriate p-values to indicate that they are not weak instruments. While there are differences
in the magnitudes of these F-statistics, estimates across models that use these different IV

parameterizations are very robust and quite similar, as we note below.

        We now turn to our main estimates in Table 2. As can be seen in the first three columns,

which are based on a sample of women with at least one child, our first set of intensive margin

estimates (i.e., Row 3) imply that an additional year of CSL-induced schooling reduces the

lifetime number of children by roughly 0.9 of a child. Off a base of almost three-and-a-half

children per sample woman, this represents a decrease of roughly twenty-five percent, which is

very consistent with the totality of our estimates from the other instrumental variable

parametrizations, which collectively imply a percent reduction in the number of children that is

between twenty-five to forty percent. Indeed, the relevant estimates in Rows 4-7 are quite

similar to our main estimates in Row 3 as well as remaining similar across the three model

specifications presented for each dependent variable. We interpret this as strong evidence of the

robustness of our main estimates.

        While seemingly large, the discrete nature of childbearing may be responsible for large

proportional magnitudes. Indeed, our estimates are very much in line with ALM, who find that

construction of the Rosenwald Schools in the U.S. South is associated with about a one-third

increase in fertility conditional on having at least one child (i.e., our definition of intensive

margin fertility) in their preferred specification linked to their Table 4. To explore this issue in

somewhat greater detail, we examine birth effects across the distribution of the number of

children, before we turn to the extensive fertility margin. In particular, we present estimates of

the fraction of women who have at least two, at least four, at least six and at least eight children

in Table 3 where column tables correspond to these outcomes. As can be seen, we find no

systematic relationship between CSL-induced schooling and intensive margin fertility at the two
children threshold. By contrast, we find much stronger evidence at the four, six and especially

the eight children thresholds. Taken together, these suggest that intensive margin fertility

reductions occur largely among women who would have relatively large numbers of children.

       Turning to the extensive fertility margin (i.e., the last three columns of Table 2), we find

a very different pattern. Consistent with our naive OLS estimates, we find that an additional year

of CSL-induced schooling actually increases the percent of women who report having given

birth to at least one child, implying an increase in extensive margin of fertility. Again, our IV

estimates are remarkably consistent across different parameterizations of the CSL instrument and

are also very similar across the three specifications we present. These IV estimates of the

relationship between education and extensive margin fertility range from 0.042 to 0.057 which

corresponds to a 5 to 7 percent increase in the fraction of sample women who have at least one

child by age forty. Overall, we find that additional schooling reduces the number of children a

woman has over her lifetime, while also reducing childlessness. In other words, we find that

education has a “compressing” effect on lifetime fertility—the intensive margin contracts while

the extensive margin expands. In the next section, we reiterate our argument in favour of

education having a “compressing” effect on lifetime fertility and present empirical evidence that

supports this pattern.

B. Reconciling main estimates with model predictions

       The observed pattern—reductions in lifetime fertility along the intensive margin coupled

with increases along the extensive margin—can be understood in the context of our model.

Recall, that additional education affected fertility through changes in τq and τe in the model we

presented. Consistent with ALM, we asserted that additional schooling raised τq, the cost of

child quantity, and lowered τe, the cost of child quality or child investment. As discussed, both
such changes imply a clear negative impact on child quantity. That is, an increase in τq and a

decrease in τe both imply a reduction in the number of children to which a woman is predicted to

give birth. However, these changes were shown to have an ambiguous effect on the extensive

margin of fertility. In particular, the model implied that τq increasing should reduce the

probability a woman has at least one child, but that a decrease in τe should increase it. That is,

the two changes oppose each other along the extensive fertility margin. Our estimates in the last

three rows of Table 2 (i.e., those that pertain to extensive-margin fertility) suggest that the impact

of the reduction in the cost of child quality (τe) outweighs the impact of the increase in the cost of

child quantity (τq) since we find an increase in the fraction of women who have at least one child.

This is also consistent with the work of ALM, who also found that increases in mandated

schooling levels made it more likely for women to exhibit positive changes on the extensive

margin of fertility.

        In what follows, we examine two major channels through which education plausibly

affects the costs of fertility, τq and τe. In particular, we examine: (1) the impact of education on

marriage, since it should principally reduce the price of child quality (τe) and (2) the impact of

education on earnings, which should principally affect the price of child quantity (τq). We find

that education increases the probability of being married, while reducing the probability of never

being married; we believe that these impacts of education reduce the cost of child quality (τe)

which, in turn, may generate the increase in extensive margin fertility we estimate. We also find

that education increases earnings among sample women which represents an increase in the cost

of child quantity (τq). Together, these findings provide support for our assertion that education

increases τq while decreasing τe, a pattern which may generate the “compressing” effect of

education on fertility that we find.
C. Empirical evidence on plausible mechanisms

       Table 4 presents estimates of the impact of schooling on marriage. While the rows of the

table correspond to Table 2, the dependent variable in the first three columns is current marital

status, while in the second three columns it is the fraction of women who report ever being

married. As in Table 2, the three columns associated with each dependent variable represent

three different model specifications. Consistent with corresponding OLS estimates, IV estimates

from the first three columns of Table 4 suggest a positive relationship between schooling and

current marital status. In particular, these estimates, which are nearly identical across the three

specifications, suggest a roughly one percent increase in the proportion of women in a birth

year/province cohort who are currently married. Estimates from other IV parameterizations

(Rows 4-7) are very similar and also statistically precise. Though slightly smaller in magnitude,

they support the idea that CSL-induced schooling increased marriage. Estimates presented in the

last three columns paint a similar picture: an increase in education is associated with a roughly 3

to 4 percentage-point increase in the likelihood of being married at some point for a woman.

Both sets of results—those pertaining to current and historical marital status—imply that

education increased marriage among women who were induced to obtain more schooling by

CSLs. This increase in marriage is a primary mechanism though which education may plausibly

have reduced the costs of child quality, τe. In turn, this reduction is consistent with the increase

in extensive margin fertility we presented earlier in this section.

       In Table 5, we present estimates for models that focus on two labour market outcomes—

earnings and annual weeks worked—which are closely linked to τq, the cost of child quantity.

Table 5 follows the structure of Table 4, but now the first three columns contain estimates from

models where the dependent variable is the log of annual income, while the second three
columns present estimates from models where the dependent variable is annual weeks worked, a

measure of labour supply. To avoid issues related to early retirement, our samples for these

models (income and weeks worked) are based on women aged 30-55 years old instead of aged

40-65 years old as in all other models. As can be seen in Row 3, our main IV estimates suggest a

14-15 percent rate of return to an additional year of schooling, which is consistent with other

studies using Canadian data (Oreopoulos, 2006b). Furthermore, unlike the case of Stephens and

Yang, the inclusion of school quality and region-specific trends does not impact the significance

or magnitude of the returns to education in the second stage of the IV regression. And, as was

the case in earlier tables, estimates are quite similar across the three specifications and the

different IV parameterizations in Rows 4-7 are very similar and most are precisely estimated at

conventional levels of significance. This overall finding supports the idea that increased

schooling raises τq, the cost of child quantity, via increasing the opportunity cost of having

children. In turn, it supports our finding of a negative impact of schooling on intensive margin

fertility. While it should also reduce extensive margin fertility, our estimates suggest such an

effect is outweighed by a reduction in τe, a reduction we link to our estimates above which show

additional CSL-induced schooling increased marriage. The estimates in the final three columns

of the table indicate that, if anything, education did not have a consistently significant impact on

labour supply for women in our sample. In rows three through seven, the IV estimates of this

effect show about a one- to two-week decrease in weeks worked in a year, but most of these

estimates are quite imprecise and not statistically significant. This indicates that the effect of

education on income in the table’s first three columns was not driven by an increase in labour

supply.
VI. Discussion

       Changes in fertility patterns have been dramatic over the past half-century, and the

analysis of these patterns has often focused entirely on the intensive margin of fertility, and the

way it has been affected by improved labor market opportunities for women. But this has

ignored the extensive margin of fertility, and in an earlier analysis, ALM demonstrated with a

sample of Black women from the U.S. south that improvements in educational training had a

“compressing” effect on the distribution of fertility for women, who were more likely to have at

least one child, but less likely to have many children. But the choice of sample in ALM raises

the question about the generalizability of their finding. The work of Stephens and Yang showed

that education does not have a significant effect on earnings for a sample of all Americans,

which undercuts the ability to extend an analysis of changes in education on fertility, which

implicitly assumes that more education will increase labor market opportunities for women, and

hence change the price of the quantity of children.

       This paper provides several contributions to the literatures analyzing the effect of

education on both fertility and earnings. First, we use a large, representative sample of Canadian

women to demonstrate that the I.V. effect of education is to compress the fertility distribution.

Second, we document the fact that – even in the presence of school quality measures and region-

specific trends – education has a significant and positive I.V. effect on income for women. This

finding is both novel to the literature on the returns to education, which has not seen an

equivalent finding since the work of Stephens and Yang, and the crucial to the fertility literature,

which requires a mechanism to alter the price of the quantity of children. Third, we investigate a

novel mechanism through which education may impact the price of quality for children:

marriage propensities. Since it is less costly to achieve a given level of child quality with a
married couple (as opposed to a single parent), we explore the I.V. effect of education on the

propensity to be currently married or to have ever been married. In both cases, education has a

positive and statistically significant I.V. effect, which demonstrates a plausible mechanism

through which it may impact the price of child quality. Overall, these results represent a new

interpretation for the effect of education on fertility for a representative sample of women from a

developed, Western economy.
References

Aaronson, Daniel, Fabian Lange and Bhashdar Mazumder. “Fertility Transitions Along the
Extensive and Intensive Margins.” American Economic Review, 104(11), November 2014, pp.
3701-3724.

Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder. “The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on Black
Achievement.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(5), October 2011, pp. 821-888.

Angrist, Joshua D., Victor Lavy and Analia Schlosser. “Multiple Experiments for the Causal
Link between the Quantity and Quality of Children.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(4),
October 2010, pp. 773-824.

Becker, Gary S. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” Demographic and Economic Change in
Developed Countries, Princeton: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1960, pp. 209-231.

Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal, 75(299), September
1965, pp. 493-517.

Becker, Gary S. and H. Gregg Lewis. “On the Interaction Between the Quantity and Quality of
Children.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(2) Part 2, (March-April, 1973), pp. S279-288.

Becker, Gary S., Kevin M. Murphy and Robert Tamura. “Human Capital, Fertility, and
Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5) Part 2, October 1990, pp. S12-S37.

Becker, Sascha O., Francesco Cinnirella and Ludger Woessmann. “The Trade-off Between
Fertility and Education: Evidence from Before the Demographic Transition.” Journal of
Economic Growth, 15, 2000, pp. 177-204.

Bianchi, Suzanne M. “Family change and time allocation in American families.” The Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 638(1), November 2011, 21-44.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. “The More the Merrier? The Effect
of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120(2), May 2005, pp. 669-700.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. “Family Size and the IQ Scores of
Young Men.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(1), Winter 2010, pp. 33-58.

Bleakley, Hoyt and Fabian Lange. “Chronic Disease Burden and the Interaction of Education,
Fertility, and Growth.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), February 2009, pp. 52-65.

Caceres-Delpiano, Julio. “The Impacts of Family Size on Investment in Child Quality.” Journal
of Human Resources, 41(4), Fall 2006, pp. 738-754.
Cooksey, Elizabeth C. & Michelle M. Fondell. “Spending time with his kids: Effects of family
structure on fathers’ and children’s lives, Journal of Marriage and the Family, 58(3), August
1996, 693-707.

Galor, Oded. “The Demographic Transition: Causes and Consequences.” Cliometrica, 6(1),
January 2012, pp. 1-28.

Hanushek, Eric A. “The Trade-off Between Child Quantity and Quality.” Journal of Political
Economy, 100(1), February 1992, pp. 84-117.

Kessler, Daniel. “Birth Order, Family Size, and Achievement: Family Structure and Wage
Determination.” Journal of Labor Economics, 9(4), October 1991, pp. 413-426.

Kendig, Sarah and Suzanne M. Bianchi. “Single, cohabiting and married mothers’ time with
children.” Journal of Marriage and Family, 70(5), November 2008, 1228-1240.

Lee, Jungmin. “Sibling Size and Investment in Children’s Education: An Asian Instrument.”
Journal of Population Economics, 21(4), October 2008, pp. 855-875.

Li, Hongbin, Junsen Zhang and Yi Zhu. “The Quantity-Quality Trade-Off of Children in a
Developing Country: Identification Using Chinese Twins.” Demography, 45(1), February 2008,
pp. 223-243.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer (2011). “The effect of female education on fertility and child
health: Evidence from school entry policies using exact date of birth”, American Economic
Review, 101(1), pp. 158-195.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2005). “Canadian compulsory schooling laws and their impact on
educational attainment and future earnings”, Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper, No. 521,
Statistics Canada.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2006a). “Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education
when compulsory schooling laws really matter”, American Economic Review, 96(1), pp. 152-
175.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2006b). “The Compelling Effects of Compulsory Schooling”, Canadian
Journal of Economics, 39(1), pp. 22-52.

Qian, Nancy. “Quantity-Quality and the One-Child Policy: The Only-Child Disadvantage in
School Enrollment in Rural China.” Forthcoming, Gender and Development.

Pencavel, John. “The Market Work Behavior and Wages of Women: 1975-94”, Journal of
Human Resources, 33(4), Autumn 1998, pp. 771-804.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz. “Fertility and Investments in Human Capital:
Estimates of the Consequence of Imperfect Fertility Control in Malaysia.” Journal of
Econometrics, 48(1), January 1980, pp. 227-240.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin. “Testing the Quantity-Quality Fertility Model:
The Use of Twins as a Natural Experiment.” Econometrica, 36, 1987, pp. 163-184.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Junsen Zhang. “Do Population Control Policies Induce More Human
Capital Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s `One-Child’ Policy.” Review of
Economic Studies, 76, 2009, pp. 1149-1174.

Schultz, T. Paul. “Changing World Prices, Women’s Wages, and the Fertility Transition:
Sweden, 1860-1910.” Journal of Political Economy, 93(6), December 1985, pp. 992-1015.

Schultz, Theodore W. “The Value of Children: An Economic Perspective.” Journal of Political
Economy, 81(2) Part 2, (March-April, 1973), pp. S2-S13.

Stephens Jr., Melvin and Dou-Yan Yang (2014). “Compulsory education and the benefits of
schooling”, American Economic Review, 104: 1777-1792.

Willis, Robert J. “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior.” Journal of
Political Economy, 81(2) Part 2, (March-April 1973), pp. S14-S64.
                                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                             Grade 6            Between Grade 7      Between Grade 9          At Least HS
                           Education or         and 8 Education      and 11 Education          Education
                              Less
                              54.91                  53.56                 51.54                 49.97
        Age
                              (7.07)                 (7.23)                (7.40)                (7.38)
                               0.661                 0.738                 0.765                 0.756
  Currently Married
                              (0.473)               (0.440)               (0.424)               (0.429)
                               0.935                 0.964                 0.968                 0.952
    Ever Married
                              (0.247)               (0.186)               (0.176)               (0.215)
     Number of                 4.221                 3.682                 3.100                 2.602
      Children                (3.284)               (2.555)               (1.999)               (1.603)
  Percent with Any             0.890                 0.926                 0.937                 0.921
      Children                (0.313)               (0.262)               (0.243)               (0.269)
                                6961                 7444                  10925                 19885
       Income
                              (11252)               (12281)               (15431)               (23026)
                               9.15                   9.74                 14.37                 21.91
   Weeks Worked
                              (16.02)               (16.32)               (19.58)               (22.24)

The sample consists of women, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data displayed in the first five
rows are assembled from the 1981 and 1991 Canada Censuses for women between the ages 40 to 65. The data
displayed in the last two rows are assembled from the 1971 and 1981 Canada Censuses for women between the
ages 30 to 55. Standard deviations are listed in parentheses beneath the means within each cell.
Appendix Table 1: The Effect of the Instrument on Educational Attainment and Individual Grade Completion

                             Years of           Complete      Complete       Complete      Complete       Complete      Graduate
                            Education            Grade 7       Grade 8        Grade 9      Grade 10       Grade 11        HS?
                              0.462               0.087          0.091         0.043         0.024          0.029         -0.014
 Drop out at age 14?
                             [0.024]            [<0.001]       [<0.001]       [0.080]       [0.226]        [0.008]       [0.670]
                              0.961               0.131          0.194         0.133          0.116         0.088         -0.045
 Drop out at age 15?
                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.048]
                              0.453               0.067         0.055          0.042         0.017          0.020         0.011
 Drop out at age 16?
                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [0.130]        [0.174]       [0.527]        [0.164]       [0.605]
  F-stat on Dropout           73.14               62.36         59.15          16.18          9.84          12.45          3.63
      Dummies                [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [0.002]        [0.048]       [0.146]        [0.044]       [0.212]

The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981
and 1991 Canada Censuses. The dependent variables in the regressions underlying these results are listed in the table’s columns,
and the coefficients listed in the rows correspond to the dummy variable equal to one if the law permitted an individual to cease
their education at age 14 (in row 1), age 15 (in row 2) or age 16 (in row 3). The fourth row reports the F-statistic on the test of
the hypothesis that all three coefficients are equal to zero. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute
the p-values for the table, which are listed in brackets beneath the coefficient estimates (or F-statistics in row 4). The other
controls in the regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census
extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant
indicator.
Appendix Table 2: The Effect of the Instrument on Educational Attainment and Individual Grade Completion
                                    With Educational Quality Controls

                             Years of           Complete      Complete       Complete      Complete       Complete      Graduate
                            Education            Grade 7       Grade 8        Grade 9      Grade 10       Grade 11        HS?
                              0.458               0.087         0.090          0.042         0.022          0.028         -0.009
 Drop out at age 14?
                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [0.002]        [0.062]       [0.232]        [0.002]       [0.496]
                              0.791               0.122          0.169         0.108          0.090         0.069         -0.036
 Drop out at age 15?
                             [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.224]
                              0.294               0.062         0.033          0.015         -0.011         -0.002        0.019
 Drop out at age 16?
                             [0.008]             [0.008]       [0.460]        [0.551]       [0.647]        [0.931]       [0.482]
  F-stat on Dropout           46.13               40.59         24.44          15.99          7.54           8.26          3.27
      Dummies                [0.001]            [<0.001]       [0.019]        [0.019]       [0.119]        [0.094]       [0.238]

The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981
and 1991 Canada Censuses. The dependent variables in the regressions underlying these results are listed in the table’s columns,
and the coefficients listed in the rows correspond to the dummy variable equal to one if the law permitted an individual to cease
their education at age 14 (in row 1), age 15 (in row 2) or age 16 (in row 3). The fourth row reports the F-statistic on the test of
the hypothesis that all three coefficients are equal to zero. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute
the p-values for the table, which are listed in brackets beneath the coefficient estimates (or F-statistics in row 4). The other
controls in the regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census
extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant
indicator, the per capita number of schools in the province, the per capita number of teachers in the province, and the real per
capita annual expenditures on schooling.
Appendix Table 3: The Effect of the Instrument on Educational Attainment and Individual Grade Completion
                                            With Provincial Trends

                               Years of           Complete      Complete       Complete      Complete       Complete      Graduate
                              Education            Grade 7       Grade 8        Grade 9      Grade 10       Grade 11        HS?
                                0.447               0.093          0.092         0.037         0.016          0.025         0.003
   Drop out at age 14?
                               [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [<0.001]       [0.026]       [0.010]       [<0.001]       [0.651]
                                0.817               0.137          0.181        0.111           0.085         0.063         -0.035
   Drop out at age 15?
                               [<0.001]           [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.492]
                                0.291               0.064         0.025          0.012         -0.019         -0.003        0.038
   Drop out at age 16?
                               [0.284]             [0.048]       [0.773]        [0.693]       [0.504]        [0.911]       [0.158]
    F-stat on Dropout           68.51              110.50         62.07          22.58          9.47          30.44          4.64
        Dummies                [0.002]             [0.002]       [0.001]        [0.033]       [0.112]        [0.025]       [0.105]

  The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981
  and 1991 Canada Censuses. The dependent variables in the regressions underlying these results are listed in the table’s columns,
  and the coefficients listed in the rows correspond to the dummy variable equal to one if the law permitted an individual to cease
  their education at age 14 (in row 1), age 15 (in row 2) or age 16 (in row 3). The fourth row reports the F-statistic on the test of
  the hypothesis that all three coefficients are equal to zero. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute
  the p-values for the table, which are listed in brackets beneath the coefficient estimates (or F-statistics in row 4). The other
  controls in the regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census
  extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant
  indicator, and three trend terms to capture trends in three different regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces (Newfoundland,
  PEI, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), the central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and the “Prairie” provinces (Manitoba,
  Saskatchewan and Alberta).
 Appendix Table 4: The Effect of Various Instruments on Educational Attainment
                                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)
   F-stat on Dropout Dummies                    25.14               32.23                 40.79
     (Income Sample Only)                      [0.001]             [<0.001]              [0.003]
                                               101.2                111.7                 396.8
      F-stat on Dropout Age
                                              [<0.001]             [<0.001]              [<0.001]
             F-stat on                         87.05                111.5                  441
       Total required years                   [<0.001]             [<0.001]              [0.008]
                                               73.14                 46.13                68.51
   F-stat on Dropout Dummies
                                              [<0.001]              [0.001]              [0.002]
                                                59.57                50.56                288.41
    F-stat on Entry Dummies
                                               [0.050]              [0.065]              [<0.001]
        F-stat on Dropout                      115.59               187.48               227.74
        & Entry Dummies                        [0.081]              [0.022]              [0.003]
    School Quality Controls?                     No                   Yes                   No
             Trends?                             No                   No                   Yes

The sample consists of women who are at least 40 years old, and born in one of the ten Canadian
provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981 and 1991 Canada Censuses. The dependent
variable is equal to the average educational attainment for women in each birth-year/province
cohort. Each cell reports the F-test on the instrumental variable(s) used in the regression, as well
as the p-values for these test statistics, which are listed in brackets beneath the F-statistics, and
were computed with the Wild Cluster Bootstrap at the province level. The instruments differ by
row: the first row involves the age at which an individual is allowed to drop out of school, the
second row involves the total number of required years of education, the third row uses three
dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease their schooling,
the fourth row uses three dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was required to
begin their schooling, and the fifth row involves all six dummies involved in the regressions
from the third and fourth rows. The independent variables in the first column’s regressions
include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the
Census extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an
aboriginal indicator, an immigrant indicator. The second column’s regressions are the same as
column one, but also include the per capita number of schools in the province, the per capita
number of teachers in the province, and the real per capita annual expenditures on schooling.
The third column’s regressions are the same as column one, but also include three trend terms to
capture trends in three different regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces (Newfoundland, PEI,
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), the central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and the “Prairie”
provinces (Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta).
                 Table 2: The Effect of Education on the Intensive and Extensive Margins of Fertility
                                         Number of Children (at least one)                   Percent With At least One Child
                                                     3.332                                                0.924
    Mean Dep. Variable
                                                    (2.049)                                              (0.264)
                                       -0.620           -0.740          -0.851            0.033            0.038           0.041
   OLS Coef. Education
                                      [0.002]          [0.002]         [0.002]           [0.014]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
       IV Education                   -0.832           -0.944          -1.046             0.046            0.055           0.055
    (Dropout dummies)                [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
    IV Education (Total               -1.174           -1.223          -1.386            0.044             0.047           0.046
      required years)                [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
  IV Education (Dropout               -1.171           -1.221          -1.349             0.042            0.044           0.042
          Age)                       [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
       IV Education                    -0.971          -0.902          -0.884             0.055            0.057           0.057
     (Entry Dummies)                  [0.004]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
  IV Education (Dropout                -0.855          -0.956          -1.005             0.047            0.055           0.054
    & Entry Dummies)                  [0.007]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]          [<0.001]         [<0.001]        [<0.001]
     Quality Controls?                  No               Yes             No                No              Yes              No

            Trends?                        No                No             Yes                  No             No               Yes
The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981 and
1991 Canada Censuses. The first three columns use a dependent variable equal to the average total number of children born to woman
(in each birth-year/province cohort), the next three use this same average, but compute it for women with at least one child, and the
last three columns use a dependent variable equal to the percent of women (in each birth-year/province cohort) who have given birth
to at least one child. The means of the dependent variables are listed in the first row of the table. The second row reports the
coefficient on years of education from OLS regressions with controls that vary depending on the column. The first, fourth and seventh
column’s regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census extract
which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant indicator. The
second, fifth and eighth column’s regressions are the same as columns one and four, but also include the per capita number of schools
in the province, the per capita number of teachers in the province, and the real per capita annual expenditures on schooling. The third
and sixth column’s regressions are the same as columns one and four, but also include three trend terms to capture trends in three
different regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces (Newfoundland, PEI, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), the central provinces
(Ontario and Quebec), and the “Prairie” provinces (Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta). The third row reports the coefficient on
years of education from IV regressions which use three dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease
their schooling. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute the p-values for the table, which are listed in
brackets beneath the coefficient estimates in rows two and three.
                Table 3: The Effect of Education on the Distribution of the Intensive Margin of Fertility
                           At Least 2 Children         At Least 4 Children        At Least 6 Children         At Least 8 Children
                                 0.753                       0.294                      0.099                       0.038
   Mean Dep. Variable
                                (0.431)                     (0.456)                    (0.298)                     (0.191)
       OLS Coef.           -0.003        -0.002        -0.053        -0.072        -0.045        -0.072       -0.031        -0.050
       Education          [0.529]       [0.531]       [0.022]       [0.002]       [0.056]       [0.002]      [0.028]       [0.002]
      IV Education         -0.001        -0.001       -0.073        -0.093         -0.066       -0.088        -0.044        -0.059
   (Dropout dummies)      [0.765]       [0.781]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.046]      [<0.001]      [0.065]       [<0.001]
   IV Education (Total     -0.021       -0.023        -0.123        -0.139        -0.089        -0.119        -0.057        -0.077
     required years)      [<0.001]     [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]
      IV Education         -0.021       -0.023        -0.124        -0.137        -0.092        -0.116        -0.057        -0.075
     (Dropout Age)        [<0.001]     [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]
      IV Education         -0.003        0.009        -0.091        -0.069         -0.077       -0.076        -0.050        -0.053
    (Entry Dummies)       [0.615]       [0.020]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.061]      [<0.001]      [0.122]       [0.026]
      IV Education         -0.003        0.001        -0.078        -0.087         -0.066       -0.086        -0.044        -0.058
    (Dropout & Entry      [0.488]       [0.761]      [<0.001]      [<0.001]       [0.056]      [<0.001]      [0.118]       [<0.001]
       Dummies)
           Trends?              No            Yes          No           No              Yes            No           No           Yes
The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981 and
1991 Canada Censuses. The first two columns use a dependent variable equal to the average proportion of woman (in each birth-
year/province cohort) who birthed at least two children, the next two use a dependent variable equal to the average proportion of
woman who birthed at least four children, the next two use a dependent variable equal to the average proportion of woman who
birthed at least six children, and the last two columns use a dependent variable equal to the average proportion of woman who birthed
at least eight children. The means of the dependent variables are listed in the first row of the table. The second row reports the
coefficient on years of education from OLS regressions with controls that vary depending on the column. The first, third, fifth and
and seventh column’s regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the
Census extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant
indicator. The second, fourth, sixth and eighth column’s regressions are the same as the other columns, but also include three trend
terms to capture trends in three different regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces (Newfoundland, PEI, Nova Scotia and New
Brunswick), the central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and the “Prairie” provinces (Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta). The
third row reports the coefficient on years of education from IV regressions which use three dummy variables to capture the age at
which a student was permitted to cease their schooling. The fourth row reports the coefficient on years of education from IV
regressions which use a single variable to capture the difference between the age at which a student was permitted to cease their
schooling and the age at which a student must begin her schooling. The fifth row reports the coefficient on years of education from IV
regressions which use a single variable to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease their schooling. The sixth row
reports the coefficient on years of education from IV regressions which use three dummy variables to capture the age at which a
student must begin her schooling. The seventh row reports the coefficient on years of education from IV regressions which use three
dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease their schooling, and three to capture the age at which
she must cease her schooling. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute the p-values for the table, which
are listed in brackets beneath the coefficient estimates in rows two through seven.
                                      Table 4: The Effect of Education on Marital Status
                                                  Currently Married?                                     Ever Married?
                                         (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)            (5)              (6)
                                                         0.748                                                0.958
 Mean of Dependent Variable
                                                        (0.434)                                              (0.202)
                                        0.007            0.008            0.008               0.021           0.024           0.025
 OLS Coefficient on Education
                                       [0.056]          [0.046]          [0.047]             [0.028]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
  IV Coefficient on Education          0.009            0.011            0.012                0.027           0.034           0.033
      (Dropout dummies)               [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
         IV Education                  0.006             0.006           0.008                0.041           0.042           0.039
     (Total required years)           [<0.001]          [0.108]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
                                        0.005            0.006           0.007                0.039           0.040           0.036
  IV Education (Dropout Age)
                                       [0.057]          [0.112]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
         IV Education                   0.010           0.012            0.012                0.036           0.032           0.027
       (Entry Dummies)                 [0.046]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
        IV Education                    0.009           0.011            0.011                0.029           0.033           0.030
 (Dropout & Entry Dummies)             [0.011]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]            [<0.001]        [<0.001]        [<0.001]
       Quality Controls?                 No               Yes              No                  No              Yes             No
              Trends?                         No              No              Yes                  No              No            Yes
The sample consists of women, aged 40 to 65, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1981 and
1991 Canada Censuses. The first three columns use a dependent variable equal to the average percentage of married women (in each
birth-year/province cohort), and the last three columns use a dependent variable equal to the average percent of women (in each birth-
year/province cohort) who have never been married. The means of the dependent variables for columns one to three are columns four
to six are listed in the first row of the table. The second row reports the coefficient on years of education from OLS regressions with
controls that vary depending on the column. The first and fourth column’s regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-
birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census extract which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of
manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant indicator. The second and fifth column’s regressions are the same as
columns one and four, but also include the per capita number of schools in the province, the per capita number of teachers in the
province, and the real per capita annual expenditures on schooling. The third and sixth column’s regressions are the same as columns
one and four, but also include three trend terms to capture trends in three different regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces
(Newfoundland, PEI, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), the central provinces (Ontario and Quebec), and the “Prairie” provinces
(Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta). The third row reports the coefficient on years of education from IV regressions which use
three dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease their schooling. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was
used at the province level to compute the p-values for the table, which are listed in brackets beneath the coefficient estimates in rows
two and three.
                              Table 5: The Effect of Education on Income and Weeks Worked
                                                        Income                                           Weeks Worked
                                         (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)           (5)                (6)
 Mean of Dependent Variable                              9.383                                                26.24
                                                        (1.330)                                              (23.24)
OLS Coefficient on Education            0.117           0.126             0.126              –2.502          –2.206           –2.803
                                       [0.012]         [<0.001]          [0.028]             [0.072]         [0.104]          [0.002]
  IV Coefficient on Education          0.153            0.156             0.149              –1.148          –1.392           –2.185
     (Dropout Dummies)                [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]             [0.346]         [0.064]         [<0.001]
 IV Education (Total required          0.171            0.166             0.138              –0.633          –0.721           –1.849
           years)                     [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]             [0.318]         [0.140]         [<0.001]
                                       0.156            0.158             0.129              –0.832          –0.795           –1.820
 IV Education (Dropout Age)
                                      [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]             [0.202]         [0.174]         [<0.001]
         IV Education                  0.198            0.162             0.140              –1.102          –1.764           –1.948
       (Entry Dummies)                [<0.001]         [<0.001]          [0.033]             [0.400]         [0.132]          [0.128]
   IV Education (Dropout &             0.165            0.155             0.134              –0.981          –1.474           –1.967
       Entry Dummies)                 [<0.001]         [<0.001]         [<0.001]             [0.300]         [0.054]          [0.038]
       Quality Controls?                 No               Yes              No                  No              Yes              No
             Trends?                      No              No               Yes                  No               No             Yes
The sample consists of women, aged 30 to 55, born in one of the ten Canadian provinces. The data are assembled from the 1971 and
1981 Canada Censuses for the first three columns, and only the 1981 Canada Census for the last three. The first three columns use a
dependent variable equal to the average log annual income (in each birth-year/province cohort), and the last three columns use a
dependent variable equal to the average total number of weeks worked (in each birth-year/province cohort). The means of the
dependent variables for columns one to three are columns four to six are listed in the first row of the table. The second row reports the
coefficient on years of education from OLS regressions with controls that vary depending on the column. The first and fourth
column’s regressions include: year-of-birth dummies, province-of-birth dummies, a quartic in age, a dummy for the Census extract
which produced the data, rural status, the percentage of manufacturing jobs, an aboriginal indicator, an immigrant indicator. The
second and fifth column’s regressions are the same as columns one and four, but also include the per capita number of schools in the
province, the per capita number of teachers in the province, and the real per capita annual expenditures on schooling. The third and
sixth column’s regressions are the same as columns one and four, but also include three trend terms to capture trends in three different
regions of Canada – the Atlantic provinces (Newfoundland, PEI, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick), the central provinces (Ontario and
Quebec), and the “Prairie” provinces (Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta). The third row reports the coefficient on years of
education from IV regressions which use three dummy variables to capture the age at which a student was permitted to cease their
schooling. The Wild Cluster Bootstrap was used at the province level to compute the p-values for the table, which are listed in
brackets beneath the coefficient estimates in rows two and three.
