                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FORGETTING AND HETEROGENEITY IN TASK DELAY:
          EVIDENCE FROM NEW YORK CITY PARKING-TICKET RECIPIENTS

                                          Ori Heffetz
                                        Ted O'Donoghue
                                       Henry S. Schneider

                                      Working Paper 23012
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23012


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




We thank Samuel Bufter, David Frankel, Christopher Quinn, and Andrew Salkin at New York
City Department of Finance, and Janet Capuano at CGI Group for access to the data and many
helpful conversations. We have benefitted from valuable comments from Amr Farahat and
seminar participants at Ben Gurion, Cornell, Harvard, Hebrew U, IDC Herzliya, UCLA
Anderson, UCSD Rady, USC, Wharton, Williams, SITE 2014, and BEAM 2015. We also thank
Lawrence Jin, Lin Xu, and Maya Catabi for excellent research assistance. The authors have no
financial or other material interests related to this research to disclose. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ori Heffetz, Ted O'Donoghue, and Henry S. Schneider. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Forgetting and Heterogeneity in Task Delay: Evidence from New York City Parking-Ticket
Recipients
Ori Heffetz, Ted O'Donoghue, and Henry S. Schneider
NBER Working Paper No. 23012
December 2016
JEL No. D03,D04,D12

                                          ABSTRACT

We study response behavior of New York City parking-ticket recipients by analyzing
administrative data on 6.6 million tickets issued to 2 million individuals over two years.
Exploiting variation (from a policy change and a field experiment) in letters sent to recipients, we
find that forgetting plays a major role in delay–letters seem to act mostly as reminders, with their
content mattering little. Moreover, by studying an individual’s behavior across multiple tickets,
we find significant heterogeneity in underlying types, with different types reacting differently to
deadlines and reminders. Failure to account for this heterogeneity yields biased–and sometimes
incorrect–conclusions.

Ori Heffetz                                               Henry S. Schneider
S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management                Stephen J.R. Smith School of Business
Cornell University                                        Queen’s University
324 Sage Hall                                             Goodes Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853                                          Kingston, ON K7L 3N6
and NBER                                                  henry.schneider@queensu.ca
oh33@cornell.edu

Ted O'Donoghue
Department of Economics
Cornell University
464 Uris Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
edo1@cornell.edu




A Online Appendix is available at http://nber.org/~heffetz/papers/HOS-online-appendix.pdf
1     Introduction
You return to your car to find a parking ticket on the windshield. When, if ever, will you
pay it? Life involves many such tasks that must–or at least should–be completed. People
must pay bills, file taxes, make doctors’ appointments and fill prescriptions, apply for schools
and jobs, and so forth. Despite the ubiquity of such tasks, there is relatively little research
in economics on the determinants of when–and whether–people complete them.
    In this paper, we study a classic task-completion problem: when to respond to a parking
ticket. Using a detailed administrative dataset provided by the New York City Department
of Finance (henceforth, DOF), we observe response behavior associated with the universe of
parking tickets issued in New York City between June 2011 and August 2013. In our core
dataset, we analyze response behavior for 6,646,540 tickets issued to 1,980,698 unique pas-
senger vehicle license plates, totalling $424 million in fines and $85 million in late penalties.
    Our paper makes three contributions. First, the large size of our dataset permits us to
non-parametrically characterize aggregate response rates at the daily level over a very long
period of time–for 135 days after people receive their tickets. As such, we provide a detailed
look at behavior in this domain. Second, we focus on one particular determinant of task
completion: forgetting. Our dataset contains exogenous variation in both the timing and
the content of notification letters that are sent by DOF to ticket recipients, created by a
combination of a citywide regime shift implemented in June 2012 and a citywide field ex-
periment implemented in the summer of 2013. Using this variation, we find strong evidence
of forgetting–in particular, notification letters seem to act mostly as reminders, with their
content mattering little. Third, our analysis sheds light on the important role of hetero-
geneity in this domain. Unlike prior empirical work on task completion (especially that on
forgetting), our dataset contains response behavior for the same individuals (license plates)
across multiple tasks (tickets). Using this feature, we find clear indication of persistent types.
Moreover, we find that diﬀerent types react diﬀerently to deadlines and reminders. Incidence
analysis of this kind is often essential for formulating eﬀective policy interventions.
    In Section 2, we develop a stylized theoretical model of task completion, designed to
roughly match our field context and to help organize our interpretation of behavior. We


                                                1
begin with a search model in the spirit of McCall (1970) that captures the intuition that
people wait for a convenient (low-cost) time to pay their tickets. We then describe the
implications of forgetting and heterogeneity in that context.
       In Section 3, we describe our data and setting in more detail. After receiving a ticket,
the ticket recipient faces a series of deadlines and associated late penalties. If she does not
respond by a first deadline (day 30)–by either paying or contesting (i.e., challenging) the
ticket–she is assessed a $10 late penalty. If she still does not respond by a second deadline
(the first Monday after day 61), she is assessed an additional $20 penalty. If she still does not
respond by a third deadline (the first Friday after day 100), she is assessed yet an additional
$30 penalty. The (day 0) windshield ticket clearly states the first deadline and penalty. At
various later times, the ticket recipient receives notification letters from DOF to keep her
informed of her current situation and to specify updated deadlines and penalties.
       While these deadlines and late penalties did not change throughout the timeframe of
our data, the timing and content of notification letters did. In particular, in June 2012,
DOF implemented what we label as a shift from the OLD regime to the NEW regime. The
key change was in the timing of the first notification letter: under the OLD regime, it was
received at roughly day 40, whereas under the NEW regime it was received at roughly day
20. Our initial test of forgetting exploits this change.
       In Section 4, we analyze response behavior in the OLD and NEW regimes. Figure 1
                                                                              # first response on day d
depicts daily hazard rates of recipients’ first responses (i.e.,             # no response before day d
                                                                                                        )   as well as
                                    # first response on or before day d
cumulative response rates (i.e.,          total # of tickets issued
                                                                        ).   The horizontal axis indicates the
number of days since the ticket was issued, and the three deadlines are highlighted by the
vertical shaded bands.1 Figure 1 suggests that the change in timing of the first letter had
a striking impact that is consistent with forgetting. Relative to the OLD regime, where no
communications are received prior to the first deadline, under the NEW regime there is a
dramatic increase in hazard rates following day 20. In addition, relative to the NEW regime,
where no communications are received between the first and second deadlines, under the
OLD regime there is a dramatic increase in hazard rates following day 40.
   1
   After the third deadline, DOF enters a default judgment in court against the plate owner, after which
more serious actions might be taken. Figure 1 reveals that this action has a strong impact on hazard rates.
While we focus on behavior prior to the third deadline, we discuss this later behavior where relevant.


                                                       2
                 .05




                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                              Cumulative response rate
                 .04




                                                                                                                         .8
   Hazard rate
                 .03




                                                                                                                         .6
                 .02




                                                                                                                         .4
                 .01




                                                                                                                         .2
                 0




                                                                                                                         0
                       0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90 100 110 120 130                                       0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90 100 110 120 130
                                               Days since issue date                                                                                  Days since issue date


                                                                             OLD regime                                           NEW regime




Figure 1: Hazard Rates and Cumulative Response Rates in OLD vs. NEW
Regimes. Note: All tickets have a first deadline at day 30, second deadline at days 62-68, and
third deadline at days 101-107, indicated by the shaded areas (the latter two deadlines are a range
because they depend on ticket-issuance day of the week). First notification letter is received around
day 40 (OLD) vs. day 20 (NEW). Based on 3,355,094 (OLD) and 3,020,357 (NEW) observations;
see details in Section 3.


        While the pattern in Figure 1 is consistent with forgetting, the specific way in which DOF
implemented the regime change resulted in issues of interpretation. To rule out alternative
explanations, we worked with DOF on a field experiment that was implemented over five
weeks, for tickets issued July 13, 2013 through August 16, 2013. The recipient of each ticket
was assigned to receive one of four versions of the first letter (at roughly day 20), and to
receive or not receive an additional letter at roughly day 48 (a 4 × 2 experimental design).
The four versions of the first letter vary in their informational content and presentation. The
results seem to confirm that the letters served primarily as reminders.
        Figure 1 exhibits other important patterns. First, under both regimes, there is a dramatic
decline in hazard rates between the first and second deadlines. While this decline could be
due in part to forgetting, a similar decline in hazard rates over time is typically observed in
job search data, and has been attributed to heterogeneity in types (Salant (1977)). Second,
while there is a noticeable spike in hazard rates at the first deadline under both regimes
(and especially under the NEW regime), there are at most small spikes in hazard rates at
the second and third deadlines. This apparent limited response to later deadlines is also


                                                                                          3
consistent with heterogeneity in types: if only some types pay attention to deadlines, those
types disproportionately respond and thus leave the dataset before the second deadline.
       In Section 5, we directly investigate heterogeneity. We first demonstrate the existence
of persistent types by showing that response behavior on one’s past tickets is highly predic-
tive of response behavior on one’s current ticket (Figure 5). To explore the nature of this
heterogeneity and the resulting selection, we then estimate a mixture model in which types
diﬀer in their hazard rates. Specifically, we focus on six time periods following the receipt
of a ticket (i.e., we divide days 0—135 into six natural periods), and we represent each type
as a vector of (period×regime)-specific hazard rates. We then estimate each type’s hazard
rates jointly with the population distribution of types, allowing for up to four types.
       Our estimates highlight two ways in which failing to account for heterogeneity can yield
misleading conclusions. First, failing to account for selection yields biased estimates. Indeed,
the estimated heterogeneity in our data implies selection eﬀects so strong that they sometimes
cause the aggregate hazard rate to decrease from one period to the next in spite of an increase
in each of the type-specific hazard rates (Table 6). In other words, failing to account for
selection sometimes reverses one’s conclusion.
       Second, our estimates highlight the importance of incidence analysis: without it, one may
focus on the wrong policy interventions. In particular, our estimates suggest that deadlines
and reminders mostly impact types with high hazard rates, helping them to respond in a
very timely way instead of in a mostly timely way, thus having no lasting impact on response
rates (Figure 6). In contrast, the types with low hazard rates exhibit significant delays, react
little to deadlines and reminders, and incur large costs by the time their case arrives in court
(after the third deadline). Hence, our analysis suggests that if one wants to induce overall
higher response rates, the focus should be less on deadlines and reminders, and more on
identifying the non-responsive types and tackling the diﬃcult question of how to get them
to act. We provide some thoughts in our concluding discussion in Section 6.
       Task completion was not a central topic of interest in economics until researchers started
exploring sources of suboptimal delay.2 Initial theoretical work studied procrastination on
   2
    Our discussion here focuses on one-time tasks. Other papers focus on recurring tasks such as taking
one’s daily medicine or sticking to one’s exercise regime. The latter tasks likely involve a diﬀerent (though
overlapping) set of mechanisms.


                                                     4
tasks due to present bias (Akerlof (1991); O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999); O’Donoghue and
Rabin (2001)), followed by some experimental tests for the existence of procrastination (e.g.,
Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002)). Later work focused on the role of mental “goals” in inducing
task completion (Koch and Nafziger (2011); Hsiaw (2013)), and the role of forgetting of (or
inattention to) tasks (Taubinsky (2014); also see Ericson (forthcoming) who considers both
procrastination and forgetting). There is experimental work documenting the existence of
forgetting (Ericson (2011); Taubinsky (2014); Tasoﬀ and Letzler (2014), who also study
whether task completion can be enhanced via reminders), including field experiments that
investigate the impact of reminders (e.g., Schoar and Cadena (2011)) or “planning prompts”
(Nickerson and Rogers (2010); Milkman, Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2011)).
   Relative to the latter work, our heterogeneity results suggest a word of caution, and in
particular raise the question of who benefits–and, equally importantly, who does not–from
interventions designed to improve task performance. Moreover, this word of caution extends
to an expanding list of disciplines. Legal scholars, for example, have recently proposed us-
ing deadlines as “nudges” (Zamir, Lewinsohn-Zamir, and Ritov (2015))–using them “as a
regulatory means, compared to alternative tools, such as default rules and required choices.”
To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to focus on the incidence of behavioral
reactions to reminders and deadlines. Our findings highlight the importance of such analy-
sis, and the insuﬃciency of aggregate response evidence (typical of small-scale studies), for
planning many types of real-world interventions.
   Much of our contribution comes from the sheer magnitude of our dataset. Indeed, we
provide graphical depictions of behavior without confidence bands (as in Figure 1) because
those confidence bands are mostly indistinguishable from the depicted point estimates, and
essentially any visible diﬀerence in our figures is statistically significant (see Appendix 2).
Having many observations is particularly important if one wants to follow a population for
a long time. For example, by day 100, roughly 85% of ticket recipients have responded and
left the sample, but there are still nearly 500,000 outstanding tickets per regime that can be
used to estimate hazard rates. Finally, the large dataset is not merely valuable, but is indeed
crucial, when we study heterogeneity and the incidence of behavioral reactions–something
that much of the previous literature simply cannot do. For example, we use our estimated


                                              5
three-type model to assign each plate to one of the three types, and estimate daily hazard
rates for each type (Figure 6). By the second deadline, only 1.5% of the high-type plates
remain in the sample, but they still have roughly 5,000 outstanding tickets per regime that
we use to estimate daily hazard rates.



2     An Organizing Model
A person receives a parking ticket on day d = 0 with a fine amount f . On each day
d ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...} she decides whether or not to pay the ticket. If she has not paid by an initial
deadline d1 , a late penalty a1 is imposed. Similarly, if she misses a second deadline d2 > d1 ,
a second late penalty a2 is imposed. Finally, if she misses a third deadline d3 > d2 , she incurs
an additional (exogenous) utility cost z. As we discuss in Section 3, in our field context the
situation becomes complicated after the third deadline; z is meant to capture the third late
penalty as well as all expected eﬀort and other costs that might occur in the further future.


2.1    A Standard Search Model

A natural explanation for why people do not pay their tickets immediately is that they wait
for a convenient (low-cost) time. To capture this intuition, we use a version of the (now
standard) McCall (1970) job-search model.
    We assume that paying a ticket takes a little eﬀort and time, whose cost varies from day
to day–e.g., due to daily variation in the opportunity cost of one’s time. Let cd denote the
realized eﬀort cost on day d, drawn i.i.d. from some distribution F . A person knows her F .
Each day d she learns the realization cd and then decides whether to pay the ticket today
at a known cost cd or wait and potentially be able to pay the ticket at a lower cost in the
future. The incentive to wait depends on a tradeoﬀ between the chance to find a lower-cost
day (which depends on F ) and the risk of getting stuck with higher costs (which depends
on the structure of deadlines and penalties).
    For simplicity, we assume that the person seeks to minimize her expected total cost C,
which depends on payment day d¯ as follows:



                                                6
                                   ⎧
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪        f + cd¯           if d¯ ≤ d1
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎨     f + a1 + cd¯      if d¯ ∈ (d1 , d2 ]
                            ¯ =
                          C(d)
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪ f + a1 + a2 + cd¯ if d¯ ∈ (d2 , d3 ]
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎪
                                   ⎩ f +a +a +z           if d¯ > d3 .
                                          1    2

Proposition 1 describes behavior. It essentially reiterates known results from similar optimal
stopping problems (e.g., Bertsekas (2005)).

   Proposition 1: (1) For each d ≤ d3 , there exists a cd such that the person completes
the task in period d if and only if cd ≤ cd , unless either the person does not pay the ticket
in period d for any c in the support of F or the person pays the ticket in period d for every
c in the support of F . (2) Moreover, for all d ∈
                                                / {d1 , d2 }, if F (cd ) ∈ (0, 1) then cd+1 > cd .

   Part (1) of Proposition 1 merely states that each day the person follows a cutoﬀ rule under
which she pays the ticket today if and only if today’s cost is low enough, and otherwise she
waits. The more substantive result is part (2), which states that, as time passes, the person
becomes increasingly likely to pay the ticket (i.e., the cutoﬀ cost increases with time). The
only exception is when the person misses a deadline, in which case she might become less
likely to pay on the day immediately after the deadline. Figure 2 illustrates this pattern for a
set of parameters chosen to approximate our setting (see figure notes for details). Intuitively,
the person faces a trade-oﬀ: she would like to pay the ticket before the next deadline (to
avoid the penalty), however, she would also like to find a convenient time. Well in advance of
a deadline, it is safe to wait for a future low-cost day. As that deadline approaches, however,
the incentive to pay rises because the person wants to avoid either missing the deadline or
being forced to incur a high cost at the deadline. Once that deadline passes, the person is
now focused on the next deadline, and thus the incentive to pay can drop immediately after
the deadline, but then it rises again toward the next deadline. Finally, the spikes for the
second and third deadlines are progressively larger because the penalties for missing those
deadlines are progressively larger.
   By assuming that the person seeks to minimize the expected total cost, we assume away
discounting. Indeed, under exponential discounting, it is natural to assume a discount factor


                                                  7
                                    .06
                                    .05 .04
                            Hazard rate
                               .03  .02
                                    .01
                                    0
                                              0   10   20   30    40      50     60      70   80   90   100
                                                                 Days since issue date




Figure 2: Typical Pattern of Hazard Rates in Baseline Model. Note: Hazard rates
implied by baseline model under the following parameter values: a0 = 65, a1 = 10, a2 = 20,
z = 160, d1 = 30, d2 = 65, d3 = 100, and F (c) = 0.02 + c/1000 for c between 0 and 998.


≈ 1 for daily decisions. A more relevant form of discounting is present bias (as in Laib-
son (1997), O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999)), as it seems plausible that people are prone to
procrastinate paying their tickets. However, the direct impact of present bias in this model
is merely to reduce the likelihood of acting in any particular period, without changing the
qualitative pattern of behavior illustrated in Figure 2. Moreover, it is diﬃcult to separately
identify discounting parameters and the distribution of eﬀort costs (F ) without variation in
the magnitude of penalties or the timing of deadlines–variation that we do not have in our
data. Hence, while we believe present bias is likely playing a role in this environment, we
exclude it from our organizing model.
   A comparison between Figures 1 and 2 suggests that, except for the spike at the first
deadline, the qualitative pattern predicted by the model does not capture the data well. The
increasingly large spikes at the second and third deadlines predicted by the model are all but
absent in the data, and moreover the model does not explain the dramatic decline in hazard
rates between the first and second deadline. Incorporating forgetting and heterogeneity into
the model can bring it closer to the data, as we discuss next.


2.2    Heterogeneity and Selection

Prior analyses of search–especially of job search–attribute declines in hazard rates over
time to the existence of heterogeneity and selection. The intuition is simple. Suppose there

                                                                       8
are two types, call them High and Low. Both behave according to the model above, but High
are more prone to pay on any given day than Low–i.e., they face a diﬀerent distribution
of costs (F ). As time since day 0 passes, a growing share of the population of people with
unpaid tickets is Low. Hence, the observed hazard rate, which is a weighted average of the
two type-specific hazard rates, will gradually drop.
       To test for the existence of persistent types in the population, one can test whether
an individual’s response behavior on some tickets helps predict response behavior on other
tickets.3 We pursue this strategy to investigate heterogeneity in Section 5.


2.3       Forgetting

A second reason why hazard rates might decline over time is forgetting.                         Simple “i.i.d.
forgetting,” wherein on each day there is some probability p that a person remembers her
outstanding ticket, cannot generate declining hazard rates.4 We consider instead forgetting
with persistence. Suppose that individuals are all of the same type (same F , etc.), but each
can be in one of two internal states, call them On-the-mind and Oﬀ-the-mind (see Taubinsky
(2014) for a model of this kind). If a ticket is on a person’s mind today, then it is likely
to remain on her mind tomorrow. However, once the ticket slips oﬀ the mind, it is likely
to remain oﬀ her mind tomorrow. In such a model, the longer a ticket is outstanding, the
more likely it is to be oﬀ the mind, and thus the lower should be the observed hazard rate.
       To test for oﬀ-the-mind forgetting, one can study the impact of interventions designed
to put the ticket back on the mind (at least with some probability).                      Such interventions
should lead to a jump in hazard rates and a restart of the forgetting process. In Section 4,
we pursue such a test by using exogenous changes in the timing of notification letters.
   3
      Notice that for a known type, hazard rates are the same for all tickets. Hence, in the one-type model in
Section 2.1 (and Figure 2), where a person’s type is known, there is no information in past behavior to help
predict current behavior. In contrast, in the two-type model described here, the later a person paid a past
ticket, the more likely she is to be Low, and thus she is predicted to pay the current ticket later.
    4
      If we modified the model to include an underlying cost distribution F̂ (c) and i.i.d. probability of remem-
bering p, it would be equivalent to the model in Section 2.1 with cost distribution F (c) = pF̂ (c)–and thus
Proposition 1 still holds.




                                                       9
3         New York City Parking Tickets

3.1        Data Description

Appendix 1 contains a detailed description of our data. Here we summarize the most im-
portant details. The data come from the New York City Department of Finance (DOF),
which handles most incoming revenue to the city. The full dataset contains information on
20,874,688 tickets, covering (virtually) all tickets issued between June 1, 2011 and August
31, 2013.5 The data include ticket issue date, violation type, fine amount, issuing agency,
location, and many other details. In addition, the data allow us to construct each ticket’s his-
tory of “events” through late January 2014–i.e., actions taken either by the ticket-receiving
individual (e.g., making a payment or contesting the ticket) or by DOF (e.g., imposing a
late penalty or sending a notification letter).
        We restrict the full dataset in several ways. Most notably, we exclude: tickets issued
for commercial vehicles and vehicles that are rentals or part of a fleet program (32.4% of
tickets in the full dataset); two moving violations which fall under the purview of DOF (red-
light and bus-lane violations caught with stationary cameras, which are subject to diﬀerent
rules); and several non-moving, non-parking violations (e.g., expired registration). These
restrictions leave us with a passenger dataset that contains 11,139,375 tickets.
        Next, to ensure that notification letters were received, we limit attention to vehicles with
DOF’s highest address verification level, leaving us with 6,801,115 tickets. We then drop the
173 remaining tickets with addresses outside of New York, and restrict attention to the 23
most common parking violations, leaving us with 6,730,378 tickets. Finally, while tickets can
be issued by many agencies, the vast majority are issued by either New York City parking
ticket agents or by the New York City Police Department, and we restrict attention to those.
The remaining 6,646,540 tickets comprise the core dataset that we analyze in this paper.
        The first column of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the core dataset (see Ap-
pendix Table A1 for a comparison with the passenger dataset). The most common violations
are for expired parking meter (36.2%), no parking due to street cleaning (26.2%), parking
    5
    Due to what appears to be a data-transfer issue, we are missing a large number of tickets issued on two
specific days (February 27—28, 2013).



                                                    10
in a general no parking zone (9.2%), and parking or standing in a general no standing zone
(6.7%).6 The most common fine amounts are $35 (30.1%), $45 (23.9%), and $115 (23.0%).
The vast majority (97.2%) of tickets are issued by parking-ticket agents; indeed, excluding
those issued by police oﬃcers does not aﬀect our results.
       Four payment methods are available: by mail, online, by phone, or in person (at one
of five DOF Business Centers). The bottom panel of Table 1 presents the distribution of
payment types for the 80.2% of tickets in the core dataset that have payments made by day
135. The most common payment methods are online (53.8%) and by mail (32.3%).


3.2       The OLD and NEW Regimes

Table 2 summarizes the timeline of key events under the OLD and NEW regimes (and also
under the EXP regime, which we describe in Section 4.3). The timeline is identical for the
OLD and NEW regimes except for one thing: DOF changed the timing and the content of
the first notification letter. The rest of this section provides detail.


3.2.1      Timeline in the OLD Regime

Tickets are issued (on what we define as day 0) as a paper ticket that is placed, along
with an orange envelope, on the windshield of the oﬀending car. The ticket and envelope
together provide information on the violation type, fine amount, the four possible ways to
pay, information on how to contest the violation, the (first) due date of day 30, and the (first)
late-payment penalty amount of $10. They also mention that failure to respond may result
in additional penalties and a default judgment being entered, which in turn could mean the
vehicle might be towed. Appendix 13 contains sample tickets and the relevant part of the
envelope, as well as samples for all notification letters described below.
       While the stated due date is day 30, in practice DOF’s computer system runs a batch job
every Saturday, and assigns a $10 late penalty to any outstanding ticket for which the due
date passed during the preceding week ending on Thursday. In addition, DOF also mails a
   6
    In Table 1, the expired-meter category aggregates three separate violations for diﬀerent types of meters,
and the authorized-vehicles-only category aggregates two separate violations. Hence, there are 20 rather
than 23 violation types in Table 1.



                                                     11
notification letter to the plate owner (OLD letter 1) on the subsequent Tuesday (which would
be day 35—41). This letter, labelled “NOTICE OF OUTSTANDING VIOLATION,” shows
an updated balance due that includes the $10 late penalty. It also provides a new due date,
the Monday that is exactly 27 days after that Tuesday (day 62—68), and states that failure
to respond in time will result in an additional late penalty of $20 and can lead to a default
judgment entry, which would then permit actions such as garnisheeing the owner’s wages,
towing the owner’s vehicles, and preventing renewal of motor vehicle registrations. Note that
the list of possible actions following a default judgment entry has expanded relative to the
language on the original ticket/envelope–and will keep expanding in later letters, including
increasingly severe possible actions–a point we return to below. Finally, like the original
ticket/envelope, the letter also describes the payment and contest methods.7
       If no response is received by the first Saturday after the second deadline, the second
late penalty is applied and in addition DOF mails a second notification letter (letter 2)
on the subsequent Tuesday (day 70—76). Letter 2, labelled “NOTICE OF IMPENDING
DEFAULT JUDGMENT,” shows an updated balance that includes the second late penalty,
and provides yet a new due date, which is the Friday that is exactly 31 days after that
Tuesday (day 101—107). The letter warns that failure to respond will lead to a default
judgment entry against the owner, which would then permit actions such as reporting the
debt to credit agencies, towing the owner’s vehicles, garnisheeing the owner’s wages and/or
seizing assets including real estate and bank accounts, and preventing renewal of motor
vehicle registrations. However, the letter does not explicitly mention the amount–$30–of
the impending third late penalty.
       If no response is received by the first Saturday after the third deadline, a third late
penalty of $30 is applied. In addition, DOF sends a third notification letter (letter 3) on
the subsequent Tuesday (day 105—111), stating that it has entered a default judgment, and
that the owner is now subject to immediate judgment enforcement procedures. The due
date on letter 3 is “IMMEDIATELY” and the letter indicates a range of severe punishments
   7
    Each notification letter included four pages, the last three of which describe the details of possible ways
to pay and to contest (DOF is required by state law to have certain language in the notices). Those three
pages are the same for all letters, except for one place on page 4 that lists the details of the specific violation
(violation type, fine amount, etc.). In Appendix 13, we provide those three pages only for OLD letter 1.



                                                        12
such as “Assigning your judgment debt to a Collection Agency,” “Seizing any motor vehicle
registered to you and selling it at auction,” and “Seizing your non-exempt personal property.”


3.2.2   Change to the NEW Regime

Under the OLD regime, OLD letter 1 was sent shortly after the first deadline (on day 35—41).
Beginning with tickets issued on June 18, 2012, DOF moved this letter to before the first
deadline. Specifically, if there is no response by day 17, then a letter (NEW letter 1) is
generated on day 18, mailed on day 19, and (most likely) received on day 20. The exceptions
are tickets issued on Tuesday or Wednesday, for which day 18 occurs on a weekend.         For
these tickets, the letter is generated on the subsequent Monday (day 19 or 20), mailed on
Tuesday (day 20 or 21), and (most likely) received on Wednesday (day 21 or 22).
   In addition, while most of the content of NEW letter 1 is identical to that of OLD let-
ter 1, DOF made three substantive changes. First, the label is changed from “NOTICE
OF OUTSTANDING VIOLATION” to “PRE-PENALTY NOTICE OF UNPAID VIOLA-
TION.” Second, instead of stating the second deadline (day 62—68) and the second penalty
($20), NEW letter 1 states the first deadline (day 30) and the first penalty ($10). Finally,
unlike OLD letter 1, which mentions the possibility of a default judgment entry and uses a
bold font to highlight various future penalties, NEW letter 1 does not mention the possibility
of a default judgment entry and does not contain any bold font.
   We highlight two further diﬀerences between the two regimes. First, prior to February
1, 2012, DOF had a settlement program in which, if an owner initiated a contest, the owner
was automatically oﬀered a fine reduction if they accepted a settlement instead of continuing
with the contest. The oﬀered fine reduction varied by ticket type, ranging from $10 to $25.
This program was abolished because DOF had come to believe that drivers were gaming
the program. While this program was available during much of the OLD regime but never
during the NEW regime, its elimination had little eﬀect on our results (see Section 4.1).
   Second, as described above, communications from DOF contain incomplete information
about the deadlines and the possible consequences of missing them. Consider a driver without
prior knowledge of the timeline of events. Under the OLD regime, she is initially (in the
ticket/envelope) told only about the first deadline and its associated $10 penalty. Only

                                             13
after missing that deadline is she told (in OLD letter 1) about the second deadline and
its $20 penalty. Similarly, only after missing the second deadline is she told (in letter 2)
about the third deadline, but only after missing it is she told (in letter 3) the amount ($30)
of the third penalty–after it has already been imposed. In addition, from the start, the
driver repeatedly receives hints at the possibility of a default judgment entry and ensuing
enforcement actions, but is not told when that will occur until letter 3–when a default
judgment has now been entered. Under the NEW regime, things are much the same, except
that now no notification letter is sent between the first and second deadline, and thus the
driver is not told about the existence of the second deadline and its $20 penalty until after
that deadline has passed and the penalty has been imposed. We return to this issue when
we motivate our field experiment, which was designed in part to test whether diﬀerences in
information might drive some of the observed behavioral diﬀerences across the two regimes.
As we discuss there, this issue seems not to matter.


3.2.3    Descriptive Statistics

The OLD regime applies to tickets issued between June 1, 2011 and June 17, 2012. The
NEW regime applies to tickets issued between June 18, 2012 and July 12, 2013 and between
August 17, 2013 and August 31, 2013. (Tickets issued between July 13, 2013 and August 16,
2013 were part of the EXP regime, which we discuss in Section 4.3.) As the second and third
columns of Table 1 show, the distributions of violation type, ticket amount, ticket issuer,
and payment type are all similar across the regimes. The main diﬀerence is that as time
passes and we move from OLD to NEW regime, there is a modest shift from in-person and
mail payments to online and phone payments (a shift that continues into the EXP regime).



4       Evidence of Forgetting

4.1     First Responses

Drivers in our setup face a two-dimensional decision: they choose not only when to respond to
a ticket, but also how to respond–they can pay or contest. We focus on the when question–


                                             14
that is, we study the timing of first responses of any type, pooling together payments and
contests (as in Figure 1).
       Table 3 describes the when and how of first responses. Timing is measured in days since
issue date and can take values from 0 to 135, or a no-response indicator if no response is
observed by day 135. First response can be a payment (including partial) or a contest,
whichever happens sooner.8 We count settlements through the settlement program as a
contest. The top section of the table shows the distribution of first responses for all tickets.
       The cumulative response rate through day 135 is roughly the same across the OLD,
NEW, and EXP regimes–90.1%, 89.3%, and 89.5%. However, there are diﬀerences in the
type of first response, with more contests and fewer payments in the OLD regime than in the
NEW and EXP regimes. This diﬀerence is primarily due to the elimination of the settlement
program on February 1, 2012. To show this, Table 3 also presents first responses for the
subset of tickets under the OLD regime that were issued on February 1, 2012 or later, which
we label the OLD-post regime. Cumulative behavior through day 135 is much the same (in
fact, slightly closer to NEW and EXP), and moreover the composition of first responses is
similar under the OLD-post, NEW, and EXP regimes.
       Our analysis of first responses pooled across response types creates two potential worries
that Table 3 helps to alleviate. First, within a regime, we may be missing interesting patterns
in the type of response over time. Second, and more important, when comparing regimes,
we may be focusing on the wrong question–the timing question–if the primary impact of
the regime change is on the type of first response. Our sense is that the regime changes are
unlikely to have much impact on the type of first response, and indeed we see no evidence
of this in the data. Specifically, the bottom panel of Table 3 reports first-response behavior
across diﬀerent time intervals as well as the composition of first responses within an interval.
The regimes clearly diﬀer in the timing of pooled first responses–i.e., the NEW and EXP
regimes have more first responses prior to deadline 1 than the OLD regime, and fewer first
responses between deadlines 1 and 2. This is the pattern highlighted in Figure 1 that we
   8
    The number of payments by day 135 diﬀers in Tables 1 and 3 because the former reflects all payments by
day 135 while the latter only reflects payments that are also a first response. For a small fraction of contests,
we observe only the resolution date, which might come zero or more days after the contest (see Appendix 1
and Appendix 10 for details).



                                                       15
explore in detail in Section 4.2. However, the data exhibit two additional features that
together alleviate our concerns above. First, the timing of pooled first responses in the OLD-
post regime is roughly the same as that in the OLD regime, and thus the elimination of the
settlement program appears to have altered the type of first response without altering the
timing of pooled first responses. Second, the within-interval composition of first responses in
the OLD-post regime is roughly the same as that in the NEW and EXP regimes, especially
prior to deadline 2, and thus the regime shifts from OLD-post to NEW to EXP appear not
to have altered much the type of first response.


4.2       Behavior under the OLD vs. NEW Regimes

We analyze first-response hazard rates using survival analysis. Each ticket is a single obser-
vation, and its first response is viewed as a failure event. We estimate daily hazard rates by
dividing, for each of days 0—135, the number of first responses on that day by the number of
outstanding tickets, i.e., tickets with no first response before that day.
      As described in Section 1, Figure 1 depicts estimated hazard rates in the OLD and NEW
regimes.9 Prior to day 20, behavior is roughly the same under the two regimes, as expected
given there is not yet any diﬀerential treatment between regimes. Then, when NEW letter
1 hits in the NEW regime, hazard rates are increasingly larger and more obviously spike at
day 30 (deadline 1) relative to hazard rates in the OLD regime. Analogously, from roughly
day 40, when OLD letter 1 hits in the OLD regime, hazard rates increase relative to hazard
rates in the NEW regime. After the second deadline hazard rates quickly converge, and
after the arrival of the second letter (sent on days 70—76), behavior is as similar as it was
prior to day 20. (Appendix 3 reproduces Figure 1 using the OLD-post regime in place of the
OLD regime, and shows that the small OLD-NEW diﬀerences before day 20 and after day
77 essentially disappear, suggesting they reflect the discontinued settlement program.)
      In Figure 1, diﬀerent tickets involve diﬀerent timing of deadlines and letters depending
on the day of the week a ticket is issued. To address this issue, and as a means to quantify
some of the diﬀerences seen in Figure 1, we analyze behavior across six natural “periods”
(we also use these periods when we estimate a mixture model in Section 5.2).
  9
      Appendix 2 reproduces the major figures with 95% confidence bands.

                                                   16
 Period 1: from day 0 to the day NEW letter 1 is sent (day 20 and 21 for tickets issued on
         Wednesday and Tuesday, respectively; day 19 otherwise)

 Period 2: from the day after NEW letter 1 is sent to deadline 1 (day 30 for everyone)

 Period 3: from day 31 to the day OLD letter 1 is sent (day 35—41)

 Period 4: from the day after OLD letter 1 is sent to deadline 2 (day 62—68)

 Period 5: from the day after deadline 2 to the day letter 2 is sent (day 70—76)

 Period 6: from the day after letter 2 is sent onward

       Because these periods have diﬀerent lengths, we focus on average daily hazard rates
within each period. Table 4 presents estimated average daily hazard rates and cumulative
response rates (see Appendix 4 for details of how Table 4 is created). As in Figure 1, response
rates prior to day 20 (in period 1) are roughly the same across the two regimes, but then
NEW letter 1 leads to a dramatic increase in response rates relative to the OLD regime, both
before and for a while after the first deadline–average daily hazard rates are 30% higher
in period 2, and 45% higher in period 3. However, once the first letter is sent in the OLD
regime, response rates become higher than those in the NEW regime, both before and for a
while after the second deadline–average daily hazard rates are 40% higher in period 4, and
45% higher in period 5. Like Figure 1, Table 4 shows that the cumulative response rate by
the time letter 2 is sent is roughly the same under the NEW vs. OLD regimes.
       An alternative way to address the issue that tickets diﬀer in the timing of deadlines and
letters is to redefine day 0 to be the date of deadline 2. Under this approach, OLD letter 1
is sent on day −27 for all tickets, deadline 2 is day 0 for all tickets, letter 2 is sent on day 8
for all tickets, deadline 3 is day 39 for all tickets, and letter 3 is sent on day 43 for all tickets.
Figure 3 depicts hazard rates estimated with this alternative definition of days. We see the
same general pattern, and moreover we now see a noticeable reaction immediately after each
letter is sent, providing further evidence of forgetting.10
  10
    Figure 3 reveals more noticeable spikes in hazard rates at deadlines 2 and 3, although these spikes are
much smaller than the spike at deadline 1. It also exhibits a clear weekly cycle in hazard rates, with lower
response rates on weekends. See Appendix 5 for hazard rates estimated by issue day of week.


                                                    17
                 .05




                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                             Cumulative response rate
                 .04




                                                                                                                        .8
   Hazard rate
                 .03




                                                                                                                        .6
                 .02




                                                                                                                        .4
                 .01




                                                                                                                        .2
                 0




                                                                                                                        0
                       −60 −50 −40 −30 −20 −10   0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70                                        −60 −50 −40 −30 −20 −10   0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70
                                   Days to/since second deadline                                                                         Days to/since second deadline


                                                                         OLD regime                                           NEW regime




Figure 3: Hazard Rates and Cumulative Response Rates in OLD vs. NEW
Regimes. Note: Day 0 is the day of the second deadline, which is a Monday for all tickets.
All tickets have the third deadline at day 39 (a Friday), and the first deadline at days −38 to −32,
indicated by shaded areas. First notification letter is received on day −26 (OLD) vs. about day
−46 (NEW).


        Finally, while Section 5 focuses on unobserved heterogeneity, here we assess the robust-
ness of our conclusions about forgetting to observed heterogeneity. Specifically, within each
regime, we estimate daily hazard rates separately for each of (i) the six most-common vio-
lation types, (ii) the six most-common fine amounts, and (iii) the two issuing agencies (Ap-
pendix 6 contains the figures). From this analysis, we draw two conclusions. First, while
there are noticeable diﬀerences across sub-groups, there is nothing systematic that relates
naturally to some underlying mechanism (e.g., while hazard rates are diﬀerent for diﬀerent
fine amounts, higher fines are associated with neither higher nor lower hazard rates). Second,
within each sub-group, the qualitative comparison between the OLD vs. NEW regimes is es-
sentially the same–that is, our results appear robust to observed heterogeneity in violation
type, fine amount, and ticketing agency.


4.3                    A Field Experiment (the EXP Regime)

After some initial comparisons of behavior under the OLD vs. NEW regimes, DOF agreed
to conduct a field experiment. The experiment included random variation along three di-
mensions: (i) NEW letter 1 might or might not include additional information (described

                                                                                        18
below), (ii) NEW letter 1 might or might not include some “scary” language (also described
below), and (iii) there might or might not be a new reminder letter between the first and
second deadlines (which we label EXP letter 1.5).11 Hence, there are eight experimental cells
as described in Table 5.
       This design addresses three issues of interpretation in the comparison of the OLD vs.
NEW regimes. First, as discussed in Section 3.2.2, drivers learn the schedule of deadlines
and penalties in a piecewise fashion, and there are diﬀerences in this information across
regimes. To explore whether these diﬀerences in information drive some of the diﬀerences
in behavior between the OLD vs. NEW regimes, some drivers–those in the info and info
scary treatments–received a modified version of NEW letter 1 that includes a box that lists
the full set of (individualized) deadlines and penalties. For instance, for a ticket issued on
Monday, July 15, 2013, this box would read as follows:


         AMOUNT DUE IF PAID BY 8/14/13:                   $65

         AMOUNT DUE IF PAID BY 9/16/13:                   $75 (INCLUDES $10 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT)

         AMOUNT DUE IF PAID BY 10/25/13:                  $95 (INCLUDES $30 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT)

         AMOUNT DUE IF PAID AFTER 10/25/13:               $125 (INCLUDES $60 PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT)

         If no payment is received by 11/1/13, Finance may boot or tow your vehicle.




       Second, the language used in NEW letter 1 is diﬀerent from that used in OLD letter
1. In particular, OLD letter 1 mentions the possibility of a default judgment entry and the
associated actions, and moreover uses a bold font to highlight the various future penalties.
In contrast, NEW letter 1 does not mention the possibility of a default judgment entry, and
does not contain any bold font. To investigate the impact of such language diﬀerences, some
drivers–those in the scary and info scary treatments–received a modified version of NEW
letter 1 that contains arguably scarier (or more forceful) language. Specifically, the letter
had the following header in large bold-faced letters:
  11
    Varying penalty amounts and deadlines might make it possible to identify discounting and possibly
present bias, but such interventions were not feasible.




                                                             19
                         WARNING: PENALTY APPROACHING
                                DON’T MISS THE DEADLINE


In addition, NEW letters 1i, 1s, and 1is all mention that failure to respond might result in
one’s vehicle being booted or towed, and in NEW letters 1s and 1is this is mentioned in a
larger font size.
       Third, in our comparison of the OLD vs. NEW regimes, we interpreted the higher re-
sponse rates in the OLD regime between OLD letter 1 and the second deadline as further
evidence of forgetting, but this comparison is not clean due to diﬀerent treatment prior to
OLD letter 1. To get a cleaner test of the impact of a letter between the first and second
deadlines, some drivers, chosen independently of the NEW letter 1 groups, received a new
reminder letter (EXP letter 1.5) between the two deadlines. Specifically, if there is no re-
sponse by day 45, then a letter is generated on day 46, mailed on day 47, and (most likely)
received on day 48, except for tickets issued on Tuesday or Wednesday, for which day 46
occurs on a weekend and the letters are generated on the subsequent Monday. The content
of this letter is identical to that in NEW letter 1i, except that (i) the first amount due in
the information box is deleted (since it is no longer relevant) and (ii) the letter is labeled
“NOTICE OF OUTSTANDING VIOLATION.”
       The experimental (EXP) regime applied to all tickets issued from July 13, 2013 through
August 16, 2013. For tickets issued during these five weeks, if a NEW letter 1 was triggered,
it was randomly assigned to one of the four NEW letter 1’s according to the probabilities in
Table 5. The EXP letter 1.5 treatment applied only for tickets issued July 22, 2013 through
August 10, 2013 (and implemented by generating EXP letter 1.5 over three business weeks
in September 2013). For tickets issued during this period, if an EXP letter 1.5 was triggered,
with 50% chance an EXP letter 1.5 was sent (regardless of which NEW letter 1 was sent).12
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the EXP regime. In general, these statistics
look roughly the same as both the OLD and NEW regimes. Table 3 presents an overview of
first responses in the EXP regime (see the discussion in Section 4.1).
  12
    Each randomization was done by ordering plates alphanumerically and then assigning plates to treat-
ments via a pre-set pattern. For plates that received multiple tickets in the EXP regime, it was possible to
receive diﬀerent treatments for the diﬀerent tickets. Our results in Section 4.4 are unchanged if we consider
only plates that received exactly one ticket in the EXP regime (see Appendix 7.1).

                                                     20
4.4       Behavior under the EXP Regime

We analyze daily hazard rates in each of the eight experimental cells. However, because
randomization occurred only when letters were generated, and not at the time tickets were
issued, we create the eight experimental cells by performing an ex post random assignment for
all tickets with a response prior to the day-18 or day-46 letter generation.13 Specifically, for
each ticket with a response prior to day 18 (that did not receive any NEW letter 1) we ex post
randomly assign it into one of the four NEW letter 1 treatments, using the same probabilities
as in Table 5. Similarly, for each ticket issued between July 22, 2013 through August 10,
2013 for which there is a response prior to day 46, we ex post randomly assign it into one
of the two EXP letter 1.5 letter treatments. Finally, we assign all tickets issued outside of
July 22, 2013 through August 10, 2013 to the no-EXP-letter-1.5 treatment, since none of
them could have received an EXP letter 1.5.14 After applying this ex post randomization,
the number of observations in the four cells without EXP letter 1.5 are 38,016 (1), 76,510
(1i), 38,321 (1s), and 38,130 (1is), and the number of observations in the four cells with
EXP letter 1.5 are 16,053 (1), 32,133 (1i), 15,854 (1s), and 16,072 (1is).15
       Figure 4a depicts hazard rates for the four experimental cells assigned not to receive an
EXP letter 1.5. It reveals that the four versions of NEW letter 1 lead to almost identical
hazard rates. This result suggests that neither the large diﬀerences in behavior between the
OLD vs. NEW regimes nor the weak response to the third deadline in both regimes are driven
by diﬀerences in information or language (recall that the weak response to the third deadline
in both regimes could have resulted from individuals not having been informed about the
$30 penalty; however, informing them about all penalties and deadlines in the info and info
scary treatments had little impact).16

  13
      As shorthand, we refer to the day on which NEW letter 1 is triggered as “day 18,” even though for some
tickets it is day 19 or day 20 (see Section 3.2.2). For EXP letter 1.5, we analogously use “day 46.”
   14
      Our results are robust to dropping tickets outside of July 22 to August 10, 2013 (see Appendix 7.2).
   15
      An alternative approach would be to conduct a single hazard rate estimation prior to receipt of NEW
letter 1, then four hazard rate estimations between NEW letter 1 and EXP letter 1.5, and finally eight hazard
rate estimations after EXP letter 1.5. We chose not to pursue this approach because of diﬃculties associated
with the split dates varying depending on the day of the week on which a ticket is issued.
   16
      A close inspection of the confidence intervals in Appendix 2 reveals that the scary and info scary
treatments led to a statistically significant but very small increase in hazard rates relative to the baseline
and info treatments. Because NEW letter 1 contains less scary language than OLD letter 1, if anything our
comparison of the OLD vs. NEW regimes slightly understates the impact of NEW letter 1.

                                                     21
                                                                           (a) Response rates in four day−18 treatments




                                                                                                                         1
          .05




                                                                                                            Cumulative response rate
                                                                                                                                 .8
              .04
  Hazard rate




                                                                                                                          .6
        .03




                                                                                                                   .4
  .02     .01




                                                                                                             .2
          0




                                                                                                                         0
                          0       10   20   30   40    50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130                                                             0       10    20     30     40    50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
                                                      Days since issue date                                                                                                        Days since issue date

                                                               Baseline                           Info                                                         Scary                             Info Scary


                                                                           (b) Response rates in two day−46 treatments
                    .05




                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                       Cumulative response rate
                    .04




                                                                                                                                            .8
         Hazard rate
                .03




                                                                                                                                     .6
          .02




                                                                                                                              .4
                    .01




                                                                                                                        .2
                    0




                                                                                                                                       0




                              0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130                                                                         0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130
                                              Days since issue date                                                                                                   Days since issue date

                                                                          All 4 treatments without day−46                                                         All 4 treatments with day−46




Figure 4: Hazard Rates and Cumulative Response Rates in EXP Regime. Note:
Figure 4a includes only the four experimental cells in which EXP letter 1.5 is not sent. Figure 4b
pools the four experimental cells assigned not to receive, and to receive, an EXP letter 1.5.


          Figure 4b, in which the four NEW letter 1 treatments are pooled together, reveals that
EXP letter 1.5 has a noticeable impact, further supporting the role of oﬀ-the-mind forgetting.
Even after getting a letter shortly after day 18, getting a second letter shortly after day 46
increases response rates. However, this eﬀect is much smaller than the impact of NEW letter
1 under the NEW and EXP regimes, and of OLD letter 1 under the OLD regime. These
diﬀerences in magnitude suggest the existence of heterogeneous types and selection: with
heterogeneity, under the EXP regime the distribution of types that receives EXP letter 1.5
is diﬀerent from the distribution that receives NEW letter 1 (and it is also diﬀerent from the
distribution receiving OLD letter 1 in the OLD regime) and thus the significant diﬀerences
in responses. We turn our attention to such selection shortly.
          The diﬀerential impact of the first and second letters raises two further issues. First,


                                                                                                         22
while we interpret the impact of the first letter as a reminder, it is possible that, in some
instances, the first letter is actually the first time the owner learns of a ticket–perhaps the
ticket was received by someone who borrowed the car, or perhaps the ticket somehow fell oﬀ
the car before the owner noticed it. However, our type results in Section 5 would seem to
contradict this story, because it would require that the good types are the types prone not to
know about the ticket, and this seems implausible. Second, there might be something special
about the first letter that one receives–perhaps it reveals to owners that DOF knows where
they live, or that the ticket really does need to be paid. However, such eﬀects would primarily
apply for first oﬀenders, and our results look much the same for repeat oﬀenders–as seen
in Figure 5 in Section 5, or by comparing Tables A4 and A5 in Appendix 8.1.



5        Unobserved Heterogeneity and Selection

5.1       Evidence of Persistent Types

To demonstrate the existence of persistent types, we show that response behavior on one’s
past tickets is highly predictive of response behavior on one’s current ticket.               We use a
relatively simple approach. First, we identify all plates that received exactly three tickets
under the OLD regime, and divide them into four groups: (i) plates whose first two tickets
are both responded to by day 30, (ii) plates whose first ticket is, but second ticket is not,
responded to by day 30, (iii) plates whose second ticket is, but first ticket is not, responded
to by day 30, and (iv) plates whose first two tickets are neither responded to by day 30.
Then, for each of these four groups, we estimate daily hazard rates for each plate’s third
ticket. We carry out an identical exercise for all plates that received exactly three tickets
under the NEW regime.17
       Figure 5 depicts these hazard rates. We see clear evidence of persistent types. Third-
ticket hazard rates for plates in group (i) are roughly twice the average daily hazard rates
in Figure 1, while those in group (iv) are less than half the rates in Figure 1, and those in
groups (ii) and (iii) are in between. Moreover, the allocation of plates into the four groups
  17
    In the OLD regime, the number of observations in each group are 56,035, 19,872, 20,429, and 41,559. In
the NEW regime, the number of observations in each group are 55,783, 17,510, 17,166, and 35,111.


                                                   23
itself provides further evidence of persistent types. Specifically, the vast majority of plates
fall into either group (i) (40.6% in the OLD regime and 44.4% in the NEW regime) or group
(iv) (30.1% and 28.0%). These allocations are inconsistent with every ticket having the same
independent probability to respond by day 30. For instance, seeing 40.6% in group (i) implies
that the probability of responding by day 30 is 63.7% (because 0.6372 = 0.406), but that in
turn would mean that we should see only 13.2% in group (iv) (because (1 − 0.637)2 = 0.132).


                                                                                     (a) OLD regime
                 .12




                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                  Cumulative response rate
                 .1




                                                                                                                             .8
                 .08
   Hazard rate




                                                                                                                             .6
                 .06




                                                                                                                             .4
                 .04




                                                                                                                             .2
                 .02
                 0




                                                                                                                             0




                       0   10   20   30   40    50   60   70   80   90   100 110 120 130                                          0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90   100 110 120 130
                                               Days since issue date                                                                                       Days since issue date
                                                                                     (b) NEW regime
                 .12




                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                  Cumulative response rate
                 .1




                                                                                                                             .8
                 .08
   Hazard rate




                                                                                                                             .6
                 .06




                                                                                                                             .4
                 .04




                                                                                                                             .2
                 .02
                 0




                                                                                                                             0




                       0   10   20   30   40    50   60   70   80   90   100 110 120 130                                          0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90   100 110 120 130
                                               Days since issue date                                                                                       Days since issue date

                                                                             First response by first deadline:
                                 Both tickets 1 & 2                          Only ticket 1                                                 Only ticket 2                           Neither ticket 1 nor 2




Figure 5: Past Response Behavior Predicts Current Response Behavior. Note:
Daily hazard rates and cumulative response rates split by the ticket recipient’s response behavior
on two prior tickets. Based on recipients of exactly three tickets within a regime.




5.2                    A Mixture Model of Unobserved Types

Having demonstrated the existence of persistent types, we next estimate a mixture model
of unobserved types. We impose no structure on hazard rates over time. However, for

                                                                                             24
tractability, instead of considering a model at the daily frequency, we conduct this analysis
in terms of the six periods introduced in Section 4.2.
   Suppose there is a discrete set K of types in the population, and let πk denote the
                                                        P
proportion of the population that is type k ∈ K, where k∈K πk = 1. Each type k is
characterized by hazard rates (pk1 , pk2 , pk3 , pk4 , pk5 ). The hazard rate pkt is the probability that
the person responds to a ticket in period t conditional on not having responded prior to
period t. The hazard rate in the last (open-ended) period 6 is by definition equal to 1.
       We permit hazard rates to depend on the regime γ, and thus write pkt (γ) for each t ∈
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and k ∈ K. The impact of regime on the pkt ’s will be a measure of the impact
of the reminder letters–e.g., the extent to which pk2 (NEW) > pk2 (OLD) is a measure of the
immediate impact of NEW letter 1 in the NEW regime (relative to no letter in the end of
period 1 in the OLD regime), and the extent to which pk4 (OLD) > pk4 (NEW) is a measure of
the immediate impact of OLD letter 1 in the OLD regime (relative to no letter in the end
of period 3 in the NEW regime).18
       For plate i, we can write the observed behavior as a vector

                                          ¡                                                ¢
                                      di ≡ Ji , mi1 , γ i1 , mi2 , γ i2 , ..., miJi , γ iJi .


where Ji is the total number of tickets received by plate i, mij ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} is the period
in which plate i’s owner responded to ticket j, and γ ij is the regime that applies to ticket
j for plate i. Then, conditional on receiving Ji tickets, the likelihood that type k would
generate observed behavior di is
                                ⎛                        ⎛"                                  #I{mij =t} ⎞⎞
                          Ji
                          Y                            Y
                                                       6    Y
                                                            t−1
                                 £           ¤ i                ¡                ¢
             `k (di ) =         ⎝ pk1 (γ ij ) I{mj =1}   ⎝       1 − pkt0 (γ ij ) pkt (γ ij )           ⎠⎠
                          j=1                           t=2       t0 =1

where I is the identity function, and thus the likelihood that plate i generates observation
  18
    The latter statement is true for a known type. In practice, however, given that our estimation will
permit only a small number of types, there is likely some residual heterogeneity within an estimated type,
and thus part of the diﬀerence between pk4 (OLD) and pk4 (NEW) might be due to some diﬀerential selection
in periods 2 and 3.




                                                               25
di is
                                                        X
                                                        K
                                                i
                                            `i (d ) =         πk `k (di ).
                                                        k=1

Finally, assuming that the number of tickets received Ji is independent of one’s type k, the
sample log-likelihood can be written as19

                                                        X
                                           log L =            log `i (di ).
                                                        i

       This model makes several simplifying assumptions. It assumes that (i) the population
distribution of types π k is the same for each regime γ, (ii) the number of tickets received Ji
is independent of one’s type k, and (iii) within a type, the pkt (γ)’s are the same for all tickets
received under regime γ (this assumption rules out “learning” in the sense that one’s response
experience on prior tickets does not change one’s response behavior on the current ticket, as
well as any other form of interaction across tickets). These assumptions are primarily made
for practical reasons, both to reduce computational burden and because there is a limit to
how much heterogeneity we can identify. In Appendix 8.1, we assess these assumptions, and
report evidence that, while not fully accurate, they seem reasonable for our purposes.
       In our main estimation, we use all plates that received J ∈ {3, 4, ..., 12} tickets across the
OLD and NEW regimes combined–657,890 plates that received 3,366,145 tickets.20 Before
estimating the model, for each plate we take one randomly chosen ticket and put it in a
holdout sample, which we will use in Section 5.3 below. Using the remaining 2,708,255
tickets for the 657,890 plates, we estimate the mixture model above for K ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}.
       Table 6 reports, for each K ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, the estimated average daily hazard rates for
each type in each period, along with the estimated proportion of each type.21 The estimated
model yields several interesting conclusions. The discussion below focuses on the K = 3
  19
                                         P       ¡             ¢
      The actual sample log-likelihood is i log Pr(Ji )`i (di ) , but as long as Pr(Ji ) is independent of type k,
it does not impact the estimation.
   20
      We do not use data from the EXP regime in estimating this model because regime-specific hazard rates
are identified from plates that have multiple tickets within a regime, and there are very few plates that
receive multiple tickets within any one cell in the EXP regime. We do study response behavior for the typed
plates in the EXP regime in Section 5.3 below.
   21
      As described above, our estimation technique yields per-period hazard rates (these are reported in
Appendix Table A7). For interpretation, we convert each per-period hazard rate into an average daily
hazard rate using the average number of days in each period, and use the delta method to convert the
standard errors. Details of this transformation are available in Appendix 8.2.


                                                        26
model, but similar messages emerge from the K = 2 or K = 4 models. In the K = 3 model,
we refer to the first type with the highest hazard rate in all periods as the high type, the
third type with the lowest hazard rate in all periods as the low type, and the other type as
the middle type.
   First, failing to account for selection will bias one’s estimates. The estimated heterogene-
ity implies very strong selection eﬀects (see Appendix Table A9). The high types are selected
out very quickly–under either regime, roughly 90% respond by the first deadline (by the end
of period 2), and almost 99% respond by the second deadline (by the end of period 4). In
contrast, the low types respond very slowly–under either regime, even after period 5, more
than 65% of the low types have not yet responded. Given these strong selection eﬀects, we
even find in Table 6 instances in which the aggregate hazard rate decreases from one period
to the next in spite of an increase in each of the type-specific hazard rates. For example,
in the three-type model under the OLD regime, all three types have pk4 (OLD) > pk3 (OLD),
reflecting the impact of receiving the first reminder letter. If, however, one considered only
a one-type model–thus failing to account for heterogeneity and the resulting selection–one
would estimate an average “treatment” eﬀect of p4 (OLD) < p3 (OLD), which is the opposite
direction. Of course, this diﬀerence is driven by the significant increase in the proportion of
the remaining population that is low type as we move from period 3 to period 4.
   Second, our estimates highlight the importance of incidence analysis. Specifically, the
diﬀerent types react to deadlines in diﬀerent ways. Within each regime, the extent to which
people respond in period 2 (just before deadline 1) rather than period 3 (just after deadline
1) reflects the impact of the deadline on their behavior. For the high type, the average daily
hazard rate is significantly higher in period 2 than in period 3 (7.47% relative to 5.00% in
the OLD regime, 10.43% relative to 9.85% in the NEW regime). For the middle type, the
average daily hazard rate actually gets higher in period 3 (3.10% vs. 3.29% in the OLD
regime, 4.01% vs. 4.98% in the NEW regime). For the low type, the average daily hazard
rate is roughly the same in periods 2 and 3 under either regime. Applying a similar approach
to analyze behavior before and after deadline 2 (comparing periods 4 and 5), the high types
again react strongly, the middle types now have a mild reaction, while the low types react
very little. Hence, it seems that the high types react strongly to deadlines, while the middle


                                              27
and low types react much less.
   The diﬀerent types also react to letters in diﬀerent ways, where reminders seem to have
their primary impact on helping the better types to pay in a very timely way instead of in a
mostly timely way. Table 6 reveals that adding NEW letter 1 (relative to the OLD regime)
has a dramatic impact on average daily hazard rates for the high types in periods 2 and 3.
Average daily hazard rates increase from 7.47% to 10.43% in period 2, and from 5.00% to
9.85% in period 3. NEW letter 1 also has a large impact on average daily hazard rates for
the middle types in periods 2 and 3, increasing them from 3.10% to 4.01% in period 2, and
from 3.29% to 4.98% in period 3. In contrast, NEW letter 1 has little impact on the low
types–average daily hazard rates in periods 2 and 3 increase only marginally, with little
impact on the cumulative response in periods 2 and 3 combined. There is perhaps a more
noticeable response among the low types to OLD letter 1 in the OLD regime (i.e., comparing
behavior in periods 4 and 5 across regimes), although average daily hazard rates are still very
low in both regimes–indeed, by the end of period 5, the cumulative response rate of the low
types is only 34.9% in the OLD regime and 31.2% in the NEW regime. Hence, our analysis
suggests that if one wants to induce higher response rates and fewer late penalties (and
especially if one wants to reduce default judgments and selling debts to collection agencies),
the focus should be less on deadlines and reminders, and more on identifying the low types
and tackling the diﬃcult question of how to get them to act.


5.3    Analysis of Predicted Types

Once we have estimated the model, we are able to generate a predicted type for each of the
657,890 plates used in the estimation. We can then use these predicted types to investigate
(i) the daily hazard rates for each type under the OLD and NEW regimes using the holdout
sample of 657,890 tickets, one for each plate, (ii) the daily hazard rates for each type under the
eight experimental treatments for plates that also receive tickets under the EXP regime, and
(iii) whether the predicted types are correlated with observables. Throughout this section,
we apply the estimated three-type model (i.e., the K = 3 columns in Table 6).
   Using the estimated parameters for the π k ’s and the pkt (γ)’s, the predicted probability



                                               28
that plate i with observed behavior di is type k is

                                                     πk `k (di )
                                      π̂(k|di ) = P                i
                                                                      .
                                                     k0 π k0 `k0 (d )


In principle, we could merely assign plate i to the type k that maximizes π̂(k|di ). With
this approach, however, one might worry about plates that are barely assigned to one type
relative to another. Instead, we assign plate i to the type k that maximizes π̂(k|di ) only
if that k yields π̂(k|di ) > 0.60. With this approach, we type 582,063 of the 657,890 plates
(88.5%). Of these, 36.2% are assigned to be high types, 39.4% to be middle types, and 24.4%
to be low types.22
   Using the holdout sample, Figure 6 depicts the type-specific daily hazard rates in the
OLD vs. NEW regimes. Comparing Figures 5 and 6, notice that, not surprisingly, our
mixture model provides an improved typing relative to the crude approach to typing used
for Figure 5–in the sense that the three types appear more distinct in Figure 6. In addition,
Figure 6 yields much the same message as the estimated parameters in Table 6.23 The high
and middle types behave qualitatively the same, with the high types being more prone to
act sooner, and both types reacting strongly to the reminder letters. The low types, in
contrast, exhibit very low and relatively flat response rates from day 0 through the third
deadline. There is a barely noticeable reaction to NEW letter 1 in the NEW regime, and a
still small but more noticeable reaction to OLD letter 1 in the OLD regime. In fact, the shift
from the OLD to the NEW regime clearly leads to worse cumulative outcomes for the low
types. Finally, note that the most significant jump in hazard rates for the low types occurs
at roughly day 110, just after they receive letter 3–indeed, under each regime, hazard rates
for the low types are higher from day 110 to day 135 than they are for any earlier set of
dates. We return to this point in Section 6.


  22
     The criterion π̂(k|di ) > 0.60 is chosen to balance suﬃcient confidence in the typing against typing
suﬃciently many plates. If we instead require π̂(k|di ) > 0.50, we can type 99.3% of plates, whereas if we
require π̂(k|di ) > 0.70, we can type 72.8% of plates. See Appendix 9.1.
  23
     We remind the reader that the summonses used to produce Figure 6 were not used to estimate the
parameters in Table 6. For more detail, see Figure A2 in Appendix 9.1, which presents Figure 6 with a
separate panel for each type.



                                                   29
                                                                                                            1
                 .12




                                                                                               Cumulative response rate
                                                                                                                    .8
                 .1
                 .08
   Hazard rate




                                                                                                             .6
                 .06




                                                                                                      .4
                 .04




                                                                                                .2
                 .02




                                                                                                            0
                 0




                       0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90 100 110 120 130                                   0   10   20   30   40     50   60   70   80   90 100 110 120 130
                                               Days since issue date                                                                              Days since issue date


                                                                             OLD regime                                       NEW regime



Figure 6: Hazard Rates and Cumulative Response Rates by Predicted Type. Note:
Daily hazard rates and cumulative response rates in the OLD vs. NEW regimes for each of the
three predicted types (high, middle, low) from the estimated three-type mixture model. Based on
582,063 summonses in the holdout sample.


        Of the 582,063 typed plates, 78,136 also receive at least one ticket under the EXP regime,
and those 78,136 plates receive a total of 98,752 tickets under the EXP regime. Using these
tickets, we estimate daily hazard rates in each of the eight experimental cells (see Appendix
9.2 Figures A3 and A4). Due to the much smaller samples, which further shrink as the days
pass (especially rapidly for the higher types), our results here are less precise. That said,
for each type, the four versions of NEW letter 1 appear to have roughly the same impact on
hazard rates, and the EXP letter 1.5 also appears to have a modest impact on hazard rates.
        Finally, we assess whether the predicted types are correlated with observables (see Ap-
pendix 9.3 for full details, here we provide an overview of our approach and our results).
We take advantage of the fact that we have an address for every ticket in the EXP regime
for which a NEW letter 1 was sent, and thus we can match the associated plates to Census
demographics at the block group level.24 Specifically, of the 657,890 plates in our estimation
sample, 60,529 plates received a ticket under the EXP regime for which (i) they were sent
a NEW letter 1, (ii) we were able to match their address, and (iii) there were no missing
values for the demographic variables.25
  24
   Census block groups have a population of 600 to 3,000 people.
  25
   Whenever a NEW letter 1 is sent to a P.O. box, we treat the address as a non-match. In addition, a
small fraction of the addresses were not recognized by ArcGIS, and we treat those as a non-match as well.



                                                                                          30
    For these 60,529 plates, we further update their predicted type probabilities (i.e., their
π̂(k|di )’s) based on their response behavior under the EXP regime–this updating is necessary
to correct for selection due to the fact that we observe an address only if a ticket is not
paid within the first 18 days. Then, in two separate regressions, we regress the predicted
likelihood of being a high type and the predicted likelihood of being a low type on various
Census variables, including income, race, education, ability to speak English, and how one
travels to work (see Appendix 9.3 Table A10 for descriptive statistics and Table A11 for
regression results). We find that the probability that a plate is a high type rather than a low
type is associated with living in a Census block group that has higher income, more non-
native English speakers, a higher proportion of Asian or Caucasian residents, and a higher
proportion of college graduates.



6     Discussion
In this paper, we have provided a detailed analysis of response behavior by New York City
parking-ticket recipients, estimating daily hazard rates for 135 days after ticket receipt. We
have documented clear evidence of forgetting, a central role for heterogeneous types and
selection, and key diﬀerences in how diﬀerent types respond to deadlines and reminders.
Nonetheless, there is still much to be learned in this domain. We conclude by discussing
some issues raised by our analysis, and some thoughts for the future.
    First, note that, even after we split our population into types, the type-specific hazard
rates in Figure 6 do not look like those in Figure 2. In other words, even after controlling
for heterogeneity, we are still left with type-specific hazard rates that are inconsistent with
the optimal delay model. Two natural explanations are (i) there is residual heterogeneity
within the three types, and (ii) each type is characterized by forgetting, which, as we have
emphasized, can generate a general decline in hazard rates.
    Second, there are surely other forces at play in this context that we have not studied.
One potential force that we have not discussed is another form of inattention: while people
have a ticket “on the mind,” they have trouble tracking the exact deadlines that they face.
For instance, one might have the ticket on the mind and be looking for a convenient time


                                              31
to pay, but somehow get the deadline mixed up.       A related possibility is that one might
open one’s mail at irregular intervals, and thus might not see a reminder letter until after
a deadline has passed.    Indeed, we see some evidence of this kind of inattention in that
response rates remain high in the days after each deadline (i.e., in periods 3 and 5).
   Third, our analysis raises the questions of who are the low types and how do we get
them to respond. Figure 5 suggests that, at least for some domains, it may be relatively
easy to identify the types prone to delay. Hence, with further investigation and more data,
it might be possible to learn who they are and why they delay. Perhaps they just do not
care about monetary penalties and thus do not care about responding until the consequences
become severe. Or perhaps they are liquidity constrained or face other creditors, and thus
have limited scope to respond in a timely manner. A more detailed understanding of the
low types would then permit programs targeting those types. On this dimension, Figure
5 and especially Figure 6 suggest that some low types react to the third letter–in Figure
6, hazard rates for low types are highest from day 110 through day 135, perhaps due to
the more severe consequences or the stated deadline being “IMMEDIATELY.” Hence, it is
possible that some types of noticing or language could aﬀect the behavior of low-types. But
even these higher hazard rates are still low compared to those for the high or middle types.
Hence, other approaches are needed.
   Finally, we conclude with a word of caution. A number of recent papers (many cited
in Section 1) have identified a significant impact of reminders. We view these results as
important, and indeed we find such an impact in our data. We worry, however, that re-
searchers might become overly focused on such unobtrusive interventions to the detriment
of investigating when a heavier hand is necessary. We also call for more incidence analysis
before giving policy advice. In our domain, the impact of reminders is concentrated on those
least likely to need them (i.e., those who would have responded within a few weeks anyway).
For the group that delays the most (i.e., the low types, many of whom never respond in our
data), our analysis reveals that bolder approaches may be needed.




                                             32
References
Akerlof, G. A. (1991): “Procrastination and Obediance,” American Economic Review,
  81(2), 1—19.

Ariely, D., and K. Wertenbroch (2002): “Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance:
  Self-Control by Precommitment,” Psychological Science, 13(3), 219—224.

Bertsekas, D. (2005): Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control. Athena Scientific.

Ericson, K. M. (2011): “Forgetting We Forget: Overconfidence and Memory,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 9(1), 43—60.

         (forthcoming): “On the Interaction of Memory and Procrastination: Implications
  for Reminders, Deadlines, and Empirical Estimation,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association.

Hsiaw, A. (2013): “Goal-Setting and Self-Control,” Journal of Economic Theory, 148, 601—
  626.

Koch, A. K., and J. Nafziger (2011): “Self-regulation through Goal Setting,” Manage-
  ment Science, 113(1), 212—227.

Laibson, D. (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 112(2), 443—477.

McCall, J. J. (1970): “Economics of Information and Job Search,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 84(1), 113—126.

Milkman, K. L., J. Beshears, J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2011):
  “Using implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates,” Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(26), 10415—10420.

Nickerson, D. W., and T. Rogers (2010): “Do You Have a Voting Plan? Implementa-
  tion Intentions, Voter Turnout, and Organic Plan Making,” Psychological Science, 21(2),
  194—199.

                                           33
O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999): “Doing It Now or Later,” American Economic
  Review, 89(1), 103—124.

         (2001): “Choice and Procrastination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1),
  121—160.

Salant, S. W. (1977): “Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 91(1), 39—57.

Schoar, A., and X. Cadena (2011): “Remembering to Pay? Reminders vs. Financial
  Incentives for Loan Payments,” Unpublished, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Tasoff, J., and R. Letzler (2014): “Everyone Believes in Redemption: Overoptimism
  and Nudges,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 107A, 107—122.

Taubinsky, D. (2014): “From Intentions to Actions: A Model and Experimental Evidence
  of Inattentive Choice,” Unpublished, Harvard University.

Zamir, E., D. Lewinsohn-Zamir, and I. Ritov (2015): “It’s Now or Never! Using
  Deadlines as Nudges,” Hebrew University of Jerusalem Legal Studies Research Paper
  Series 16-03.




                                           34
                                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                            Core Dataset OLD Regime NEW Regime EXP Regime
Total # of Tickets                           6,646,540    3,355,094  3,020,357   271,089
Violation Type
Expired Meter ($35/$65)                         36.23%           37.52%          34.92%          34.88%
Street Cleaning ($65/$45)                       26.18%           25.38%          27.01%          26.88%
General No Parking Zone ($65/$60)                9.21%            9.27%           9.14%            9.28%
General No Standing Zone ($115)                  6.70%            6.58%           6.78%            7.24%
Fire Hydrant ($115)                              5.59%            5.24%           5.95%            5.78%
Double Parking ($115)                            4.75%            4.91%           4.63%            4.00%
Bus Stop ($115)                                  2.40%            2.30%           2.50%            2.39%
Truck Loading/Unloading ($95)                     2.17%           2.09%           2.24%            2.22%
Authorized Vehicles Only ($95/$65/$60)            1.94%           2.04%           1.85%            1.73%
In Commercial Zone ($115)                         1.35%           1.25%           1.40%            2.09%
In Crosswalk ($115)                              1.02%            0.90%           1.15%            1.10%
On Sidewalk ($115)                               0.68%            0.70%           0.66%            0.64%
Parking Longer than Limit ($65/$60)               0.37%           0.43%           0.32%            0.23%
In a Driveway ($95)                              0.30%            0.30%           0.30%            0.30%
Not as Marked ($65)                              0.23%            0.23%           0.22%            0.30%
In Pedestrian Ramp ($165)                        0.22%            0.20%           0.25%            0.27%
In a Safety Zone ($115)                          0.22%            0.20%           0.24%            0.23%
In a Bike Lane ($115)                            0.17%            0.16%           0.18%            0.17%
No Standing / Taxi Stand ($115)                  0.14%            0.13%           0.15%            0.16%
In Handicapped Zone ($180)                       0.13%            0.16%           0.11%            0.11%
Ticket Amount
$35                                             30.11%           31.30%          28.91%          28.70%
$45                                             23.89%           23.12%          24.69%          24.47%
$60                                              8.20%            8.25%           8.15%            8.29%
$65                                             10.45%           10.64%          10.23%          10.49%
$95                                              3.97%            3.95%           4.00%            3.87%
$115                                            23.00%           22.36%          23.64%          23.80%
$165                                             0.22%            0.20%           0.25%            0.27%
$180                                             0.13%            0.16%           0.11%            0.11%
Other/Missing                                    0.02%            0.02%           0.01%            0.01%
Ticket Issuer
Parking-Ticket Agent                            97.16%           97.28%          97.03%          96.98%
New York City Police Department                   2.84%           2.72%           2.97%            3.02%
Payment Type
Payment made by Day 135                       5,333,147        2,721,947       2,397,666         213,534
    Mail                                        32.34%           33.50%          31.23%          29.94%
    Online                                      53.81%           51.11%          56.55%          57.48%
    Phone                                        2.76%            2.10%           3.36%            4.33%
    In Person                                   11.09%           13.28%           8.85%            8.25%
    Unknown                                      0.00%            0.00%           0.00%            0.00%
Note: For all but payment type, percentages in each column are relative to the total number of tickets for
that regime (listed on line 1). For payment type, percentages in each column are relative to number of
tickets with payment made by Day 135.
                             Table 2: Timeline For Each Regime

  Day     Event                                          OLD Regime NEW Regime EXP Regime
   0      Ticket received                                                          
 19-21    NEW letter 1 (sent on Day 19 unless weekend)       ‐‐                (4 versions)
  30      Deadline 1 ($10 late penalty)                                            
 35-41    OLD letter 1 (sent on Tuesday)                               ‐‐           ‐‐
 47-49    EXP letter 1.5 (sent on Day 47 unless weekend)     ‐‐         ‐‐       (to 50%)
 62-68    Deadline 2 (on Monday, $20 late penalty)                                 
 70-76    Letter 2 (sent on Tuesday)                                               
101-107   Deadline 3 (on Friday, $30 late penalty)                                 
105-111   Letter 3 (sent on Tuesday)                                               
Note: The shaded areas indicate the communications corresponding to the regime-shift and
experimental variations. See details in text.
                                Table 3: Summary Statistics for First Responses

                                    OLD Regime        OLD-post Regime          NEW Regime           EXP Regime
Total # of Tickets                    3,355,094           1,240,286              3,020,357             271,089
Payments by Day 135                     61.7%               69.9%                  70.8%                70.3%
Contests by Day 135                     28.4%               19.3%                  18.5%                19.2%
 Regular Contests by Day 135            16.6%               19.3%                  18.5%                19.2%
 Settlements by Day 135                 11.8%                0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%
No Response by Day 135                   9.9%               10.8%                  10.7%                10.5%
                                    % of      % of      % of      % of         % of      % of       % of      % of
                                   Total    Interval   Total    Interval      Total    Interval    Total    Interval
Prior to Deadline 1                53.1%     --------  52.7%     --------     56.2%     --------   55.9%     --------
 Payments                          36.0%     67.7%     41.1%     77.9%        44.6%     79.4%      43.8%     78.4%
 Contests                          17.1%     32.3%     11.7%     22.1%        11.6%     20.6%      12.1%     21.6%

Between Deadlines 1 & 2            22.9%      --------   22.6%     --------   19.6%     --------   20.3%      --------
 Payments                          16.1%      70.2%      18.3%     80.8%      16.0%     81.5%      16.5%      81.5%
 Contests                           6.8%      29.8%       4.4%     19.2%       3.6%     18.5%       3.7%      18.5%

Between Deadlines 2 & 3             8.8%      --------   8.4%      --------   7.7%      --------    7.6%      --------
 Payments                           6.1%      69.6%      6.8%      80.9%      6.4%      83.5%       6.5%      85.6%
 Contests                           2.7%      30.4%      1.6%      19.1%      1.3%      16.5%       1.1%      14.4%

Between Deadline 3 & Day 135 5.3%            --------   5.5%       --------   5.8%     --------    5.8%      --------
  Payments                        3.5%        65.6%     3.8%       69.2%      3.8%     64.7%       3.5%      60.8%
  Contests                        1.8%        34.4%     1.7%       30.8%      2.1%     35.3%       2.3%      39.2%
Note: In the bottom panel, "% of Total" is the percentage in reference to the number of tickets in the respective
regime (column), and "% of Interval" is the percentage in reference to the number of first responses in the
respective regime (column) and time interval (row).
                             Table 4: Responses Analyzed by Period

Definition of Periods (same for both regimes)
Period                  1               2                 3                4                5
Start                 day 0         day 20-22            31            day 36-42        day 63-69
End                 day 19-21          30             day 35-41        day 62-68        day 70-76

Average Daily Hazard Rates
Period                1                  2                3                 4                5
OLD                2.28%              2.69%            2.00%             1.86%            1.32%
NEW                2.17%              3.51%            2.88%             1.33%            0.90%

Cumulative Response Rates
Period                 1                 2                3                4                5
OLD                 37.63%            53.14%           60.17%           76.02%          78.44%
NEW                 36.18%            56.18%           65.27%           75.79%          77.48%
Note: See Appendix 6 for details of how average daily hazard rates and cumulative response rates are
calculated.




                      Table 5: Letters Sent in the Eight Experimental Cells

                                                       EXP letter 1.5 Treatment
                                           not sent (50%)                     sent (50%)
              baseline (20%)                NEW letter 1              NEW letter 1, EXP letter 1.5
 NEW letter 1 info (40%)                   NEW letter 1i              NEW letter 1i , EXP letter 1.5
  Treatment scary (20%)                    NEW letter 1s              NEW letter 1s , EXP letter 1.5
              info scary (20%)             NEW letter 1is            NEW letter 1is , EXP letter 1.5
               Table 6: Estimated Mixture Model with Average Daily Hazard Rates

              OLD             NEW       OLD           NEW     OLD           NEW       OLD           NEW
                    K=1                       K=2                   K=3                     K=4
    ₁              1.000                     0.640                 0.338                   0.261
                       ----                  (0.001)               (0.001)                 (0.001)
    p₁        2.26%           2.15%     3.70%      3.45%     6.58%       6.09%       7.99%       7.46%
             (0.00%)          (0.00%)   (0.01%)   (0.01%)    (0.02%)     (0.02%)     (0.03%)     (0.03%)
    p₂        2.43%           3.18%     4.80%      6.46%     7.47%       10.43%      6.46%       9.74%
             (0.01%)          (0.01%)   (0.01%)   (0.02%)    (0.04%)     (0.06%)     (0.06%)     (0.07%)
    p₃        1.99%           2.84%     4.42%      7.30%     5.00%       9.85%       3.33%       7.68%
             (0.01%)          (0.01%)   (0.02%)   (0.03%)    (0.06%)     (0.11%)     (0.06%)     (0.12%)
    p₄        1.84%           1.31%     5.25%      3.85%     5.69%       3.52%       4.99%       2.98%
             (0.00%)          (0.00%)   (0.02%)   (0.02%)    (0.06%)     (0.06%)     (0.07%)     (0.06%)
    p₅        1.30%           0.87%     4.32%      2.60%     2.45%       1.65%       2.40%       1.64%
             (0.01%)          (0.01%)   (0.05%)   (0.04%)    (0.11%)     (0.10%)     (0.12%)     (0.10%)
    ₂                                        0.360                 0.413                   0.275
                                             (0.001)               (0.001)                 (0.002)
    p₁                                  0.60%      0.54%     1.50%       1.35%       2.19%       1.92%
                                        (0.00%)   (0.00%)    (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
    p₂                                  0.83%      0.96%     3.10%       4.01%       5.73%       7.36%
                                        (0.00%)   (0.01%)    (0.01%)     (0.02%)     (0.03%)     (0.04%)
    p₃                                  0.87%      1.16%     3.29%       4.98%       6.21%       9.72%
                                        (0.01%)   (0.01%)    (0.02%)     (0.02%)     (0.05%)     (0.08%)
    p₄                                  1.06%      0.83%     3.90%       2.93%       6.37%       4.71%
                                        (0.00%)   (0.00%)    (0.02%)     (0.01%)     (0.06%)     (0.06%)
    p₅                                  0.98%      0.67%     3.57%       2.18%       4.62%       2.62%
                                        (0.01%)   (0.01%)    (0.03%)     (0.02%)     (0.13%)     (0.10%)
    ₃                                                              0.249                   0.296
                                                                   (0.001)                 (0.001)
    p₁                                                       0.53%       0.47%       1.17%       1.08%
                                                             (0.00%)     (0.00%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
    p₂                                                       0.52%       0.56%       1.51%       1.91%
                                                             (0.00%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
    p₃                                                       0.51%       0.60%       1.70%       2.55%
                                                             (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.02%)
    p₄                                                       0.63%       0.49%       2.54%       1.94%
                                                             (0.00%)     (0.00%)     (0.02%)     (0.01%)
    p₅                                                       0.65%       0.45%       2.51%       1.59%
                                                             (0.01%)     (0.01%)     (0.02%)     (0.02%)
    ₄                                                                                      0.169
                                                                                           (0.001)
    p₁                                                                               0.38%       0.33%
                                                                                     (0.00%)     (0.00%)
    p₂                                                                               0.40%       0.40%
                                                                                     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
    p₃                                                                               0.35%       0.36%
                                                                                     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
    p₄                                                                               0.36%       0.27%
                                                                                     (0.00%)     (0.00%)
    p₅                                                                               0.39%       0.27%
                                                                                     (0.01%)     (0.01%)
Note: Estimated average daily hazard rates by period (pt's) for each type, as well as estimated
proportions of each type (k's). Standard errors in parenthesis. See Appendix 8.2 for details of the
transformation from estimated per-period hazard rates to estimated average daily hazard rates.
