                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    EVALUATING POST-SECONDARY AID:
       ENROLLMENT, PERSISTENCE, AND PROJECTED COMPLETION EFFECTS

                                        Joshua Angrist
                                         David Autor
                                         Sally Hudson
                                        Amanda Pallais

                                      Working Paper 23015
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23015


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016

We are grateful to the staff of the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation for their expert assistance
in implementing this evaluation. We also thank the Provost’s Office at the University of
Nebraska, the Nebraska State College System, and Nebraska’s community colleges for
supporting this effort and sharing their data. Nick Gebbia, Tyler Hoppenfeld, Sookyo Jeong, and
Olivia Kim provided outstanding research assistance with this paper. Sydnee Caldwell, Enrico
Cantoni, Annice Correia, Eryn Heying, Brendan Malone, and Karen Scott were instrumental in
the project’s early stages. We thank Raj Chetty, Amy Finkelstein, Nathan Hendren, Lisa Kahn,
Lawrence Katz, Danielle Li and seminar participants at the Advances in Field Experiments
Conference, ASSA Meetings, Econometric Society Meeting, NBER Summer Institute, Robert
LaLonde Festschrift Conference, Columbia, Harvard, IIES MIT, Stanford, University of Virginia,
and Yale for their many helpful comments and suggestions. We acknowledge financial support
from the Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, the MIT SEII seed fund, and the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship No. 1122374 (Hudson) and CAREER Grant No.
1454476 (Pallais). The views expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily
reflect those of the institutions or funders involved with this work. This RCT was registered with
the American Economic Association under trial number AEARCTR-0000125. The views
expressed here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the
institutions or funders involved with this work.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Sally Hudson, and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Evaluating Post-Secondary Aid: Enrollment, Persistence, and Projected Completion Effects
Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Sally Hudson, and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 23015
December 2016
JEL No. I21,I22,I23,I24,I28,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reports updated findings from a randomized evaluation of a generous, privately-
funded scholarship program for Nebraska public college students. Scholarship offers boosted
college enrollment and persistence. Four years after award receipt, randomly-selected scholarship
winners were 13 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in college. Enrollment effects were
larger for groups with historically low college attendance, including nonwhite students, first-
generation college-goers, and students with low high school GPAs. Scholarships shifted many
students from two- to four-year colleges, reducing associate’s degree completion in the process.
Despite their substantial gains in four-year college enrollment, award winners from the first study
cohort were slightly less likely to graduate on time than control applicants, suggesting that
scholarships delay degree completion for some students. Projected graduation rates using the last
cohort of pre-experimental scholarship applicants indicate that scholarships are likely to increase
bachelor’s degree completion within five years.

Joshua Angrist                                   Sally Hudson
Department of Economics, E52-436                 Garrett Hall L032
MIT                                              235 McCormick Road
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
Cambridge, MA 02139                              USA
and NBER                                         sally.hudson@virginia.edu
angrist@mit.edu
                                                 Amanda Pallais
David Autor                                      Department of Economics
Department of Economics, E52-438                 Harvard University
MIT                                              Littauer Center
77 Massachusetts Avenue                          Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02139                              and NBER
and NBER                                         apallais@fas.harvard.edu
dautor@mit.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/125/history/4037
1        Introduction

        The Susan Thompson Bu↵ett Foundation (STBF) o↵ers scholarships to Nebraska high school

graduates who attend the state’s public colleges and universities. STBF is one of the largest private

grant providers in the country, funding more than 4,000 students with $36 million in aid every year.

Its awards are generous: the largest STBF awards provide more than $70,000 toward five years

of study at Nebraska public institutions. The Foundation selects award winners on the basis of

financial need, high school GPA, and a review of personal statements and reference letters. STBF

aid recipients, known as Bu↵ett Scholars, can use their awards to cover costs at any University of

Nebraska (NU) or State College campus, along with any of the state’s six community colleges. Buf-

fett Scholars who attend one of the three NU campuses also participate in Learning Communities

(LCs), a Foundation-supported academic services intervention similar to other Learning Communi-

ties programs around the country.1

        To measure the impacts of grant aid and Learning Community services, we implemented a large

randomized evaluation of the STBF program. Between 2012 and 2016, STBF awarded more than

3,700 of its scholarships via random assignment. Our earlier working paper (Angrist et al. 2014)

reports award e↵ects on college enrollment and sophomore persistence for the first two experimental

cohorts of students, who started college in the fall of 2012 and 2013. The results reported here add

two new cohorts (2014 and 2015) and follow the 2012 applicants through their fourth post-award

academic year. The latest data allow us to measure initial college completion e↵ects and investigate

enrollment and persistence with much greater precision.

        The new results reinforce our earlier findings that STBF scholarships alter students’ enrollment

behavior. Awards o↵ered to high school seniors who planned to attend community colleges boosted

initial enrollment by five percentage points and dramatically increased transfers to bachelor’s degree-

granting institutions over time. Four years after award receipt, community college scholarship

winners from the first cohort were 50 percent more likely to be enrolled at post-secondary institutions

than students not o↵ered Bu↵ett aid. Awards o↵ered to students who aspired to attend four-year

colleges had smaller e↵ects on initial enrollment since 96 percent of control students in this group
    1
        See Weiss et al. (2015) for a review of research on LC impacts.




                                                             1
enrolled in college. Still scholarships boosted their initial enrollment by three points, a gain that

increased to 13 points by the end of senior year.

   The large and heterogeneous STBF applicant pool reveals important variation in aid e↵ects

across subgroups. Retention increased most among groups with high expected dropout rates in the

absence of treatment: nonwhite applicants, first-generation college-goers, and students with low

high school GPAs. On the whole, STBF scholarships substantially reduced persistence gaps across

demographic groups.

   To distinguish the e↵ects of STBF’s financial aid from those of LC services, we randomly o↵ered

some applicants an aid-only treatment that excluded access to LCs. This treatment, known to

applicants as the College Opportunity Scholarship (COS), o↵ered financial support to NU applicants

in the same amounts and under the same conditions as full STBF awards but without o↵ering seats

in the Foundation-sponsored LC programs at NU campuses. Aid-only awards generated average

enrollment gains on par with the combination aid and LC treatment. However, the combination

treatment — aid plus Learning Community support — appears more e↵ective than aid alone for

students with lower high school GPAs.

   Although STBF awards generated clear and impressive enrollment gains, the picture for degree

completion remains unclear. Awards shifted community-college-bound students to four-year schools

without increasing associate’s degrees in the process. Roughly half of all control applicants in the

2012 community-college-bound group earned associate’s degrees within four years of high school

graduation. The associate’s degree completion rate was 12 points lower among scholarship recipients

in this group, an imprecisely estimated e↵ect. Scholarship winners who targeted four-year schools

were also less likely to complete bachelor’s degrees within four years than were control students.

Though on-time graduation rates were low — less than 30 percent — for both groups, scholarship

support further delayed completion. A likely explanation for this pattern is that STBF scholarships

fund up to five years of study, thereby decreasing financial pressure for on-time completion. Despite

the initial delays, we project that scholarships will ultimately increase bachelor’s degree completion

using data from an earlier cohort of non-randomized scholarship applicants.

   The next section briefly reviews STBF program parameters and the design of our ongoing

experiment. Section 3 discusses the scholarships’ e↵ects on students’ financial aid packages. Section

4 reports reduced-form estimates of award e↵ects on enrollment for students targeting two- and four-


                                                    2
year colleges, including e↵ects in key demographic subgroups. Section 5 presents provisional results

from the aid-only treatment arm, and Section 6 discusses preliminary e↵ects on degree completion.

Section 7 concludes by summarizing the findings to date and briefly discussing our work in progress.



2        Background

2.1       The STBF Scholarship Program

        The Susan Thompson Bu↵ett Foundation is the largest private grant provider in Nebraska and

among the largest in the country, supporting more than 4,000 students with $36 million each year.

STBF scholarships are available to Nebraska-resident high school seniors and graduates of in-state

high schools who have not yet been to college. The program is widely known in Nebraska and

well-publicized to potential applicants. More than half of all Pell-eligible Nebraska seniors who file

for federal aid also apply for Bu↵ett grants.2

        STBF award criteria combine the academic standards of many state aid programs with the

means testing of federal student aid. Eligible applicants must attain a 2.5 high school GPA and

document financial need using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). STBF gauges

financial need using FAFSA’s Expected Family Contribution (EFC) metric, which depends chiefly

on family size and income.3 The maximum Bu↵ett-eligible EFC— $15,000 in 2012 and $10,000

thereafter4 — exceeds the federal Pell Grant cuto↵, which ranged from $5,000 to $5,300 between

2012 and 2015. Bu↵ett awards are therefore available to many students who do not qualify for

federal grants or other state-funded programs tied to Pell receipt.

        Within the pool of eligible applicants, STBF’s merit assessment is more fine-grained than most

state programs, incorporating transcripts, essays, and reference letters. Students submit their

application materials online between November 1 and February 1, with FAFSA records due by

March 15. Reviewers then evaluate eligible applicants using a rubric that emphasizes academic

achievement, financial need, and leadership skills. STBF notifies award winners in mid-April, and

more than 94 percent of scholarship winners accept their awards.
    2
      Authors’ calculations from data obtained by request from the Federal Student Aid office.
    3
      Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2007) provide further detail on the FAFSA and EFC formula.
    4
      Less than eight percent of the 2012 randomized sample had EFCs greater than $10,000, so the 2013 change in
eligibility requirements had little impact on the EFC distribution across cohorts.




                                                       3
      Bu↵ett awards can be used to cover expenses at any public undergraduate institution in Ne-

braska, including two- and four-year colleges. Award amounts vary by campus but are calibrated

to match the cost of tuition and fees for a full-time student plus a $500 allotment for books. In

2015, for example, awards provided up to $8,700 per academic year for full-time students at the

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, where full-time resident tuition and fees were $8,382 (University

of Nebraska-Lincoln 2015). STBF provides an additional semester’s worth of funding for summer

enrollment so that the maximum 2015 award was $13,050 at the University of Nebraska and $5,700

at community colleges. Though tuition levels determine the value of Bu↵ett grants, the funds can

be used to cover any of the federally-defined components of cost-of-attendance (COA), including

room, board, books, and supplies. This flexibility boosts STBF’s scholarship value relative to aid

programs that cover only tuition and fees. Because most Bu↵ett Scholars also qualify for state and

federal tuition grants, STBF aid often covers the remaining balance of COA, eliminating the need

for loans and out-of-pocket contributions to college costs. Bu↵ett awards are renewable for up to

five years provided students meet minimal academic requirements, though no more than three years

of funding can be paid toward community college expenses. Students enrolled for fewer than nine

credits per semester or with cumulative GPAs below 2.0 risk losing their scholarships.

      Bu↵ett Scholars who attend one of NU’s three campuses—Lincoln (UNL), Omaha (UNO), or

Kearney (UNK)—are required to participate in STBF-funded Learning Community (LC) programs

during their first and second years.5 These programs are designed to promote academic success

and social engagement. While the LC programs di↵er somewhat by campus, they all include

special classes for Bu↵ett Scholars, a collection of academic and social activities, peer mentoring,

and academic advising services from LC faculty and sta↵. Most participants in the LC programs

at UNK and UNL live in dedicated dorm space. Bu↵ett Scholars who fail to participate in LC

activities may also lose their scholarships.


2.2     Research Design and Sample Construction

      From 2012 to 2015, STBF awarded the majority of its scholarships via stratified random as-

signment. The Foundation divided students into strata by their “target college,” the institution
  5
    The STBF-sponsored Thompson Learning Community program is named in honor of William H. Thompson, the
father of Susan T. Bu↵ett, who served as Professor of Psychology and Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at
Omaha University, now known as the University of Nebraska Omaha (UNO).


                                                       4
where applicants indicated they would enroll if o↵ered awards. Award winners were not required

to follow their stated plans, but 87 percent of aid recipients did indeed attend their target schools.

Within each target college stratum, STBF further divided students into three groups by application

score. Students in the highest-scoring group received guaranteed awards, the middle group was

subject to random assignment, and the lowest-scoring students were disqualified. Score thresholds

and award rates for the randomized group were determined by STBF preferences for award counts

at each campus.6 Appendix Table A1 reports award counts for each target college and cohort. The

Foundation o↵ered roughly 300 guaranteed awards each year, with a relatively stable distribution

of awards across campuses from year to year. Due to increased Foundation outreach, the number of

eligible applicants grew over time and with it the randomized sample, from 999 in the first experi-

mental cohort to 1,878 by the fourth study year.7 In total, 6,183 applicants were subject to random

assignment between 2012 and 2015.8

       To distinguish the e↵ects of STBF’s financial aid from those of LC services, we randomly o↵ered

some applicants the aid-only College Opportunity Scholarship (COS). These aid-only awards match

traditional STBF scholarships in financial support but omit access to Bu↵ett LCs. COS awards were

made only to applicants in the NU strata of the randomized sample. Because the COS treatment

arm did not commence until the second year of our study and is smaller than the other experimental

groups, our COS impact estimates are less precise than results for full STBF awards. We exclude

COS recipients from our analysis except in Section 5 where we explicitly analyze the COS treatment.

       The earlier experimental cohorts naturally provide a longer follow-up horizon than more recent

cohorts. We report initial enrollment e↵ects for the 2012-2015 cohorts; year two results for the

2012-2014 cohorts; year three impacts for the 2012 and 2013 cohorts; and year four results for the

2012 cohort. E↵ects di↵er little from one cohort to another and cohort pooling increases precision.

Estimated pooled impacts come from regressions that control for a full set of strata dummies to

reflect the di↵erential award rates across target colleges and cohorts. Appendix Table A2 reports

sample sizes for each follow-up period.
   6
     The primary considerations are historic precedent and physical capacity constraints at the NU Learning Commu-
nities.
   7
     Starting in 2013, STBF advertised the scholarship by sending e-mail and print letters to Nebraska ACT test-
takers who reported family incomes less than $100,000. In addition, the Foundation worked with high school guidance
counselors to identify eligible students who were not submitting applications.
   8
     Here and throughout our analysis, we exclude fewer than 25 students who were less than 17 years old when they
applied for STBF aid.


                                                        5
2.3   Data and Descriptive Statistics

   Data for this project come primarily from the STBF scholarship application, the administrative

records of Nebraska’s public colleges, and the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). The STBF

scholarship application provides a rich set of baseline characteristics, including high school tran-

scripts, ACT scores, and detailed demographic and financial information from federal Student Aid

Reports. Prior to 2014, the application did not ask students to report race, so we obtained race

data from state driver’s license records. We supplement the driver’s license data with self-reported

race in later cohorts.

   More than 90 percent of applicants who enrolled in college attended Nebraska public institutions.

These colleges and universities provided information on their students’ enrollment, financial aid

packages, and academic outcomes. To capture enrollment at private and out-of-state colleges,

we supplement school-provided records with data from the NSC, which captures 92 percent of

enrollment nationwide (Dynarski, Hemelt and Hyman 2015). The data appendix provides additional

information about data sources and processing.

   STBF applicants are substantially poorer than the general population of Nebraska high school

seniors. This can be seen in the first two columns of Table 1, which compare descriptive statistics

for eligible scholarship applicants and 12th grade students statewide. Bu↵ett applicants are also

disproportionately female and nonwhite. Applicants’ ACT scores mirror the average among ACT

test-takers in Nebraska, though test-taking rates among STBF’s college-bound applicants exceed

the state average.

   Consistent with STBF’s scoring criteria, the guaranteed award winners have higher grades and

ACT scores and lower family incomes than the rest of the applicant pool, results that can be seen

in column 3 of Table 1. Nearly half are nonwhite, and half are first-generation college students. At

the other end of the rankings, students disqualified before random assignment had lower academic

achievement but otherwise look similar to the eligible sample.

   Randomized students had average annual family incomes near $47,000 and Expected Family

Contributions just under $3,000. They are slightly over two-thirds white, 62 percent female, and

averaged B+ grades in high school. Just over one in three had a parent with a bachelor’s degree

at the time of application. Random assignment successfully balanced the characteristics of treated


                                                 6
and control applicants in the experimental sample, as Table 1 confirms. Column 6 reports strata-

adjusted di↵erences in treated and control means with standard errors in parentheses.

        Our analysis reports results separately for students targeting two- and four-year colleges. These

target college strata are an important feature of the research design and a strong predictor of

enrollment outcomes. As shown in Appendix Table A3, students who target community colleges

have lower grades and test scores and are less likely to have college-educated parents than students

targeting four-year colleges.



3        How Awards A↵ected Aid

        We begin by reviewing award e↵ects on students’ financial aid packages. This analysis is limited

to students who attended Nebraska public colleges because our administrative aid data come from

those institutions. Since STBF awards a↵ect where students enroll and, by extension, their inclusion

in this sample, the analysis here is potentially subject to selection bias. In practice, however, the

e↵ect of awards on enrollment at in-state public colleges is small while the e↵ects on financial aid

packages are large.9 Though the picture painted here is, in principle, more descriptive than causal,

it still provides a useful gauge of the scholarships’ impact on financial aid packages.

        As a benchmark, the first column of Table 2 describes the first-year financial aid packages of

control group students who attended Nebraska public colleges. They incurred almost $17,000 in

college costs and received about $12,350 in total aid, on average. Even without STBF support,

these low-income students collected nearly $7,800 in grant aid, primarily from need-based public

programs. They also accepted roughly $3,700 in federal loans and $830 in work study wages. These

calculations omit private loans, which are underreported in our data. Subsidized public loans are

the primary source of borrowed funds for this low-income population.

        We estimate the e↵ects of scholarship o↵ers on aid packages using regression models of the form:
                                                  X
                                     Ai = Si +           sc disc   + ⇧0 X i + " i ,                            (1)
                                                   s,c

    9
    Less than eight percent of control students enrolled at out-of-state or private institutions. Scholarship o↵ers
diverted 3.6 percentage points to Nebraska public colleges. These estimates appear in Table 3, which we discuss in
greater detail in Section 4.




                                                         7
where Ai is the dollar amount of aid that student i received, and Si is an indicator for whether

student i was (randomly) o↵ered an STBF scholarship. Since a few students in each cohort turn

down Bu↵ett grants for other merit aid, these estimates capture intent-to-treat contrasts between

treated and control subjects. The dummies disc indicate whether applicant i from cohort c listed

school s as her target college. These strata e↵ects adjust for di↵erential award rates by target college

and application year. The covariate vector Xi includes GPA, EFC, gender, race, and parental

education. To the extent that selection into Nebraska public colleges varies with these traits,

including Xi mitigates the resulting selection bias. In practice, however, controlling for covariates

has little e↵ect on the estimates.

       STBF award winners received $7,156 in Bu↵ett grants, on average, during their first post-award

year, as shown in column 2 of Table 2, which reports estimates controlling only for strata dummies,

disc . On net, total grants increased by slightly less ($6,209). The less than one-for-one pass-through

reflects a $951 decline in institutional awards and private grants with little change in state or federal

grants.10

       STBF aid substantially reduced students’ reliance on federal loans and work study wages. Av-

erage federal loans fell by $2,292, and the share of students accruing any federal debt dropped from

57 to 30 percent. Less than one in five award winners received Federal Work Study, compared with

one in three control students. In total, Bu↵ett Scholarship o↵ers increased first-year aid packages

by $3,497. Column 3 confirms that adding baseline covariates has little impact on these estimates,

bolstering the case that these results capture causal e↵ects despite our data limitations.

       To estimate the dollar-for-dollar impact of STBF aid on other funding sources, we replace Si

in equation (1) with the dollar amount of Bu↵ett aid received. The estimates in column 5 of

Table 2 show that each dollar of STBF grant aid increased students’ total grants by $0.85, while

reducing loans by $0.29 and work study by $0.05, for a net gain of $0.51 per dollar awarded. These

results capture two countervailing forces. At any given college, scholarship money crowds out aid

from other sources, reducing award e↵ects on total aid disbursed. But awards also change where

students enroll. In particular, as we explore in detail in Section 4, STBF awards caused many

applicants to attend four-year schools instead of less costly community colleges. The first row of
  10
    Schools must apply federal grants toward aid packages before all other sources, so federal grants do not typically
respond to variation in private aid received.




                                                          8
Table 2 documents this shift: every dollar of Bu↵ett aid increased average costs of attendance by

$0.29. Though four-year colleges cost more, they also provide more grant aid. Control students

attending four-year colleges received $9,114 in grants, on average, more than double the average

grant aid among control students at two-year schools. Scholarship money therefore “crowds in” aid

by shifting students to more expensive schools that o↵er more financial aid.

    To disentangle the crowd-out and crowd-in e↵ects, columns 4 and 6 of Table 2 (labeled “campus

adjusted”) report estimates from a version of equation (1) that includes campus controls, a set of

variables which count the number of full-time semesters attended at each campus in the first post-

award year. These campus-adjusted regressions measure the extent to which Bu↵ett aid crowds out

other funding at a given school. Holding enrollment behavior constant, Bu↵ett aid has no e↵ect

on year one costs incurred, and yet each Bu↵ett dollar reduces other grant aid by $0.29, an e↵ect

that’s nearly twice as large as the crowd out estimated without campus controls.11 These results

should be interpreted cautiously, since campus-adjusted regressions combine causal e↵ects on aid

packages for students whose enrollment is invariant to award o↵ers with compositional e↵ects that

result from treatment-induced changes in college attended. Nevertheless, the observable covariates

have little e↵ect on these estimates. The campus-controlled estimates therefore provide reasonable

evidence that Bu↵ett awards dramatically increase students’ financial resources.



4     Enrollment E↵ects

    Because students targeting two- and four-year colleges have such distinct paths through college,

we analyze the scholarships’ e↵ects on these groups separately, in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. After

presenting the aggregate award impacts by target college, we analyze the di↵erential e↵ects of

awards across demographic subgroups in Section 4.3.


4.1    Enrollment E↵ects in the Two-Year College Strata

    Almost all STBF applicants attend college in the first year after high school whether or not they

win Bu↵ett awards. This fact is apparent in Figure 1, which plots enrollment rates by treatment
  11
     The crowd-out rate for total grants was similar in year two ($0.25) and year three ($0.24), which indicates that
STBF scholarships maintain their value as students progress in school. Other aid programs often shift students from
grant aid to loans after the freshman year (Sharpe 2016).



                                                         9
status and target college. Even without Bu↵ett aid, 90 percent of control applicants who targeted

community colleges enrolled at some institution in the fall of year one,12 as the grey line in Panel

A indicates. STBF awards increased initial enrollment in this group by a statistically significant

five percentage points. This estimate and others in Figure 1 come from regressions of binary

enrollment indicators on the award o↵er and strata dummies described in equation (1), though

unlike the financial aid analysis, these regressions include all randomized applicants in the two-year

college strata, not just those who enrolled at Nebraska public colleges. Whiskers indicate 95 percent

confidence intervals for the estimated treatment e↵ects.

       Although students in the two-year strata indicated that they aspired to attend community

colleges, some opted to enroll at four-year schools after receiving scholarship support. Table 3 doc-

uments this shift across institutions. Nearly all of the five point increase in total enrollment, shown

in the first row of column 4, comes from increased enrollment at four-year colleges. Admissions

records from the University of Nebraska reveal that many of the students who altered their stated

college plans didn’t apply to four-year schools until after receiving Bu↵ett aid. Award o↵ers boosted

applications to UNO, for example, from eight to 13 percent in the two-year strata, as Appendix

Table A4 reports. Scholarship winners were no more likely to be admitted conditional on applying,

however; UNO admitted 77 percent of both treated and control applicants from the two-year college

strata.13 The mechanism that motivates some Bu↵ett Scholars to alter their college plans is yet un-

known. Award winners may interpret scholarship o↵ers as positive signals of their college aptitude

and revise their enrollment goals. Another explanation is financial: STBF’s award scheme implicitly

subsidizes shifting from two- to four-year schools since awards cover tuition at any Nebraska public

college, and four-year schools are more expensive — both in total and on a per-credit basis.

       Like many state aid programs, Bu↵ett awards diverted some enrollment from out-of-state and

private schools into Nebraska public colleges, though there was little scope for shifting on this

margin in the two-year strata. Just four percent of control students enrolled outside the Nebraska
  12
      In keeping with the the Federal Student Aid year, we define post-award years to run from July 1 through June
30. We divide each post-award year into fall and spring periods, where fall runs from July through December, and
spring runs from January through June.
   13
      It’s unlikely that scholarship applicants who intend to enroll at UNO misreport their college plans to increase
their chances of winning Bu↵ett awards. The average award rate was 47 percent for the two-year strata and 54 percent
for UNO, as the sample counts in Appendix Table A1 indicate. We are still working to collect admissions records
from UNL, the most selective NU campus. However, the vast majority of two-year strata students who matriculate at
four-year schools attend UNO, owing, perhaps, to its rolling admission deadlines and proximity to Nebraska’s largest
community college.


                                                         10
public college system, and awards reduced that rate to two percent, as shown in Panel B of Table

3.

     Both treatment and control group enrollment declined modestly during the second follow-up

year, but thereafter these groups’ enrollment paths diverged. Many control students left school

during year three, and by year four fall, just 28 percent were still enrolled in college. Though

dropout also accelerated in the treated pool, Bu↵ett awardees were nearly twice as likely to extend

their studies beyond three years: more than half enrolled in the fall of year four. Panel A of Figure

1 plots these trends, and Table 4 reports the corresponding estimates.14

     Award winners’ extended enrollment came at the expense of associate’s degree completion. This

result appears in the last two columns of Table 4, which disaggregates year-four enrollment by degree

status. The top row reports the total enrollment rate: 28 percent of control applicants enrolled in

the fall of year four, and 72 percent did not. Roughly half of those not enrolled earned associate’s

degrees before leaving school. Treated students, in contrast, were 21 points less likely to complete

terminal associate’s degrees. Instead, many treated applicants transferred to four-year schools

without first earning two-year credentials: award o↵ers increased the share of students attending

four-year institutions without any degree from 8.5 to 20 points. STBF’s continuation requirements

may encourage these transfers because awards only cover three years of study at community colleges.

Students who wish to maintain their scholarships must therefore transfer to four-year colleges by the

fall of year four. The point estimate indicates that scholarships may have decreased the number of

students who dropped out before completing any degree (by 5.4 percentage points), but this figure

is imprecisely estimated.


4.2    Enrollment E↵ects in the Four-Year Strata

     STBF applicants who targeted four-year schools were even more likely to enroll in college than

their two-year strata counterparts, even without Foundation support. More than 96 percent of

control applicants attended college in the fall of year one, and awards boosted this rate by a

statistically significant three percentage points. Panel B of Figure 1 plots these enrollment rates.
  14
     Because the results for initial enrollment pool data from all four cohorts, they are more precisely estimated than
the impacts on longer-run enrollment. Appendix Table A5 shows that the underlying cohort-specific enrollment rates
are not significantly di↵erent from the pooled estimates in Figure 1.




                                                          11
    Students in the four-year strata also applied to a wider range of institutions than their com-

munity college-bound peers, so awards had more scope to influence these students’ college choice.

Scholarship o↵ers decreased the fraction of students attending out-of-state or private schools from

eight to four percent, as columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 report. Importantly, however, and in contrast

with other state merit aid programs (see Cohodes and Goodman 2014), the shift to Nebraska public

schools was concomitant with a shift toward more-selective institutions. Specifically, STBF awards

increased the proportion of students attending selective colleges (with admission rates below 75

percent) by four points. The fraction of students attending moderately-selective four-year schools

(with admissions rates between 75 and 90 percent) increased by a similar amount. At the same

time, awards reduced the share attending community colleges from nine to three percent.15

    Though scholarships had only modest e↵ects on initial enrollment in the four-year strata, awards

substantially reduced dropout in the critical transition between freshman and sophomore years.

Nearly half of all dropout from bachelor’s degree programs occurs at this juncture (Kena et al.

2015).16 In STBF’s relatively high-achieving applicant pool, scholarship o↵ers boosted sophomore

enrollment by seven points, ensuring that 96 percent of treated students enrolled in year two. The

impact on four-year college going was even larger: STBF awards increased four-year enrollment

by 13 points in year two fall. These results appear in column 4 of Table 5, which documents

institutional shifting in the four-year strata in a format similar to Table 4.

    Importantly, while many interventions produce short-lived gains, STBF award impacts appear

to be cumulative. By the fall of year four, awards increased total enrollment by 14 points, from

74 to 88 percent. Nearly all students were attending bachelor’s degree-granting institutions by the

fourth follow-up year. Less than 10 percent of both treated and control students were still enrolled

at two-year institutions.
  15
     Most STBF applicants who enrolled outside the Nebraska public college system attended private schools in the
Midwest. The top five schools attended outside the Nebraska public college system were Nebraska Wesleyan University,
Creighton University, Hastings College, Concordia University, and Midland University, all religiously-affiliated private
institutions in Nebraska.
  16
     Just 80 percent of all first-time, full-time undergraduates at bachelor’s degree-granting institutions return for a
second year, while 60 percent complete bachelor’s degrees within six years. Freshman retention rates at the University
of Nebraska hover near the national average, ranging from 77 percent at UNO to 84 percent at UNL in 2014 (U.S.
Department of Education 2014).




                                                          12
4.3      Subgroup Impacts: Race, Family Background, and College-Preparedness

       Within the four-year strata, STBF awards generated especially large enrollment gains for demo-

graphic groups with high expected dropout rates in the absence of treatment.17 Figure 2 documents

this variation in program impacts by race and parental education, both strong predictors of enroll-

ment and retention. Nonwhites in the control group were less likely to attend college than were

their white peers. More than 98 percent of white applicants enrolled without Foundation support

compared with 94 percent of nonwhite students. Award o↵ers equalized their initial enrollment so

that more than 99 percent of award winners from both groups attended college in year one. Four

years out, awards narrowed the race gap in enrollment from twelve points to just seven. Panels C

and D document a similar pattern by parental education.

       Figure 3 reveals even more striking patterns in program impacts by academic preparation.

The dots in Panels A and B show estimated impacts on year-two fall enrollment for deciles of

high school GPA, and the solid lines plot fitted values from regressions that estimate the linear

interaction between award status and GPA. Dashed lines plot 95 percent confidence intervals for

the linear fitted values. Panel A shows that award o↵ers boosted year-two enrollment by 23 points

in the bottom decile, from 74 to 97 percent. These students, with average high school GPAs of 2.7,

would be ineligible for many state merit aid programs, which often require GPAs of 3.0 (Fitzpatrick

and Jones 2016). At the same time, scholarships had almost no measurable impact on persistence

for the top-performing students who receive most merit aid. Among students with high school

GPAs above 3.5—fully half the randomized sample—awards increased year-two fall enrollment by

just three points.18 The GPA gradient for award impacts on four-year college enrollment was even

more pronounced, as Panel B illustrates. Scholarships increased the share of bottom-decile students

attending four-year schools in sophomore year by a whopping 40 points, with no e↵ect at the top

end of the grade distribution. Appendix Figure A1 documents similar patterns using ACT scores to

measure college readiness in lieu of high school GPA. These results are consistent with Dynarski’s
  17
      We restrict our subgroup analyses to students who targeted four-year colleges since the community college sample
is currently too small to support precise comparisons across subgroups. In time, additional cohorts will facilitate
similar investigations in the two-year strata.
   18
      Appendix Table A6 compares OLS and logit estimates of e↵ects in subgroups. Logit marginal e↵ects are virtually
indistinguishable from the corresponding OLS estimates.




                                                         13
(2004) argument that state aid programs with more stringent academic standards may exclude

many of the students who respond most to financial aid.

   Though award impacts vary by race, parental education, and academic achievement, we see less

evidence of di↵erential impacts by financial need. Panels C and D of Figure 3 plot award e↵ects by

Expected Family Contribution (EFC), the metric that determines eligibility for STBF grants and

federal aid programs. There is no clear gradient in award impacts by financial need.19 Appendix

Figure A1 documents similar patterns using family income to gauge financial need.

   We summarize the variation in award impacts by showing how treatment e↵ects vary with a

single index of expected college enrollment. Such “endogenous stratification” estimates are best

computed using leave-out fitted values, as Abadie, Chingos and West (2013) detail. (Otherwise,

enrollment outcomes are mechanically correlated with predicted enrollment, which may bias esti-

mates of causal e↵ects.) In this case, we use the control group data to estimate the relationship

between outcome Yj and covariates Xj in leave-out samples that omit each observation i:

                                        Yj = ⇡(0   i) Xj   + "j ; j 6= i.                                 (2)

The vector Xj contains gender, race, parental education, EFC, and high school GPA — all strong

predictors of enrollment and persistence. The resulting leave-out fitted values are given by

                                                     ˆ(0
                                               Ŷi = ⇡      i) Xi .                                       (3)

   Estimates of STBF award e↵ects conditional on expected enrollment, Ŷi , appear in Figure 4.

As in the previous graphs, each dot represents a decile of expected enrollment, and the solid lines

plot the corresponding linear fitted values. Since nearly all control applicants in the four-year strata

enroll in year one, the deciles of expected enrollment range from just .89 to 1. Even so, award o↵ers

increased initial enrollment in the bottom decile by more than 10 points, ensuring that nearly all

scholarship recipients enrolled in college. By year two, baseline covariates predict that roughly one

in four students in the bottom decile would not be enrolled in college absent scholarship support.

Scholarships boosted their enrollment rate by more than 20 points. Award impacts in years three

and four exhibit similar patterns, with enrollment impacts of over 40 percentage points for the

lowest decile by year four.
  19
     Among applicants with EFCs low enough to qualify for Bu↵ett aid, those with EFCs above $6,000 qualify for
fewer forms of other need-based aid, including federal Pell grants and institutional grants.


                                                      14
    Together, these subgroup analyses highlight the challenging trade-o↵ between rewarding stu-

dents’ past achievement and increasing program impacts. Students who appear most meritorious

based on grades and test scores are also those most likely to persist in college absent scholarship

support. Conversely, applicants who appear more likely to struggle in college respond more dra-

matically to merit aid when they are fortunate enough to receive it.



5    Distinguishing Financial Aid and Learning Community E↵ects

    Roughly 80 percent of scholarship winners in the four-year strata enroll at University of Ne-

braska campuses, where Bu↵ett Scholars participate in STBF Learning Communities (LCs) during

freshman and sophomore years. Award impacts in the four-year strata therefore combine the ef-

fects of financial support with the e↵ects of LC services.20 An aid-only treatment arm, known to

applicants as the College Opportunity Scholarship (COS), allows us to estimate the marginal e↵ect

of LC participation. COS awards o↵er the same grant support as STBF scholarships but exclude

access to LC services.21 COS awards were introduced in the second experimental cohort and were

only o↵ered in the NU strata; guaranteed award winners and those in the state and community

college strata received full STBF scholarships throughout the study. The COS sample is therefore

much smaller than the sample for the main treatment arm.

    Figure 5 o↵ers a preliminary look at enrollment e↵ects for the aid-only scholarships. Averaging

data across all NU campuses, both STBF and COS awards generated positive enrollment gains in

each post-award year (Panel A). Traditional STBF award impacts were marginally higher in all

years, but the gaps were not statistically significant. Panels B-D reveal emerging heterogeneity

across NU campuses. Though imprecise, these estimates suggest that LC services at UNO roughly

double the impact of aid alone. COS grants boosted sophomore enrollment by six percentage points,

less than the 12 point gain from full awards. At UNL and UNK, however, there is no evidence that

LC services increase enrollment rates.

    As in all analyses of site-specific treatment e↵ects, it can be difficult to discern whether these

patterns reflect variation in LC service quality across sites or in the populations targeting each
  20
     Award winners in the community college and four-year state college strata must also participate in LCs if they
enroll at NU as freshmen, though just seven percent exercise that option.
  21
     The LCs operated at full capacity throughout the study. COS awards increased the total number of scholarship
recipients without reducing LC enrollment.


                                                        15
campus. As Appendix Table A3 details, UNO serves a disproportionate fraction of students with

the biggest documented gains from full awards: racial minorities, first-generation college-goers, and

students with lower grades and test scores. UNL and UNK, in contrast, attract students with higher

expected retention in the absence of treatment. The variation in Figure 5 may therefore capture

heterogeneity across students rather than across campuses. Indeed, Figure 6 shows that splitting the

sample by high school GPA instead of campus shows no di↵erential impacts for students with GPAs

at or above the sample median (3.5), but markedly di↵erent, albeit noisy, impacts on students with

below median GPAs. These findings suggest that LC services may boost persistence for students

with lower GPAs despite their small aggregate e↵ects. With additional follow-up data, these results

will become more precise and conclusive.



6    Preliminary and Projected Completion E↵ects

    A complete picture of award impacts on bachelor’s degree completion is still one or two years

away. In keeping with nationwide trends, less than one in three students at Nebraska’s four-year

public colleges graduates within four years. After six years, however, graduation rates more than

double, ranging from 37 to 67 percent across Nebraska public institutions. (U.S. Department of

Education 2015).

    Like their peers, many Bu↵ett applicants in the oldest randomized cohort were still enrolled

but did not earn bachelor’s degrees by the end of year four. Table 6 summarizes their year-four

graduation rates. In the community college strata, slightly more than half (52 percent) of control

group students earned associate’s degrees by the end of year four. Scholarships decreased this rate

by an insignificant but economically meaningful 12 percentage points. This reduction in associate’s

degrees may ultimately be o↵set by an increase in bachelor’s degrees. Although few students in

the two-year strata have earned bachelor’s degrees to date (5.6 percent in the control group), our

estimates, while imprecise, suggest that scholarships have roughly doubled this number to 11.0

percentage points. Scholarships also increased the share of students enrolled in four-year colleges

who have not yet earned bachelor’s degrees from 15 to 23 percentage points. The total e↵ect

of scholarships on degree completion for this group will depend on how many of these students

eventually complete BAs.


                                                 16
    Scholarships also decreased degree completion in the four-year strata by the end of year four.

While only five percent of control students earned associate’s degrees by the end of year four, 28

percent completed bachelor’s degrees, as shown in Table 6. Scholarships reduced these completion

rates by 2.4 and 5.9 points, respectively. Bu↵ett Scholars’ lower on-time graduation rates may

reflect the scholarship’s terms. STBF provides up to five years of funding, so award winners likely

face less financial pressure to graduate in four years than other students do. In keeping with this

reasoning, scholarship winners were much more likely to be enrolled in four-year colleges without

earning degrees by the end of year four (57 vs. 39 percentage points).

    Results from the 2012 cohort to date show that scholarships have increased the share of students

who are on track to earn bachelor’s degrees while simultaneously depressing the number of degrees

completed in four years. It remains to be seen which of these countervailing forces will dominate

in the long run. To provide a statistical preview of future graduation results, we use data from

the STBF’s 2011 application cohort, the last cohort of students who applied before the experiment

began.22 Though these students were not subject to random assignment, outcomes for successful

and unsuccessful scholarship applicants from this cohort may, in conjunction with our experimental

estimates, be informative about the trajectory of experimental cohorts.

    We use Kline’s (2011) selection-correction procedure to adjust for non-random assignment of

award o↵ers in the non-experimental cohort. The Kline method relies on a linear model for potential

outcomes given baseline covariates,

                                                Yid = X0i       d
                                                                    + "di

for d 2 {0, 1}. Under a mean independence assumption,
                                               h             i
                                              E "di | Xi , Di = 0,

an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression among the controls identifies                     0:


                                       ⇥                ⇤       1
                                0
                                    = E Xi Xi0 | Di = 0             ⇥ E [Xi Yi | Di = 0] ,

which captures the relationship between covariates and potential outcomes absent scholarship sup-

port. If the same mapping from covariates to untreated outcomes holds among award winners, then
  22
     As with the subgroup analysis, we restrict the projection estimates to the four-year strata due to power limitations
in the community college strata.


                                                           17
the average e↵ect of treatment on the treated (TOT) is

                          ⇥                       ⇤      ⇥             ⇤
                         E Yi1     Yi0 | Di = 1       = E Yi1 | Di = 1         E [Xi | Di = 1]0    0
                                                                                                       .

Kline shows that this hybrid procedure outperforms regression in replicating the experimental e↵ects

of federal job training programs in LaLonde’s (1986) classic analysis.

         We find support for the hypothesis that scholarships will ultimately boost bachelor’s degree

completion among students who were randomly assigned scholarships. The top panel of Figure

7 compares estimated e↵ects on bachelor’s degree completion for the 2012 experimental sample

with estimates for the non-randomized 2011 cohort. As in Kline’s replication exercise, selection-

corrected estimates from the non-experimental data faithfully replicate the experimental findings.

The experimental and non-experimental estimates in Panel A are similar through the end of year

four, where both samples show a five to seven point deficit in graduation rates for award winners.

By the end of year five, however, 2011 award winners were eight percentage points more likely to

complete bachelor’s degrees than control applicants. The plotted estimates control for high school

GPA, EFC, gender, race, and parental education, but more parsimonious models produce similar

results.23

         To adjust for potential di↵erences in sample composition across cohorts, we reweight the 2011

Kline estimates by the distribution of covariates in the randomized sample and plot the resulting

projections in Panel B. Reweighting leaves the bottom line unchanged. These graphs suggest that

Bu↵ett Scholars eventually convert enrollment gains into bachelor’s degrees even though awards

increase time to completion for some. Experimental estimates of award impacts on five-year grad-

uation rates will be available in the summer of 2017.



7         Summary and Conclusions

         STBF scholarships generated large gains in college enrollment four years after award receipt.

Modest e↵ects on initial enrollment have grown as the scholarship increased college persistence.

Though apparent in our earlier working paper, these patterns have become clearer as the follow-

up window has lengthened and more cohorts have boosted precision. Estimated enrollment gains
    23
         Appendix Table A7 explores the robustness of these results to alternative control functions.




                                                              18
remain largest for nonwhite applicants, first-generation college-goers, and students with the lowest

grades and test scores in the eligible applicant pool. These findings highlight the paradox of merit

aid: awards based on past achievement are likely to generate smaller gains than awards made to

applicants who appear less college-ready.

   Awards have also shifted students from two- to four-year schools, reducing associate’s degree

completion in the process. The long-run e↵ects of reductions in two-year credentials on terminal

degree completion will likely depend on whether scholarship recipients convert their extended en-

rollment at four-year institutions into bachelor’s degrees. In the short run, Bu↵ett scholarships

appear to have reduced on-time graduation rates at four-year colleges, likely because these scholar-

ships provide up to five years of funding. Analysis of outcome data from a pre-experimental cohort

suggests that this e↵ect is likely to be transitory: we project that scholarships will raise degree

completion after five years.

   Our results are preliminary and limited to the outcomes available within the first four years of

award receipt. As the current cohorts age and new cohorts enter the study, we expect to examine

e↵ects on college completion and sharpen our estimates of di↵erential e↵ects across subgroups.

Evidence on the relative contribution of financial support and Learning Community services should

also grow more conclusive. Ultimately, we expect to measure how award e↵ects on retention and

degree completion influence long-run labor market outcomes.




                                                19
References

Abadie, Alberto, Matthew M. Chingos, and Martin R. West. 2013. “Endogenous Strat-

  ification in Randomized Experiments.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

  19742, December.

ACT.      2012.       “The   Condition     of     College   &     Career     Readiness     2012.”

  http://www.act.org/content/dam/act/unsecured/documents/CCCR12-

  NationalReadinessRpt.pdf (accessed December 14, 2016).

Angrist, Joshua D., David H. Autor, Sally Hudson, and Amanda Pallais. 2014. “Leveling

  Up: Early Results from a Randomized Evaluation of Post-Secondary Aid.” National Bureau of

  Economic Research Working Paper 20800, December.

Cohodes, Sarah R., and Joshua S. Goodman. 2014. “Merit Aid, College Quality, and College

  Completion: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy.” American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4): 251–285.

Dynarski, Susan M. 2004. “The New Merit Aid.” In College Choices: The Economics of Where to

  Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It. Vol. I, eds. Caroline M Hoxby, 67–93. Chicago: University

  of Chicago Press.

Dynarski, Susan M., and Judith Scott-Clayton. 2007. “College Grants on a Postcard: A

  Proposal for Simple and Predictable Federal Student Aid.” The Hamilton Project Discussion

  Paper 2007-01, March.

Dynarski, Susan M., Steven W. Hemelt, and Joshua M. Hyman. 2015. “The Missing Man-

  ual: Using National Student Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary Outcomes.” Educational

  Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37: 53S–79S.

Fitzpatrick, Maria D., and Damon Jones. 2016. “Higher Education, Merit-Based Scholarships

  and Post-Baccalaureate Migration.” Economics of Education Review, 54(October): 155–172.

Kena, Grace, Lauren Musu-Gillette, Jennifer Robinson, Xiaolei Wang, Amy Rathbun,

  Jijun Zhang, Sidney Wilkinson-Flicker, Amy Barmer, and Erin Dunlop Velez. 2015.

                                                 20
  “Institutional Retention and Graduation Rates for Undergraduate Students.” U.S. Department of

  Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics, Washington

  D.C.

Kline, Patrick. 2011. “Oaxaca-Blinder as a Reweighting Estimator.” American Economic Review:

  Papers & Proceedings, 101(3): 532–537.

Lalonde, Robert J. 1986. “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs with

  Experimental Data.” American Economic Review, 76(4): 604–620.

National Cancer Institute. 2015. “U.S. Population Data - 1990-2015 Expanded Races

  (White, Black, American Indian/Alaska Native, Asian/Pacific Islander) by Origin (His-

  panic, Non-Hispanic).” Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program

  https://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html (accessed January 5, 2017).

Sharpe, Rochelle. 2016. “Why Upperclassmen Lose Financial Aid.” New York Times, April 6.

University       of       Nebraska-Lincoln.         2015.      “Budgets       for     2015-2016.”

  http://financialaid.unl.edu/budget.html (accessed October 21, 2015).

U.S. Census Bureau. 2014. “American Community Survey (ACS), One-Year Public Use Micro-

  data Sample (PUMS), 2014.” (accessed via ftp March 1, 2016).

U.S. Department of Education. 2010a. “Common Core of Data.” Institute of Education Sci-

  ences, National Center for Education Statistics https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/ (accessed February 4,

  2016).

U.S. Department of Education. 2010b. “Private Schools Universe Survey.” Institute of Edu-

  cation Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics https://nces.ed.gov/surveys/pss/ (ac-

  cessed February 4, 2016).

U.S. Department of Education. 2014. “Integrated Postsecondary Education Data Sys-

  tem (IPEDS).” Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics

  https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/datacenter (accessed March 1, 2015).




                                               21
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, and National Cen-

 ter for Education Stastics. 2015. “College Navegator.” https://nces.ed.gov/collegenavigator/

 (accessed December 20, 2016).

Weiss, Michael J., Mary G. Visher, Evan Weissman, and Heather D. Wathington. 2015.

 “The Impact of Learning Communities for Students in Developmental Education: A Synthesis of

 Findings from Randomized Trials at Six Community Colleges.” Education Evaluation and Policy

 Analysis, 37(4): 520–541.




                                            22
                                                                                  Figure 1
                                                                      Award E↵ects on College Enrollment

                                                                                   A. Two-Year College Strata




                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                    .95           .94
                                                                                                 .88

                                                        .9




                                                                                                                                                                              .9
                    any post−secondary institution           .90                                               .83
                                                                            .87
                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                          .83
                                                                                                         .77                 .70
                         fraction enrolled in

                                                        .7




                                                                                                                                                                              .7
                                                                                                                                           .64
                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                                                                                                                         .56
                                                                                                                      .61
                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                                                                                                                       .47
                                                                                                                                     .51
                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                                                                                                                                 .31
                                                                                                                                                  .28
                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                             fall         spring          fall         spring         fall         spring         fall         spring

                                                                   Year 1                       Year 2                      Year 3                      Year 4

                                                                                    years since high school graduation



                                                                                   B. Four-Year College Strata
                                                                    .99            .99
                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                 .96            .94
                                                                                                                             .91            .90
                                                             .96                                                                                         .88
                                                        .9




                                                                                                                                                                              .9
                                                                             .94
                                                                                          .90                                                                           .82
                       any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                          .87
                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                                                                                                                      .85
                                                                                                                                      .82
                            fraction enrolled in

                                                        .7




                                                                                                                                                  .74                         .7
                                                                                                                                                                  .69
                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                              .6
                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                              .3
                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                             fall         spring          fall         spring         fall         spring         fall         spring
                                                                    Year 1                       Year 2                      Year 3                      Year 4

                                                                                    years since high school graduation
                                                                          years since high school graduation
                                                                                         STBF Treated                                         Control


Notes: Panel A presents enrollment rates by treatment status for students who targeted two-year colleges. The grey
line plots the enrollment rate for control applicants, and the blue line plots the sum of the control mean and strata-
adjusted treatment e↵ect for traditional STBF scholarship winners. Whiskers indicate 95 percent confidence intervals.
Panel B plots enrollment rates for students who targeted four-year colleges. Samples for each time horizon use data
from all available applicant cohorts: 2012-2015 for year one; 2012-2014 through year two; 2012-2013 through year
three; and 2012 only for year four. Fall includes any enrollment that occurs between July 1 and December 31, and
spring runs from January 1 through June 30.


                                                                                                                23
                                                                                    Figure 2
                                                            College Enrollment Rates by Race and Parental Education
                                                                         in the Four-Year College Strata


                                                            A. White                                                                                        B. Nonwhite
                                                             (68%)                                                                                             (32%)
                                              .99                                                                                                   1.00
                                   1




                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                            .97
                                                                                                                                                                  .95
                                        .98                             .92
  any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                        any post−secondary institution
                                                                                    .90                                                       .94                             .88
                                   .9




                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                         .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                .9
                                                      .91
       fraction enrolled in




                                                                                                             fraction enrolled in
                                                                  .88                                                                                                                     .83
                                                                                                                                                            .86
                                   .8




                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                                              .78
                                                                                                                                                                        .76
                                   .7




                                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                         .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                .7
                                                                                                                                                                                    .66
                                   .6




                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                   .5




                                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                        fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring                                                       fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring
                                         Year 1        Year 2      Year 3      Year 4                                                          Year 1        Year 2      Year 3      Year 4

                                               years since high school graduation                                                                    years since high school graduation



                                          C. At Least One Parent                                                                                   D. Neither Parent
                                         Earned a Bachelor’s Degree                                                                            Earned a Bachelor’s Degree
                                                   (35%)                                                                                                 (65%)
                                          .99                                                                                                       .99
                                   1




                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                        .97                                                                                                       .96
                                        .98                         .93         .93
  any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                        any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                                                              .96                             .90
                                   .9




                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                         .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                .9
                                                      .92
       fraction enrolled in




                                                                                                             fraction enrolled in




                                                                  .90                                                                                       .88                           .85
                                   .8




                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                                              .84
                                                                                                                                                                        .82
                                   .7




                                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                         .7




                                                                                                                                                                                    .69         .7
                                   .6




                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                   .5




                                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                .5




                                        fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring                                                       fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring
                                         Year 1        Year 2      Year 3      Year 4                                                          Year 1        Year 2      Year 3      Year 4

                                               years since high school graduation                                                                    years since high school graduation

                                                                          years since high school graduation
                                                                                    STBF Treated                             Control

Notes: These graphs summarize how award e↵ects on enrollment di↵er by race and parental education of scholarship
applicants. Grey lines plot enrollment rates for control applicants, and blue lines plot the sum of control means and
strata-adjusted treatment e↵ects for traditional STBF scholarship o↵ers. Whiskers indicate 95 percent confidence
intervals. Samples vary across time horizons as defined in Figure 1. Roughly 42 percent of white applicants had at
least one parent with a bachelor’s degree, compared with just 19 percent of nonwhite students.


                                                                                                   24
                                                                                       Figure 3
                                                                 E↵ects on Year-Two Fall Enrollment by GPA and EFC
                                                                            in the Four-Year College Strata


                                                 A. Any College Enrollment                                                                           B. Four-Year College Enrollment
                                                         by GPA                                                                                                 by GPA
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                              .5
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .4
effect on year two fall enrollment




                                                                                                         effect on year two fall enrollment
at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                              at four−year institution
                                     .3




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                              .1
                                     0




                                                                                                                                              0
                                     −.1




                                                                                                                                              −.1
                                           2.50 2.65 2.80 2.95 3.10 3.25 3.40 3.55 3.70 3.85 4.00                                                   2.50 2.65 2.80 2.95 3.10 3.25 3.40 3.55 3.70 3.85 4.00
                                                              high school GPA                                                                                          high school GPA




                                                 C. Any College Enrollment                                                                           D. Four-Year College Enrollment
                                                         by EFC                                                                                                 by EFC
                                     .5




                                                                                                                                              .5
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                              .4
effect on year two fall enrollment




                                                                                                         effect on year two fall enrollment
at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                              at four−year institution
                                     .3




                                                                                                                                              .3
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                              .1
                                     0




                                                                                                                                              0
                                     −.1




                                                                                                                                              −.1




                                            0       2,000     4,000     6,000     8,000    10,000                                                    0       2,000     4,000     6,000     8,000    10,000
                                                                  EFC ($)                                                                                                  EFC ($)



Notes: These graphs document how award e↵ects vary with applicants’ high school GPA and Expected Family
Contribution (EFC). The outcome in each panel is year-two fall enrollment. The sample includes applicant cohorts
2012-2014. Dots plot treatment e↵ects of traditional STBF scholarship o↵ers for deciles of the given trait. Solid lines
plot fitted values from a regression model that estimates the linear interaction between award status and the given
trait. Dotted lines plot 95 percent confidence intervals for the linear fitted values.




                                                                                                    25
                                                                                         Figure 4
                                                                    E↵ects on Enrollment in the Four-Year College Strata
                                                                             by Estimated Propensity to Enroll

                                                        A. Year One Fall                                                                                            B. Year Two Fall
                                                          (N = 4,560)                                                                                                 (N = 3,219)
                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                .5
                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                                                          effect on year two fall enrollment
effect on year one fall enrollment
at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                          at any post−secondary institution
                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                .3
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                .2
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                .1
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                       −.1




                                                                                                                                                −.1
                                             0.85            0.90             0.95            1.00                                                    0.70   0.75     0.80     0.85      0.90      0.95   1.00
                                                    propensity to enroll in year one fall                                                                      propensity to enroll in year two fall




                                                      C. Year Three Fall                                                                                            D. Year Four Fall
                                                         (N = 2,024)                                                                                                   (N = 855)
                                       .5




                                                                                                                                                .5
                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                .4
effect on year three fall enrollment




                                                                                                          effect on year four fall enrollment
 at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                          at any post−secondary institution
                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                .3
                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                .2
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                .1
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                       −.1




                                                                                                                                                −.1




                                             0.60     0.70           0.80            0.90     1.00                                                    0.40   0.50     0.60     0.70      0.80      0.90   1.00
                                                    propensity to enroll in year three fall                                                                    propensity to enroll in year four fall




Notes: These graphs summarize how award e↵ects on enrollment vary with applicants’ baseline characteristics. The
horizontal axis in each plot is propensity to enroll in the given year as a function of gender, race, parental education,
EFC, and high school GPA, estimated using the leave-one-out fitted values proposed by Abadie, Chingos and West
(2013). Dots plot treatment e↵ect estimates for each decile of expected enrollment, and solid lines plot fitted values
from a regression model that estimates the linear interaction between award status and expected enrollment. Dotted
lines plot 95 percent confidence intervals for the linear fitted values. Samples vary across time horizons as defined in
Figure 1.




                                                                                                     26
                                                                     Figure 5
                                    Comparing Financial Aid E↵ects With and Without Learning Community Services
                                                     by Intended University of Nebraska Campus



                                                      A. All Campuses                                                                                          B. Omaha




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                           1
                                            .99                                                                                                     .98




                                                                                                                                         1
                                   1




                                                           .97                                                                                                 .96




                                                                                                        any post−secondary institution
  any post−secondary institution




                                            .99                                                                                                     .98
                                            .96                       .91                                                                                                 .91




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                                           .9
                                                           .95                                                                                      .93




                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                                                                             fraction enrolled in
                                   .9
       fraction enrolled in




                                                                                  .89                                                                          .91
                                                           .89        .90
                                                                                                                                                                                       .84
                                                                                                                                                               .85




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                      .85                                                                                                 .84




                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                         .8
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                                                          .79




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .7
                                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                  .73
                                   .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                         .6
                                                                                           .6
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                                       .57




                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                   .5




                                                                                           .5




                                         fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring                                                        fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring

                                           Year 1         Year 2     Year 3      Year 4                                                             Year 1    Year 2     Year 3       Year 4

                                                  years since high school graduation                                                                  years since high school graduation



                                                           C. Lincoln                                                                                          D. Kearney
                                                                                           1




                                        .99 .99                                                                                                      1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                   1




                                                                                                                                         1




                                                          .97                                                                                 .99              .97         .97
  any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                        any post−secondary institution




                                           .97                                                                                                      .98
                                                          .96         .91                                                                                                              .94
                                                                                 .91                                                                           .95
                                                                                           .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .9
                                                                                                                                                                           .93
                                   .9
       fraction enrolled in




                                                                                                                                         .9
                                                                                                             fraction enrolled in




                                                          .91         .91
                                                                                                                                                               .90
                                                                      .88                                                                                                 .90
                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                .83
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                                      .81
                                                                                           .7




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .7
                                   .7




                                                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                           .6
                                   .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                         .6
                                   .5




                                                                                           .5




                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                         fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring                                                        fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring
                                           Year 1         Year 2     Year 3      Year 4                                                             Year 1    Year 2     Year 3       Year 4

                                                  years since high school graduation                                                                  years since high school graduation



                                                                   STBF Treated                 COS Treated                                                  Control

Notes: These graphs compare STBF and COS award e↵ects for applicants who targeted University of Nebraska
campuses. Panel A pools all NU randomized applicants, and Panels B-D disaggregate results by target campus.
Grey lines plot enrollment rates for control applicants, blue lines plot the sum of control means and strata-adjusted
treatment e↵ects for traditional STBF scholarship o↵ers, and red lines plot corresponding e↵ects for aid-only COS
awards. Whiskers indicate 95 percent confidence intervals. Samples vary across time horizons as defined in Figure 1.
COS awards were introduced in the second study cohort, so data on COS award winners are only available through
year three.




                                                                                                27
                                                                     Figure 6
                                    Comparing Financial Aid E↵ects With and Without Learning Community Services
                                                                by High School GPA



                                                A. GPA 3.5                                                                                            B. GPA < 3.5
                                            (above sample median)                                                                                (below sample median)

                                           1.00                                                                                                 .99
                                   1




                                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                       .98
                                           .99                     .95         .96                                                                          .95
                                          .97          .98                                                                                      .98
  any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                       any post−secondary institution
                                                      .95          .95                                                                         .95
                                   .9




                                                                                          .9




                                                                                                                                        .9




                                                                                                                                                                                               .9
                                                                   .92                                                                                                  .86
       fraction enrolled in




                                                                                                            fraction enrolled in
                                                                               .84                                                                          .91
                                                                                                                                                                                    .81
                                   .8




                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                                                                                                                               .8
                                                                                                                                                           .83
                                                                                                                                                                        .80

                                                                                                                                                                        .77
                                   .7




                                                                                          .7




                                                                                                                                        .7




                                                                                                                                                                                               .7
                                   .6




                                                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                        .6




                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                                                                                                                                                                                    .62
                                   .5




                                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                        fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring                                                      fall spring fall spring fall spring fall spring
                                         Year 1      Year 2      Year 3       Year 4                                                          Year 1      Year 2      Year 3       Year 4

                                            years since high school graduation                                                                   years since high school graduation



                                                              STBF Treated                     COS Treated                                             Control


Notes: These graphs compare STBF and COS award e↵ects by high school GPA for applicants who targeted University
of Nebraska campuses. Grey lines plot enrollment rates for control applicants, blue lines plot the sum of control means
and strata-adjusted treatment e↵ects for traditional STBF scholarship o↵ers, and red lines plot corresponding e↵ects
for aid-only COS awards. Whiskers indicate 95 percent confidence intervals. Samples vary across time horizons as
specified in Figure 1. COS awards were introduced in the second study cohort, so data on COS award winners are
only available through year three.




                                                                                               28
                                                            Figure 7
                                    Projecting Award E↵ects on Bachelor’s Degree Completion
                                                 in the Four-Year College Strata

                                                                                        A. Unweighted Estimates



                                                           .15
                     STBF effect on bachelor’s degree

                                                           .1
                      completion for award winners
                                                           .05
                                                           0
                                                           −.05
                                                           −.1
                                                           −.15




                                                                   fall       spring       fall       spring     fall       spring    fall        spring   fall       spring
                                                                          Year 1                  Year 2                Year 3               Year 4               Year 5

                                                                                                    years since high school graduation

                                                                                   Experimental Estimate                              Non−Experimental Estimate
                                                                                   (2012)                                             (2011)




                                                                                        B. Reweighted Projections
                                                            .15
                        STBF effect on bachelor’s degree

                                                            .1
                         completion for award winners
                                                            .05
                                                            0
                                                            −.05
                                                            −.1
                                                            −.15




                                                                   fall        spring      fall        spring    fall        spring    fall       spring   fall        spring
                                                                          Year 1                  Year 2                Year 3                Year 4              Year 5

                                                                                                    years since high school graduation

                                                                                        Experimental Estimate                           Experimental Projection
                                                                                        (2012)




Notes: The light green lines plot estimated e↵ects of award o↵ers on bachelor’s degree completion in the four-year
college strata for the 2012 experimental cohort. The dark green line in Panel A presents corresponding estimates
from the 2011 non-experimental cohort, the last application cohort before the experiment began. The estimates in
Panel A control for target college, high school GPA, EFC, gender, race, and parental education using Kline’s (2011)
Oaxaca-Blinder procedure. In Panel B, we project graduation rates for the experimental sample by reweighting the
non-experimental Kline estimates using the distribution of covariates in the experimental sample. Whiskers indicate
95 percent confidence intervals.

                                                                                                                29
                                                       Table 1
                                                 Descriptive Statistics

                                                                    Non-Experimental            Experimental
                                                                         Sample                   Sample
                                   Nebraska    Eligible           Guaranteed    No                    Treatment-
                                   HS Seniors Applicants           Award      Award           All      Control
                                      (1)         (2)                (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)
female                                   .50        .62              .67        .54           .62           -.011
                                                                                                            (.023)
White                                    .77        .66              .56        .59           .69            .025
                                                                                                            (.021)
Black                                    .07        .07              .06        .12           .07            .006
                                                                                                            (.012)
Hispanic                                 .11        .18              .25        .18           .16           -.009
                                                                                                            (.017)
Asian                                    .03        .06              .10        .05           .05           -.021 *
                                                                                                            (.009)
other race                               .02        .04              .04        .06           .03           -.001
                                                                                                            (.008)
family income ($)                       72,594     45,609           39,638     45,437        46,742         566
                                                  [31,748]         [26,831]   [27,783]      [33,274]       (1487)
EFC ($)                                  ---       2,726             1,956     2,723         2,881           123
                                                  [3,100]           [2,644]   [3,344]       [3,135]         (137)
at least one parent                      .73        .66              .55        .65           .69           -.009
  attended college                                                                                          (.021)
at least one parent earned               .40        .31              .26        .28           .32            .011
  a bachelor's degree                                                                                       (.022)
lives in a city of                       .38        .40              .46        .49           .37            .001
  250,000+ residents                                                                                        (.021)
took ACT                                 .70        .93              .93        .90           .94            .003
                                                                                                            (.008)
composite ACT score                      22.0       21.9             22.6      20.3          22.0           -.14
                                                    [4.4]            [4.4]     [4.1]         [4.4]          (.20)
high school GPA                          ---       3.44              3.60      3.12          3.45           -.009
                                                   [.43]             [.37]     [.40]         [.42]          (.019)
F-statistic                                                                                                 1.07
p-value                                                                                                     .38
# of applicants                                    8,466            1,293      990           5,542         5,542
Notes: The treatment-control differences in column 6 come from regressions that control for strata dummies (cohort
by target college). Columns 5 and 6 exclude the 641 applicants offered COS awards. The sample includes the 2012-
2015 applicant cohorts. Missing values for race (6%), family income (5%), and ACT (7%) are imputed from means
within strata in the sample of eligible applicants. The data appendix provides further detail on data sources and
variable definitions for the benchmark descriptive statistics in column 1.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10


                                                             30
                                                    Table 2
                                    E↵ects on Year One Financial Aid Packages
                                      for Nebraska Public College Students

                                                       Per Award                                Per Dollar Awarded
                                                            STBF Effect                              STBF Effect
                                        Control    Strata    Covariate Campus                  Covariate    Campus
                                         Mean     Adjusted Adjusted Adjusted                   Adjusted    Adjusted
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)                      (5)          (6)

cost of attendance                      16,987      1,499 ***      1,516 ***       84             .29 ***     .01
                                                    (187)          (184)         (125)           (.02)       (.02)

total aid                               12,344      3,497 ***      3,498 ***     2,287 ***        .51 ***     .28 ***
                                                    (197)          (189)         (159)           (.02)       (.02)

total grants                             7,792      6,209 ***      6,204 ***     5,374 ***        .85 ***     .71 ***
                                                    (178)          (160)         (145)           (.02)       (.02)

    government grants                    3,378        67            58           -165    **       .02 **     -.02 **
                                                    (108)          (73)           (70)           (.01)       (.01)

    institutional grants                 3,508      -790 ***       -788 *** -1,132 ***           -.13 ***    -.21 ***
                                                    (126)          (121)     (122)               (.02)       (.02)

    STBF grant                            0         7,156 ***      7,159 ***     6,985 ***       1.00 ***    1.00 ***
                                                     (63)           (63)          (64)           (.00)       (.00)

    other private grants                 906        -161     ***   -162    ***   -244    ***     -.03 ***    -.04 ***
                                                     (58)           (57)          (58)           (.01)       (.01)

total government loans                   3,721     -2,292 *** -2,281 *** -2,574 ***              -.29 ***    -.36 ***
                                                    (122)      (117)      (121)                  (.02)       (.02)

    subsidized govt. loans               2,008     -1,497 *** -1,495 *** -1,653 ***              -.19 ***    -.23 ***
                                                    (56)       (56)       (58)                   (.01)       (.01)

    unsubsidized govt. loans             1,713      -795     ***   -786    ***   -921    ***     -.10 ***    -.13 ***
                                                     (91)           (86)          (89)           (.01)       (.01)

Federal Work Study                       831        -419     ***   -426    ***   -513    ***     -.05 ***    -.07 ***
                                                     (36)           (36)          (37)           (.00)       (.01)
baseline covariates                                  no            yes           yes             yes          yes
campus controls                                      no            no            yes             no           yes
# of applicants                          1,765     3,063           3,063         3,063           3,063       3,063
Notes: This table reports effects of STBF scholarship offers on students' financial aid packages. The sample is
restricted to students in the 2012-2014 applicant cohorts enrolled in Nebraska public colleges. Aid data are currently
unavailable for the 519 students at state colleges and Mid-Plains Community College. Columns 2-4 report results
from regressions of the financial aid awarded in each category on a dummy for winning a scholarship, while columns
5 and 6 report results from regressions of the same dependent variables on the dollar value of STBF scholarships
awarded. The baseline covariates in columns 3-6 are GPA, EFC, gender, race, and parental education. Columns 4 and
6 also control for cumulative enrollment at each campus. Government grants include federal and state grants.
Subsidized government loans are the sum of Perkins and subsidized Stafford loans; unsubsidized government loans
are the sum of PLUS and unsubsidized Stafford loans.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                            31
                                                     Table 3
                                          E↵ects on Initial College Choice

                                            All Strata            Two-Year Strata            Four-Year Strata
                                        Control STBF             Control STBF                Control STBF
                                         Mean      Effect         Mean    Effect              Mean    Effect
                                          (1)       (2)            (3)      (4)                (5)     (6)

any college enrollment                    .955      .030 ***       .905        .048 ***         .964          .025 ***
                                                   (.005)                     (.016)                         (.005)

                                                                 A. Degree Program

four-year college only                    .716      .094 ***       .061        .039 **          .839          .107 ***
                                                   (.008)                     (.018)                         (.009)

two-year college only                     .209     -.051 ***       .838        .006             .091         -.065 ***
                                                   (.007)                     (.023)                         (.007)

dual-enrolled                             .030     -.013 ***       .006        .003             .035         -.017 ***
                                                   (.004)                     (.005)                         (.005)

                                                             B. Ownership and Location

Nebraska public college                   .877      .066 ***       .863        .070 ***         .880          .065 ***
                                                   (.008)                     (.019)                         (.008)

out-of-state public college               .022     -.015 ***       .019       -.015 **          .023         -.015 ***
                                                   (.003)                     (.007)                         (.003)

private college                           .055     -.021 ***       .023       -.007             .061         -.025 ***
                                                   (.006)                     (.009)                         (.007)

                                                                    C. Selectivity

less than 75% admitted                    .341      .033 ***       .010        .013             .404          .037 ***
                                                   (.007)                     (.008)                         (.009)

75-90% admitted                           .284      .041 ***       .021        .034 ***         .333          .043 ***
                                                   (.009)                     (.012)                         (.010)

90-100% admitted                          .330     -.044 ***       .874        .002             .228         -.055 ***
                                                   (.008)                     (.021)                         (.009)

# of applicants                          3,324     5,542           524         982             2,800         4,560
Notes: This table reports the effect of scholarship offers on enrollment by December 31 of the scholarship
application year. The sample includes 2012-2015 applicant cohorts. Selectivity categories are defined by IPEDS
according to 2012 admissions rates. UNL admitted less than 75 percent of applicants, UNK and UNO admitted 75-
90 percent; state and community colleges admitted more than 90 percent. Outcomes in each panel are mutually
exclusive. Students dual-enrolled at both Nebraska public colleges and non-Buffett eligible campuses are coded as
Nebraska public only. Regressions control for strata dummies.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                            32
                                                                          Table 4
                                                           E↵ects on Enrollment and Degree Status
                                                               in the Two-Year College Strata

                                                  Year One Fall                Year Two Fall              Year Three Fall               Year Four Fall
                                               Control   STBF               Control   STBF              Control    STBF              Control    STBF
                                                Mean     Effect              Mean     Effect             Mean     Effect              Mean      Effect
                                                 (1)       (2)                (3)      (4)                (5)       (6)                (7)      (8)
     enrolled anywhere                           .905            .048 ***     .831           .051 *        .605           .093 *       .282             .280 ***
                                                                (.016)                      (.027)                       (.050)                        (.080)
         at a two-year college                   .838            .006         .703          -.032          .318           .010         .085             .064
         and no degree                                          (.023)                      (.036)                       (.047)                        (.054)
         at a four-year college                  .067            .043 **      .071           .084 ***      .103           .053         .085             .120 **
         and no degree                                          (.018)                      (.025)                       (.035)                        (.058)

         at two-year college                                                  .054           .002          .060          -.037 **      .014             .028
                                                          ---
         and associate's degree                                                             (.015)                       (.019)                        (.027)

         at four-year college                                                 .003          -.003          .124           .067         .099             .068




33
                                                          ---
         and associate's degree                                                             (.003)                       (.036)                        (.056)

     not enrolled                                .095           -.048 ***     .169          -.051 *        .395          -.093 *       .718        -.280 ***
                                                                (.016)                      (.027)                       (.050)                    (.080)

         and no degree                           .095           -.048 ***     .163          -.050 *        .245          -.032         .324        -.054
                                                                (.016)                      (.026)                       (.043)                    (.074)
         and associate's degree                                               .005          -.001          .150          -.061 *       .380        -.212 ***
                                                          ---
                                                                                            (.005)                       (.034)                    (.070)
         and bachelor's degree                                                                                                         .014            -.014
                                                          ---                         ---                          ---
                                                                                                                                                       (.014)

     # of applicants                             524             982          367            666           233            395           71              144
     Notes: Each fall enrollment period runs from July 1 to December 31 with degree status measured on July 1. Samples vary across time horizons, as described
     in Figure 1. These outcomes partition the sample in each period; students who dual-enrolled in both two and four-year colleges during the same period are
     coded as attending four-year colleges only. Students who earned both associate's and bachelor's degrees are coded as bachelor's degree holders.
     Regressions control for strata dummies.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                                           Table 5
                                                           E↵ects on Enrollment and Degree Status
                                                               in the Four-Year College Strata

                                                  Year One Fall                Year Two Fall              Year Three Fall               Year Four Fall
                                               Control   STBF               Control   STBF              Control    STBF              Control    STBF
                                                Mean     Effect              Mean     Effect             Mean     Effect              Mean      Effect
                                                 (1)       (2)                (3)      (4)                (5)       (6)                (7)       (8)
     enrolled anywhere                           .964            .025 ***     .896           .067 ***      .849           .065 ***     .738             .138 ***
                                                                (.005)                      (.009)                       (.015)                        (.026)
         at a two-year college                   .091           -.065 ***     .129          -.067 ***      .116          -.049 ***     .075            -.015
         and no degree                                          (.007)                      (.011)                       (.013)                        (.017)
         at a four-year college                  .873            .090 ***     .766           .134 ***      .720           .124 ***     .639             .164 ***
         and no degree                                          (.008)                      (.013)                       (.019)                        (.030)
         at any college                          .000            .000         .001          -.000          .012          -.008 **      .021            -.007
         and associate's degree                                 (.001)                      (.001)                       (.004)                        (.009)
         at any college                                                                                    .001          -.001         .002            -.002




34
                                                          ---                         ---
         and bachelor's degree                                                                                           (.001)                        (.002)

     not enrolled                                .036           -.025 ***     .104          -.067 ***      .151          -.065 ***     .262            -.138 ***
                                                                (.005)                      (.009)                       (.015)                        (.026)

         and no degree                           .036           -.025 ***     .104          -.067 ***      .148          -.068 ***     .229            -.110 ***
                                                                (.005)                      (.009)                       (.015)                        (.025)
         and associate's degree                                                                            .003           .002         .021            -.019 **
                                                          ---                         ---
                                                                                                                         (.003)                        (.007)

         and bachelor's degree                                                                                                         .012            -.009
                                                          ---                         ---                          ---
                                                                                                                                                       (.006)

     # of applicants                            2,800           4,560        1,924          3,219         1,198          2,024          424             855
     Notes: Each fall enrollment period runs from July 1 to December 31 with degree status measured on July 1. Samples vary across time horizons, as described
     in Figure 1. These outcomes partition the sample in each period; students who dual-enrolled in both two and four-year colleges during the same period are
     coded as attending four-year colleges only. Students who earned both associate's and bachelor's degrees are coded as bachelor's degree holders.
     Regressions control for strata dummies.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                   Table 6
               E↵ects on Degree Completion by the End of Year Four

                                           Two-Year Strata                Four-Year Strata
                                         Control         STBF           Control         STBF
                                          Mean           Effect          Mean           Effect
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)
bachelor's degree earned                    .056          .054             .281         -.059 **
                                                         (.047)                         (.029)
associate's degree earned                   .521         -.119             .050         -.024 *
                                                         (.079)                         (.013)
  enrolled at four-year college             .099          .040             .019         -.005
                                                         (.053)                         (.009)

no degree earned                            .423          .065             .670          .083 ***
                                                         (.078)                         (.030)

  enrolled at four-year college             .056          .038             .370          .188 ***
                                                         (.044)                         (.033)

# of applicants                              71           144              424           855
Notes: This table reports effects on degree completion by the end of year four for the 2012 applicant
cohort. Students who earned both associate's and bachelor's degrees are coded as bachelor's degree
holders. Regressions control for strata dummies.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                  35
8    Data Appendix

Application Data

    The STBF scholarship application provides detailed data on applicants’ baseline characteristics.

The academic measures come primarily from high school transcripts, which report GPA and ACT

scores. We standardize GPAs to a 4.0 scale using grade conversion formulae provided by the

University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Since not all high schools report ACT scores on their transcripts,

we supplement transcript data with self-reported scores from the scholarship application for 50

percent of the experimental sample.

    Most of our financial and demographic data come from applicants’ Student Aid Reports (SARs).

These reports are available for STBF applicants who filed the Free Application for Federal Student

Aid (FAFSA). SARs contain responses to more than 100 FAFSA questions regarding students’

financial resources and family structure, including family income, parental marital status, and

education. Roughly three percent of scholarship applicants are undocumented immigrants, who are

ineligible for federal financial aid and therefore cannot file the FAFSA. STBF permits these students

to submit an alternate form called the College Funding Estimator (CFE). The CFE is published by

the EducationQuest Foundation, a non-profit organization in Nebraska, and gathers similar though

less detailed information.

    Neither SARs nor CFEs report students’ race, and the scholarship application did not collect

this variable until 2014. We obtained race data for all cohorts from the Nebraska Department of

Motor Vehicles (DMV). After combining the DMV and self-reported data, we observe race for 89

percent of randomized applicants before 2014 and over 99 percent from 2014 onward. We impute

race where missing using means within application strata.


Enrollment Data

    More than 90 percent of experimental subjects enrolled in Nebraska public colleges, which

provide administrative records for this research. We match applicants to these data using name,

gender, date of birth, and the last four digits of Social Security Numbers. To measure enrollment

at out-of-state and private institutions, we match applicants to National Student Clearinghouse



                                                 36
(NSC) data using name and date of birth. Though the NSC captures more than 91 percent of

enrollment nationwide (and more than 99 percent at four-year public institutions), its name-based

match has limitations, as Dynarski, Hemelt and Hyman (2015) detail. Roughly two percent of

experimental applicants have enrollment spells at Nebraska public colleges that do not appear in

our NSC-matched sample.

   We define post-award years to match the federal financial aid year, which runs from July 1 to

June 30, and divide each year into fall and spring halves. Within each fall and spring term, we

require binary enrollment outcomes to be mutually exclusive. Students who enroll at both two- and

four-year institutions are coded as four-year college students. Likewise, those who enroll at in-state

public colleges do not contribute to the out-of-state or private categories, and selectivity outcomes

are defined by the most-selective institution attended.


Financial Aid Data

   Nebraska’s public colleges also provide detailed information on their students’ financial aid

packages, which we analyze in Table 2. These data report costs of attendance, grants, loans, and

Federal Work Study aid. While all schools report federal loans, most do not report private loans,

which may be obtained directly from lenders without involving financial aid officers. We therefore

exclude private loans from our analysis. For most students in our sample, federal loans o↵er the

lowest available interest rate and therefore account for the vast majority of borrowing.


Other Descriptive Statistics

   Table 1 compares STBF applicants to the broader population of Nebraska high school seniors.

We estimate the race and sex composition of Nebraska seniors using 18-year-old Nebraskans in the

2012 sample of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results population data (SEER, 2015).

Parental education and family income figures come from 12th-grade Nebraska residents in the 2012

wave of the American Community Survey (U.S. Census Bureau 2014). There are two Nebraska

cities with more than 250,000 residents: Lincoln and Omaha. We estimate the share of high school

seniors who live in Lincoln and Omaha using enrollment figures from the Common Core of Data

and Private School Survey (US DOE, 2010a; 2010b). ACT provides data on Nebraska test takers

(ACT 2012).

                                                 37
                                                                                   Figure A1
                                                         E↵ects on Year-Two Fall Enrollment by ACT and Family Income
                                                                         in the Four-Year College Strata


                                                   A. Any College Enrollment                                                                                          B. Four-Year College Enrollment
                                                           by ACT                                                                                                                by ACT
                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                .4
    effect on year two fall enrollment




                                                                                                                           effect on year two fall enrollment
    at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                                                at four−year institution
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                .3
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                         −.1




                                                                                                                                                                −.1
                                               0   10    20      30     40     50    60      70    80      90 100                                                     0   10    20      30     40     50    60      70    80      90 100
                                                          percentile of ACT composite score                                                                                      percentile of ACT composite score




                                                   C. Any College Enrollment                                                                                          D. Four-Year College Enrollment
                                                       by Family Income                                                                                                      by Family Income
                                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                .4
    effect on year two fall enrollment




                                                                                                                           effect on year two fall enrollment
    at any post−secondary institution




                                                                                                                                at four−year institution
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                .3
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                         −.1




                                                                                                                                                                −.1




                                               0        20,000        40,000        60,000        80,000    100,000                                                   0        20,000        40,000        60,000        80,000    100,000
                                                                      family income ($)                                                                                                      family income ($)




                                                                                             Bin-Specific Effect           Linear Effect

Notes: These graphs document how award e↵ects vary with ACT composite score and family income. The outcome
in each panel is year-two fall enrollment. The sample includes applicant cohorts 2012-2014. Dots plot treatment
e↵ects of traditional STBF scholarship o↵ers for deciles of the given trait. Solid lines plot fitted values from regression
models that estimate the linear interaction between award status and the given trait. Dotted lines plot 95 percent
confidence intervals for the linear fitted values. ACT scores have been converted to percentiles in the distribution of
Nebraska ACT test takers.




                                                                                                                      38
                                                 Table A1
                                         Baseline Sample Selection

                                              Non-Experimental                        Experimental
                                                   Sample                               Sample
                           Eligible         Guaranteed    No                             STBF       COS
                          Applicants         Award      Award                 Control   Award      Award
  Target College              (1)              (2)        (3)                   (4)       (5)        (6)

2012 Total                    1,424              298            127              495          504
Two-Year Strata                210                49             17               71           73
Four-Year Strata              1,214              249            110              424          431
  UNK                          189                36             26               63           64
  UNL                          491               110             33              173          175
  UNO                          420                91             46              141          142
  State Colleges               114                12              5               47           50

2013 Total                    2,252              351            272              936          484          209
Two-Year Strata                356                40             65              162           89           0
Four-Year Strata              1,896              311            207              774          395          209
  UNK                          248                33             27               71           66           51
  UNL                          835               139             85              369          153           89
  UNO                          554               106             75              181          123           69
  State Colleges               259                33             20              153           53            0

2014 Total                    2,350              282            391              860          606          211
Two-Year Strata                330                20             39              134          137           0
Four-Year Strata              2,020              262            352              726          469          211
  UNK                          260                37             38               73           64           48
  UNL                          958               118            167              413          167           93
  UNO                          564                88            123              143          140           70
  State Colleges               238                19             24               97           98            0

2015 Total                    2,440              362            200             1,033         624          221
Two-Year Strata                391                39             36              157          159           0
Four-Year Strata              2,049              323            164              876          465          221
  UNK                          274                47             11              103           65           48
  UNL                          903               126             68              450          168           91
  UNO                          612               109             68              223          130           82
  State Colleges               260                41             17              100          102            0
Notes: This table reports sample counts by applicant cohort and target college. The experimental sample contains
applicants who were subject to random assignment. COS awards were only offered in the 2013-2015 University of
Nebraska strata.




                                                       39
                                          Table A2
                                 Outcomes Sample Construction


                                                                                         Total
                                                  STBF         COS               STBF         COS
                                  Control        Award        Award             Sample       Sample
         Sample                     (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)

Year One Total                      3,324         2,218          641             5,542           4,501
Two-Year Strata                      524           458            0               982              0
Four-Year Strata                    2,800         1,760          641             4,560           4,501
 UNK                                 310           259           147              569             716
 UNL                                1,405          663           273             2,068           2,341
 UNO                                 688           535           221             1,223           1,444
 State Colleges                      397           303            0               700              0

Year Two Total                      2,291         1,594          420             3,885           3,141
Two-Year Strata                      367           299            0               666              0
Four-Year Strata                    1,924         1,295          420             3,219           3,141
 UNK                                 207           194            99              401             500
 UNL                                 955           495           182             1,450           1,632
 UNO                                 465           405           139              870            1,009
 State Colleges                      297           201             0              498              0

Year Three Total                    1,431          988           209             2,419           1,930
Two-Year Strata                      233           162            0               395              0
Four-Year Strata                    1,198          826           209             2,024           1,930
 UNK                                 134           130            51              264             315
 UNL                                 542           328            89              870             959
 UNO                                 322           265            69              587             656
 State Colleges                      200           103             0              303              0

Year Four Total                      495           504                            999
Two-Year Strata                       71            73                            144
Four-Year Strata                     424           431                            855
 UNK                                  63            64                            127
 UNL                                 173           175                            348
 UNO                                 141           142                            283
 State Colleges                       47            50                             97

Notes: This table reports sample counts for each enrollment time horizon. Each sample draws on data
from available applicant cohorts: 2012-2015 for year one; 2012-2014 through year two; 2013-2014
through year three; and 2012 only for year four. Column 4 describes the primary analysis sample,
which includes control applicants and STBF award winners. Column 5 includes control applicants,
STBF recipients, and COS award winners from the University of Nebraska strata. COS awards were
not offered in 2012, so year four outcomes in the COS sample are not yet available.




                                                   40
                                                                                Table A3
                                                                 Descriptive Statistics by Target College
                                                                                                                Four-Year Strata
                                             Two-Year Strata             UNL                          UNO                          UNK                        State Colleges
                                                   Treatment              Treatment                    Treatment                    Treatment                        Treatment
                                             All    - Control        All   - Control              All   - Control              All   - Control                All     - Control
                                              (1)      (2)           (3)      (4)                 (5)      (6)                 (7)      (8)                   (9)        (10)
     female                                  .61       .040          .57          .030            .64          .016             .69         .007              .67      -.011
                                                      (.031)                     (.024)                       (.028)                       (.039)                      (.037)
     White                                   .72       .040          .70         -.009            .49         -.004             .80         .031              .87       .045 *
                                                      (.027)                     (.021)                       (.028)                       (.032)                      (.025)
     Black                                   .03       .003          .08         -.000            .11          .001             .01        -.020 **           .03      -.004
                                                      (.010)                     (.013)                       (.018)                       (.010)                      (.013)
     Hispanic                                .17      -.013          .13          .012            .27          .020             .16         .009              .07      -.014
                                                      (.024)                     (.016)                       (.025)                       (.030)                      (.018)
     other race                              .09      -.030          .09         -.002            .13         -.017             .02        -.020 **           .04      -.027
                                                      (.017)                     (.014)                       (.019)                       (.011)                      (.014)




41
     family income ($)                   43,535        276          48,643       -167            43,711       376             50,341       -167            47,997       3,664
                                        [31,646]     (2,098)       [33,980]     (1,693)         [26,915]     (1,525)         [43,960]     (3,638)         [32,660]     (2,545)
     at least one parent                     .60       .037          .75         -.006            .59         -.021             .73         .001              .76       .024
       attended college                               (.031)                     (.021)                       (.029)                       (.037)                      (.034)
     at least one parent earned              .19       .037          .40         -.024            .26          .011             .34         .000              .35      -.016
       a bachelor's degree                            (.025)                     (.023)                       (.026)                       (.040)                      (.037)
     took ACT                                .80       .025          .98         -.002             .95        -.005             .98        -.000              .97       .008
                                                      (.026)                     (.008)                       (.013)                       (.013)                      (.011)
     composite ACT score                     19.1      .32          23.8         -.18             21.2         -.34            22.3         -.35              21.7      -.03
                                             [3.4]    (.21)         [4.2]        (.20)            [4.6]        (.26)           [3.8]        (.32)             [3.9]     (.30)
     high school GPA                         3.28      .052 **      3.57         -.012            3.34        -.020            3.57         .048              3.47      .012
                                             [.41]    (.026)        [.39]        (.019)           [.41]       (.023)           [.40]       (.033)             [.42]    (.033)
     F-statistic                                      1.00                        .68                          .50                          1.44                        .78
     p-value                                           .44                        .75                          .89                          .16                         .65
     # of applicants                         982      982           2,068        2,068           1,223        1,223            569          569               700       700
     Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics by target college, pooling all four cohorts. Table 1 details variable definitions and specifications.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                                   Table A4
                                              Award E↵ects on Admission to the University of Nebraska

                                                              University of Nebraska Omaha                     University of Nebraska at Kearney
                                                     Two-Year Strata              Four-Year Strata          Two-Year Strata            Four-Year Strata
                                                     Control       STBF           Control    STBF           Control     STBF          Control      STBF
                                                      Mean         Effect         Mean       Effect         Mean        Effect         Mean        Effect
                                                        (1)         (2)             (3)       (4)             (5)        (6)            (7)         (8)

     applied                                           .084         .048    **     .446       .009           .078        .023           .276       -.006
                                                                   (.019)                    (.012)                     (.018)                     (.011)
     admitted                                          .065         .033    *      .413       .001           .063        .030    *      .248        .003
                                                                   (.017)                    (.011)                     (.017)                     (.011)
     admitted after STBF award date                    .019         .048    ***    .023       .007           .011        .017    *      .005        .005    *
                                                                   (.013)                    (.005)                     (.009)                     (.003)




42
         and applied before award date                 .006         .004           .011       .001           .000        .000           .000        .001
                                                                   (.006)                    (.003)                     (.000)                     (.001)
         and applied after award date                  .000         .018    ***    .002       .006    ***    .000        .005           .002        .001
              for freshman admission                               (.006)                    (.002)                     (.003)                     (.001)
         and applied after award date                  .013         .026    **     .009      -.000           .011        .012           .003        .002
              as a transfer student                                (.010)                    (.003)                     (.008)                     (.002)
     admissions rate among applicants                  .773         .011           .926      -.014           .805        .124           .895        .027    *
                                                                   (.088)                    (.012)                     (.080)                     (.015)
     # of applicants                                   524          982            2,800     4,560           524         982           2,800       4,560
     Notes: This table describes how scholarship offers affected application and admission to two of the three University of Nebraska campuses. The last
     row reports the admissions rate conditional on application. All other rows report unconditional effects in the full experimental sample. The sample
     includes 2012-2015 applicant cohorts.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                                   Table A5
                                         Disaggregating Award E↵ects on Enrollment by Application Cohort

                                                Two-Year Strata                                                    Four-Year Strata
                             Year One        Year Two Year Three Year Four                       Year One        Year Two Year Three Year Four
                               Fall            Fall       Fall     Fall                            Fall            Fall        Fall    Fall
                                (1)             (2)        (3)      (4)                             (5)             (6)         (7)     (8)
     pooled sample               .048 ***        .051 *          .093 *         .280 ***             .025 ***        .067 ***        .065 ***       .138 ***
                                (.016)          (.028)          (.050)         (.080)               (.005)          (.010)          (.015)         (.026)
                                {982}           {666}           {395}          {144}               {4,560}         {3,219}         {2,024}         {855}
     2012 cohort                -.011           -.051            .179 **        .280 ***             .033 ***        .095 ***       .079 ***        .138 ***
                                (.035)          (.058)          (.080)         (.080)               (.011)          (.019)         (.023)          (.026)
                                {144}           {144}           {144}          {144}                {855}           {855}          {855}           {855}
     2013 cohort                 .025            .092 *          .039                                .016 *          .045 ***        .053 ***




43
                                (.038)          (.049)          (.063)           ---                (.009)          (.015)          (.020)           ---
                                {251}           {251}           {251}                              {1,169}         {1,169}         {1,169}
     2014 cohort                 .046 *          .069 *                                              .021 **         .066 ***
                                (.027)          (.040)           ---             ---                (.010)          (.017)           ---             ---
                                {271}           {271}                                              {1,195}         {1,195}
     2015 cohort                 .095 ***                                                            .031 ***
                                (.030)           ---             ---             ---                (.010)           ---             ---             ---
                                {316}                                                              {1,341}
     F-statistic                 1.44            1.42            .98                                  .65            1.51            .38
                                                                                 ---                                                                 ---
     p-value                     .22              .24            .38                                  .63             .21            .68
     Notes: The top row reports estimated enrollment effects that pool data from all available applicant cohorts at each time horizon. Cohort-specific
     estimates appear in the subsequent rows, along with F-statistics and p-values from tests of the joint hypothesis that cohort-specific estimates equal the
     corresponding pooled sample estimate. Standard errors appear in parentheses and sample sizes in braces.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                                                 Table A6
                                      Comparing OLS and Logit Marginal E↵ects on Year-Two Fall Enrollment

                                                                Race                    Parental Education                         GPA
                                         Full                                           College No College               Above           Below
                                                      White          Nonwhite
                                        Sample                                          Degree     Degree                Median          Median
                                          (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)        (5)                  (6)             (7)

                                                                                       A. OLS

     any college enrollment                .064 ***     .048 ***         .107 ***         .049 ***        .072 ***          .020 **        .103 ***
                                          (.009)       (.010)           (.018)           (.014)          (.012)            (.009)         (.016)
                                         {3,885}      {2,839}          {1,311}          {1,280}         {2,605}           {1,975}         {1,910}

     any four-year college                 .125 ***     .099 ***         .187 ***         .075 ***        .146 ***          .054 ***       .196 ***
                                          (.012)       (.013)           (.024)           (.020)          (.015)            (.014)         (.019)
                                         {3,885}      {2,839}          {1,311}          {1,280}         {2,605}           {1,975}         {1,910}




44
                                                                            B. Logit Marginal Effects

     any college enrollment                .069 ***     .051 ***         .121 ***         .058 ***        .077 ***          .022 **        .110 ***
                                          (.011)       (.011)           (.023)           (.018)          (.014)            (.011)         (.018)
                                         {3,868}      {2,817}          {1,295}          {1,163}         {2,597}           {1,871}         {1,895}

     any four-year college                 .132 ***     .106 ***         .204 ***         .081 ***        .155 ***          .058 ***       .204 ***
                                          (.013)       (.015)           (.027)           (.022)          (.017)            (.016)         (.019)
                                         {3,869}      {2,827}          {1,234}          {1,246}         {2,590}           {1,937}         {1,895}

     Notes: This table reports OLS and average logit marginal effects for year-two fall enrollment outcomes. The OLS estimates for race and parental
     education appear in Figure 2. Regressions control for strata dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses and sample sizes are in braces. The
     race estimates exclude 6 percent of students with imputed missing race. In addition, the logit estimates exclude strata in which outcomes do not
     vary in the given subsample. The sample is restricted to the 2012-2014 applicant cohorts.
     *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10
                                           Table A7
                   Projecting Award E↵ects on Bachelor’s Degree Completion
                                in the Four-Year College Strata

                         Experimental Cohort                  Non-Experimental Cohort
                              Unweighted                      Unweighted        Reweighted
                          OLS         Kline               OLS         Kline        Kline
   covariates               (1)         (2)                 (3)         (4)          (5)
strata only               -.059 **    -.059 **            -.043       -.048 *      -.042
                          (.029)      (.029)              (.029)      (.029)       (.029)
                          {855}       {855}               {921}       {921}        {921}

GPA and EFC                -.062 **     -.063 **          -.044          -.035              -.076 **
                           (.027)       (.027)            (.028)         (.030)             (.031)
                           {855}        {855}             {921}          {921}              {921}
GPA, EFC, and              -.065 **     -.070 **          -.049 *        -.045              -.076 **
demographics               (.028)       (.027)            (.029)         (.031)             (.031)
                           {855}        {855}             {921}          {921}              {921}
control mean                .281         .281              .297           .297               .294
Notes: This table reports estimated effects of STBF award offers on bachelor's degree completion by the
end of year four. Columns 1 and 2 present estimates for the 2012 randomized sample using OLS
regression and Kline's reweighting procedure. Columns 3 and 4 report corresponding estimates for the
2011 applicant cohort, which was not subject to random assignment. Column 5 reweights the 2011 Kline
estimates in column 4 by the distribution of covariates in the 2012 randomized sample. Estimates control
for strata dummies. Demographic controls are gender, race, and parental education.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10




                                                   45
