NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE CONTROL AROUND THE WORLD
Gur Aminadav
Elias Papaioannou
Working Paper 23010
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23010

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2016

We thank Julian Franks, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer for
useful suggestions and comments. All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Gur Aminadav and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Control around the World
Gur Aminadav and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 23010
December 2016
JEL No. F30,G3,G34,G38,K11,K12,K31
ABSTRACT
We provide an autopsy of the patterns of corporate control and ownership concentration in a
dataset covering more than 40,000 listed firms from 127 countries over 2004 2012. Employing a
plethora of original and secondary sources, big data techniques, and applying the Shapley-Shubik
algorithm to quantify shareholder’s voting power we trace ultimate controlling shareholders from
the complex, pyramidal, and often obscure corporate structures. First, we show that there are
large differences in the type of corporate control (widely held firms with and without significant
equity blocks, firms controlled by families, governments, and other public-private firms) across
and within continents. Corporate structures appear persistent as the recent global financial crisis
did not affect them much. Second, we examine the role of legal traditions on corporate control.
There are economically large differences on corporate structure across legal families, with the
share of controlled (widely-held) firms being the highest (lowest) in French civil-law countries,
followed by German and then Scandinavian civil law countries. State ownership and control by
individual/families via complex corporate structures is pervasive in civil-law countries. And
while equity blocks are commonplace across widely-held firms all around the world and across
all legal families, the share of widely-held firms with large blocks is the highest in French civillaw countries. Moreover, ownership concentration is considerably higher in French civil-law (and
to a lesser extent in German civil-law) countries as compared to common-law countries. These
patterns apply to very large, big, medium-sized and small listed firms and are not driven by
regional differences, the level of economic development, or industrial structure, suggesting that
legal origin has sizable long-lasting consequences on corporate structure. Third, as legal origin
may affect corporate control via multiple channels, we examine the role of some likely
mechanisms. We find that shareholder protection rights against self-dealing activities of insiders
correlate strongly with corporate control and ownership concentration. Legal formalism and
creditor’s rights do not seem to play a role. Yet, the "reduced-form" link between legal origin and
corporate control (and ownership concentration) is also driven by entry and labour market
regulation.

Gur Aminadav
Regent's Park
NW1 4SA, London
United Kingdom
gaminadav@london.edu
Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
and NBER
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23010

1

Introduction

Understanding the driving forces and consequences of the various types of corporate control are core inquiries of corporate finance (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1999; Tirole, 2010). While most
theory distinguishes between widely—held corporations, where ownership is dispersed and no single shareholder dominates corporate decisions, and controlled firms where a dominant-influential shareholder or
family exerts control (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), the structures of corporate ownership and control are
more complex (Laeven and Levine, 2008).1 Pyramids that allow shareholders to influence corporate decisions in excess of their cash-flow rights (Dyck and Zingales, 2004) and cross-holdings of equity in business
groups, such as the keiretsu in Japan and the Korean chaebols, are pervasive. At the same time, corporate
control is typically hidden behind holding companies incorporated in financial oﬀ-shore centers (Zucman,
2015). A binary distinction between controlled and widely-held firms may be too coarse, as in many
widely-held corporations some individuals/families or institutional investors hold equity blocks and may
thus have considerable power (Edmans and Holderness, 2016). And often there are shareholders who form
coalitions with smaller investors in an eﬀort to exert corporate control (Bennedsen and Wolfenzon, 2000).
Following the influential contribution of La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999), a voluminous literature in corporate finance has tried to document the patterns of ownership concentration and
control across countries or in a single country over time. The literature (discussed below) then searched for
the main correlates of corporate ownership and examined the role of investor protection and legal quality
(see La Porta et al. (2006)). However, there are many open issues.
First, stands measurement. It is inherently hard to identify ultimate shareholders from the complex
network of equity holdings and to assess their role in corporate aﬀairs. For this reason previous research
has either focused on a relatively small number of (typically large) firms and countries (e.g., La Porta et
al. 1999; Claessens, Djankov, and Lang, 2000; Faccio and Lang, 2002), or has used larger firm samples in
a single economy (e.g., Franks, Mayer, and Rossi, 2009, on British corporations) or a handful of countries
(Franks, Mayer, Volpin, and Wagner, 2012).
Second, is heterogeneity. The size distribution of firms is highly skewed; even when one examines
typically large publicly traded firms, diﬀerences in size are enormous (see Gabaix (1999)). And theory and
case-study evidence point out that corporate control patterns and their determinants may diﬀer systematically across very large, big, medium, and relatively small listed corporations (Holderness (2016a,b)).
A third issue regards mechanisms. The literature is far from reaching a consensus on the role of
investor protection rights, courts, product and labour market regulation on corporate control and ownership
concentration. Isolating the role of each feature is challenging, as it is always hard quantifying these
institutional features, the sample of countries is limited, and because legal aspect features correlate strongly
with the regulation of product and labour markets (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2006)).
1

Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006) and Burkart, Panunzi, and Shleifer (2003) are notable exceptions.

0

1.1

Results Preview

In this paper we try to advance on these fronts. Our first contribution is to provide a comprehensive
description of ownership patterns and corporate control for the widest-possible sample of countries and
listed firms. Employing big data techniques, extensive manual checks, and relying on a plethora of data
sources (e.g., regulatory filings, company reports, government publications, private data providers), we
augment and correct Bureau van Dijk’s ORBIS’s database on corporate ownership in an eﬀort to identify
ultimate controlling shareholders from the complex and often esoteric structures of corporate holdings. We
then apply a game-theoretic algorithm based on the Shapley-Shubik power index and identify ultimate
controlling shareholders for more that 40 000 listed firms from 127 countries both before and after the
recent world financial crisis (2004 − 2012). Our corporate control identification algorithm improves over

previous works who have applied ad hoc voting rights cutoﬀs to classify firms as controlled (and widely held).
The algorithm for example is especially useful for measuring control in firms where we observe multiple

individuals/families and other entities (institutional investors, government) holding large equity blocks, a
common phenomenon (Laeven and Levine, 2007). Using the newly-compiled database we provide a broad
overview of the patterns of corporate control around the world. We distinguish between three types of firms,
widely-held corporations without any block shareholder, widely-held corporations (without a controlling
shareholder) but with one or multiple block equity stakes, and controlled firms with a dominant controlling
shareholder. We also split controlled firms based on the type of dominant shareholder to state-controlled
(national governments, municipalities and state agencies), family-controlled (where a single individual or
family exert power), and controlled by other (listed or private) firms. There are large diﬀerences on
corporate control around the world, both across and within continents. Corporate structure patterns
appear persistent, as the 2007 − 2009 global financial crisis did not alter it much.

Second, given the literature’s emphasis we re-examine the "reduced-form" link between legal origin

and corporate control. Given the large diﬀerences on firm size across countries and the potential of
diﬀerential eﬀects of the legal system on corporate control, we examine in detail heterogeneity, as there
have been concerns on the robustness of previous works that used samples of large firms in a small number
of countries. The cross-country analysis uncovers the following.
1. There are economically large diﬀerences in corporate control across legal families, with the share
of controlled firms being the highest in French civil-law countries, followed by German and then
Scandinavian civil law countries. The share of controlled firms is the lowest in common law countries.
The results are similar when we look at ownership concentration that is the highest in French civil-law
countries and the lowest in common-law countries.
2. Equity blocks are commonplace across the world. While we observe blocks in the majority of widelyheld corporations in both civil-law and common-law countries, the share of widely-held firms with
large blocks is the highest in French civil-law countries.
1

3. The link between corporate control (or corporate ownership) and legal origin patterns apply for very
large, big, medium, and small listed firms and for relatively younger and older firms. These patterns
are not driven by regional diﬀerences, the level of economic development, or industrial structure.
4. There is a strong link between dispersed ownership and GDP p.c., but only in the sample of large and
very large listed corporations. For small and medium sized public companies, there is no systematic
association between corporate control and economic development.
5. When we jointly associate the type of controlling shareholder (family/individuals, private firms,
government, private or public widely-held firms) with legal origin, we find that the legal tradition
matters crucially for state-control and family-control. The share of family and state controlled firms
is systematically higher in countries whose corporate law is centered around the Napoleonic civil code
and to a lesser extent on the German civil code, as compared to common-law countries.
Third, we try to shed light on the "reduced form" association between corporate control and legal
origin examining the likely channels. Building on legal origin theories (Glaeser and Shleifer (2002)) and
empirical findings (summarized in La Porta, et al. (2006)), we associate corporate control (and ownership
concentration) with proxies of investor protection, legal formalism, entry barriers and red tape, and labour
market regulation. The cross-country analysis shows that:
6. Shareholder protection rights, especially corporate law rules allowing the ex-post suing of managers
who exploit their position for self-dealing, are systematically linked to dispersed ownership and
absence of a controlling shareholder. Yet, legal origin’s impact on corporate control seems to operate
via additional channels.
7. Legal formalism, as reflected on various measures of the time needed to resolve simple disputes via
courts, is not much related to the patterns of corporate control and ownership concentration.
8. There is some link between proxy measures of entry barriers to corporate control (and ownership
concentration), suggesting that the reduced-form correlation also reflects developments in product
markets (Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002).
9. There is a systematic association between corporate control and ownership concentration with labour
market regulation, a result supportive to Pagano and Volpin (2006) theory.

1.2

Related Literature

Our paper is mostly related to the voluminous empirical literature on international corporate ownership
and control (see Shleifer and Vishny, 1997, for a survey).2 The first genre of studies constructed cross2

The theoretical work on the separation of ownership and control is also large, including Jensen and Meckling (1976),
Grossman and Hart (1980), Burkart, Gromb, and Panuzzi (1997), Shleifer and Vishny (1986, 1996), among many others (see
Tirole, 2010, for a textbook treatment).

2

country measures of ownership concentration and corporate control and then associates these measures
with proxies of legal protection of investors and legal origin.3 La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(1999) construct measures of corporate control for the 20 largest publicly-traded firms in 27 advanced
economies. They then show that the share of widely-held corporations is quite small around the world;
this is especially the case in civil-law countries where shareholder protection appears weaker compared
to common-law countries. Claessens, Djankov, and Lang (2000) examine ownership and control across
2 980 firms in 9 East Asian countries. They also show that few firms appear to be widely held; family
control typically exercised via pyramids and cross-holdings is pervasive and the share of widely-held firms
in (relatively) high only in Japan. Lins (2003) constructs measures of ownership type for 1 433 firms in
18 emerging markets and also documents that pyramid structures that allow insiders to exert control in
excess of their voting rights are common practice. Faccio and Lang (2002) examine ownership structure
in a sample of 5 232 big and medium-sized corporations in Western Europe (Austria, Belgium, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the U.K.). They find
that the prevalence of widely-held firms is larger in common-law Ireland and the United Kingdom and to
a lesser extent in Scandinavian countries, as compared to continental European countries. Franks, Mayer,
Volpin, and Wagner (2012) study the impact on the type of corporate control of firm age, size, and legal
system in panel of 4 654 non-financial firms in four countries (UK, France, Germany and Italy) and a large
cross-section of 27 684 firms in 27 European countries. They find that as firms mature, ownership gets
more dispersed in the UK, as compared Italy, Germany, and France, where -if anything- family control is
higher for older as compared to younger firms. A similar pattern emerges from the wider sample, with
family firms getting widely-held as they mature only in countries with strong investor protection and liquid
capital markets. Foley and Greenwood (2010) document a similar pattern of ownership diﬀusion after the
IPO in countries with strong investor protection in a sample of 2 700 firms in 34 countries over 1995−2006.4
Yet, Holderness (2016a,b), working on a sample of 8 076 firms in 32 countries, argues that the link between
ownership concentration and various proxies of legal protection of investors and legal origin is weak and
statistically insignificant.
A second genre of the literature consists of case-studies using refined data covering many firms
over many years in specific countries.5 Franks and Mayer (2001) study ownership and control of German
corporations, documenting high levels of concentration and pervasive family control. Franks, Mayer, and
Rossi (2009) study the evolution of ownership in the United Kingdom over the twentieth century and
document a high degree of ownership dispersion throughout the period, even during times with weak
3
In the same vein researchers have used firm-level data across countries to construct proxies of specific aspects of ownership
and control, related to private benefits of control (Dyck and Zingales, 2004), the prevalence of business groups (Khana and
Yafeh, 2007), state ownership and control of banks (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2002).
4
Masulis, Pham, and Zein (2011) construct measures of family-controlled business groups in a larger sample of around
28 000 firms from 45 countries in 2002 and then relate their prevalence to country and firm characteristics, such as pyramid
structure, cross-holdings, etc.
5
Morck et al. (2005) provide a collection of many country case studies on corporate ownership and governance.

3

legal protection of outside investors (see also Franks, Mayer, and Renneboog, 2001). Franks, Mayer,
and Miyajima (2014) study the evolution of corporate ownership in Japan throughout the 20th century,
documenting a relatively dispersed ownership structure that appears quite stable after WWII. Holderness
(2009) provides an analysis of ownership concentration in the United States focusing on a random sample
of 375 listed firms. He shows that in more than 90% of these firms there is at least one block-holding
shareholder with voting rights in excess of 5% (mean/median 26% and 17%). Kandel, Kosenko, Morck
and Yafeh (2015) provide a thorough historical analysis on corporate ownership and control in the United
States, showing how the business group ownership structure and pyramids that were predominant in the
19th and early 20th century steadily declined, especially after legal and regulatory changes. Aganin and
Volpin (2005), Morck et al. (2005) and Murphy (2005) give illustrative historical narratives of the evolution
of ownership, control, and corporate governance in Italy, Canada and France, respectively. Looking outside
advanced economies, Chernykh (2008) provides a thorough analysis of the complex and obscure ownership
structure of Russian listed firms, while Khanna and Palepu (2005) discuss ownership concentration and
corporate control in India.
While conceptually we apply a cross-country approach, our paper stands in the middle of these
two genres of the empirical literature. We aim to provide the most comprehensive to-date cross-country
analysis of ownership concentration and corporate control using a database from the largest possible sample
of countries. In this regard, we use a plethora of data sources and Big Data techniques to construct a
database of ultimate control for around 40 000 publicly-traded firms from 127 countries over the period
2004 − 2012. We are thus able to compare ownership concentration and the type of corporate control
(widely-held firms with or without a block, controlled firms with a dominant controlling shareholder) across

advanced, developing, frontier, and even underdeveloped countries before and after the global financial
crisis of 2007 − 2010. Our sample in 2012 reflects around 90% of global GDP, population, and total

market capitalization. Working with the widest possible sample is key, so as to uncover the basic raw
correlations between ownership concentration and corporate control and legal origin (our main focus),
economic development, and other likely determinants (investor protection rights, entry regulation, legal
formalism, and labour market regulation). The large sample allows examining heterogeneity across very
large, big, medium-sized and smaller listed firms, something key as theory suggests that the link between
legal quality and concentration may be heterogeneous (Tirole, 2010) and because the size distribution of
firms is highly skewed (e.g., Gabaix, 2009), making cross-country comparisons tricky. Moreover in the
appendix we provide an autopsy of corporate control for G-7 countries and the BRICs and discus how our
estimates compare with previous country-specific studies.
Our key contribution to this research is to document the key data patterns and re-examine the link
between corporate control and legal origin in the widest possible sample of countries and listed firms; we are
also doing the very best to minimize error and detect corporate control from the quite complex structure
of corporate ownership networks. We also search for heterogeneous eﬀects, something ex ante important

4

as the size distribution of listed firms in very skewed and because it is theoretically plausible that the link
between corporate control and legal origin to diﬀer for large and small firms. In this regard, we do find the
economic development is associated to dispersed ownership and widely-held corporations, but only when
one looks at big and very large firms. Another contribution to this literature is to show that the strong and
significant reduced-form relationship between corporate control and legal origin does not solely operate via
investor protection; it also reflects developments in product and labour markets that diﬀer greatly across
legal families. Labour protection and entry regulation is associated with more concentrated ownership and
a higher likelihood of controlled (by the state or families) listed corporations.
Our findings of economically considerable diﬀerences in ownership concentration, the fraction of
firms with a significant controlling shareholder, prevalence of family firms, and government control across
legal families contributes to the law and finance literature that stresses the legacy of legal origin (see for an
overview La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008).6 The law and finance literature provides evidence
of diﬀerences across legal families, mostly between common-law countries and French civil-law countries, in
various aspects of economic, financial, and institutional eﬃciency; for example, investor protection rights
(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 1997, 1998), legal formalism (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-deSilanes, and Shleifer, 2003), stock market development (La Porta et al. 1997 and Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008), private credit (Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2007), bankruptcy
(Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2008), regulation of entry (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
and Shleifer, 2004) and labour markets (Botero et al. 2002).7 We contribute to this line of research -that
focuses on historical legacies- by providing robust evidence that legal origin is systematically related to the
patterns of corporate control around the world, in particular ownership concentration, family control, and
state control. We also show that diﬀerences in corporate control across legal families are sizable both when
we look at very large, big, medium-sized, and even small listed firms. We also examine the likely mechanisms
behind the strong reduced-form relationship between corporate control and legal origin. Our cross-country
regression analysis shows that investor protection, in particular legal rights protecting shareholder’s against
self-dealing actions of controlling shareholders and managers, matters crucially. Moreover, we detect a
strong link between ownership concentration and controlled (by the state or families/individuals) firms
with measures of labour market regulation and entry barriers. In contrast there is no systematic link
between legal formalism with neither corporate control nor ownership concentration.8
6
Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) provide a simple model of the historical forces in England and France in the late Medieval
era that shapped diﬀerences across legal families. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) provide a synposis of the key
diﬀerences of leagl families on the role and function of judges, legal system’s adaptability, codification, etc.
7
Burkart, Panunzi and Shleifer (2003), Almeida and Wolfenzon (2006), and Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) develop theoretical models linking legal system’s quality and adaptability to various aspects of corporate finance.
8
Our work also relates to the literature examining the origins of business groups (e.g., Khana and Yafeh, 2007) and family
firms (e.g., Masulis, Pham, and Zein, 2011).

5

Structure The paper is structured as follows. In the next Section we discuss the data on corporate
ownership and detail our algorithm in identifying corporate control. Section 3 presents the main data
patterns on corporate control around the world. Section 4 gives results associating corporate control with
legal origin. Section 5 reports "reduced-form" form estimates associating ownership concentration with
legal origin. In Section 6 we examine the link between corporate control (and ownership concentration)
and investor protection, courts’ quality, and product and labour market regulations. In the last section we
summarize oﬀering some directions for future work.

2

Data

In this Section we present the ownership data and give details on the samples of our analysis. Then we
discuss the algorithm in constructing proxies of corporate control and provide company examples.

2.1

Ownership Data

Our objective is to get data on corporate ownership and construct proxies of corporate control for the
maximum possible sample of publicly traded firms across the globe. We start with Bureau Van Dijk’s
ORBIS and OSIRIS databases that report ownership information, year of incorporation, year of initial
public oﬀering (IPO) and some accounting data for around 50 000 publicly-traded (46 699) firms over the
period 2004 − 2012 from 134 countries.9 [While data is available since the late 1990, coverage improves

considerably after 2003.]. Bureau van Dijk (BvD) collects ownership data from firms’ annual reports, stock
exchange releases, company web-sites, press news, and private correspondence.10 BvD also collects data
from country-specific private agencies that themselves collect statistics on firm performance and ownership.
(e.g., ICAP in Greece, InfoCredit in Cyprus, etc.).
We match the BvD ownership data to Datastream (Thompson Reuters) and Compustat (North
America and Global) to get information on firms’ market capitalization, industry classification, stock
exchange. In the process, we manually corrected many errors.11 While the ORBIS database is considered
of high-quality and has thus been employed by researchers in corporate ownership and international finance
(e.g. Franks, Mayer, Volpin, and Wagner, 2012; Masulis, Pham, and Zein, 2011), there are inconsistencies
and errors (e.g., double entries); and there is missing information and gaps for many companies (see also
9

ORBIS contains information on millions of privately-held firms (see Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2015) for a detailed description
and quality assessment). In this paper we focus on listed firms only.
10
Bureau van Dijk describes its collection of ownership data as follows: “For US listed companies, ownership information
is systematically collected from the Free Edgar File which includes all companies filing proxy statements. These links cover
all known shareholders (corporations or individuals) with an ownership percentage of 5% or more, as well as the ownership
of directors and executive oﬃcers (with no lower ownership percentage limitation). Data is gathered tracking lower levels
percentages owned by corporations. This is done by querying the NASDAQ web-site under the entry "Beneficial Owner" which
is associated to the display of a company. (This covers all companies listed in the US stock exchanges, not only those listed on
the NASDAQ).”
11
For example some firms are reported twice in a year; there are double entries on key shareholders; and there are many
mis-classifications of government agencies and investors from financial services.

6

Kalemli-Ozcan, et al. 2015). We double-checked the data and added information on ownership for firms
with incomplete coverage with manual checks and textual analysis. We added data on ownership for
more than 13 000 of the 46 699 firms in ORBIS using: (i ) Financial data providers, such as Bloomberg,
Dun & Bradstreet, Google Finance, Credit Risk Monitor and Forbes. (ii) Governmental publications to
identify state ownership and control12 . (iii) Reports from regulatory agencies. (iv ) We also went over
many country-specific news websites and company reports.13 The key challenge was getting ownership
data for private firms that hold considerable equity stakes in publicly-traded firms. This was challenging,
as ownership structures are complex and because often those private firms are incorporated in small "oﬀshore" centers (e.g., Cayman Islands, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands). We assembled detailed ownership
information for 13 275 listed corporations, whose ultimate controlling shareholder was not recorded in the
Bureau van Dijk databases.14
12

For example in Sweden we went over the detailed reports of the Ministry of Finance on State-owned companies (TeliaSonera:
http://www.government.se/contentassets/2e0ac8a0b3f648be9a8f5b0e5fdfd72e/annual-report-state-owned-companies-2013;)
In Norway we went over the annual State Ownership reports of the Ministry of Trade and Industry (Yara International, Source:
https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/upload/nhd/statenseierberetning)./pdf/engelsk/the_state_ownership_report_2012.pdf
13
For example from company reports, we found that the Liberty Media Corporation is controlled by John C. Malone (Source:
http://ir.libertymedia.com/secfiling.cfm?filingID=1104659-11-68199&CIK=1507934;) and that the key controller of Comcast
Corporation is Brian L. Roberts (Source: http://www.cmcsa.com/secfiling.cfm?filingID=950159).-04-860]
14
For these publicly-traded corporations, we had to check ownership information for about 9 500 private firms. Some
examples of manually identified ultimate owners of large listed firms are:
(1) China Aoyuan Property, which is incorporated in the Cayman Islands, is one of the largest property developers in Hong
Kong. Its largest shareholder is Ace Rise Profits, a limited liability company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands (BVI),
which in turn is owned by Guo Zi. (Source: Announcement in Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited: The General
Disclosure under rule 13.18 of the listing rules, published by China Aoyuan Property Group Limited in August 2011).
(2) "Global Brands SA", which owns Domino’s Pizza franchises in Switzerland, Luxembourg and Liechtenstein, largest
shareholder is the Luxemburg firm Belvia, owned by Alexandre Gaydamak, the son of Russian-Israeli tycoon Arcadi Gaydamak.
(Source: Regulatory News Service, London Stock Exchange, published in Reuters in February 2008.)
(3) Schroders, a large asset management firm is controlled by Bruno Schroder via two Bermuda-incorporated private firms
(Flavida and Fervida) and two trustee-firms (Vincitas Limited and Veritas Limited). [We got this information from Schroders
Annual Reports; 2013 Annual Report, pages 65 − 66.]
(4) Norilsk Nickel, world’s leading nickel and palladium producer and one of the largest copper producer is ultimately owned
by two key individuals: Vladimir Potanin, who owns indirectly 30% via two Cypriot private firms and Oleg Deripaska who
owns just over 25% via his controlled firm RUSAL; until 2008 Notlisk was also indirectly owned by Michael Prokhorov via his
controlled firm Onexim, and his share was bought then by Deripaska. (Sources: 1. Forbes, 9 Jun 2015; 2. Financial Times
Report September 9, 2013; 3. 2012 Annual Report, page 191 4. Interros International Investments Website )
(5) Ceylon Hotels Corporation PLC is a Sri Lanka-based hotel service company. It is controlled by the Galle Face Hotels
group from Sri Lanka. This group is ultimately controlled by Sanjiv Gardiner and Family. (Source: Shalini Perera, Corporate
ownership and Control: Corporate Governance and Economic Development in Sri Lanka, 2011, Page 175).
(6) PT Modernland Realty Tbk is an integrated property developer in Indonesia (listed in the Jakarta stock-exchange)
with some exposure also to the hospitality and commercial property industry. It is owned through various private holding
companies; a large stake (2975%) is owned by the private firm AA Land Pte Ltd which is incorporated in Singapore. This firm
was discovered to be ultimately owned by the Honoris family from Indonesia.(Source: Moodys, announcement from Global
Credit Research - 31 Mar 2014).
(7) Zhongsheng Group Holdings Limited is a multinational automotive retail and services company headquartered in Beijing
and listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. The firms is controlled by many private firms that are mostly incorpoarted in
the British Virgin Islands. Blue Natural Development Ltd., Light Yield Ltd., Vest Sun Ltd., Mountain Bright Limited; RBC
Trustees (CI) Limited, and Vintage Star Limited hold roughly two thirds of the group’s shares. Ownership structure is quite
complex as besides its direct equity stakes, Light Yield and Vest Sun control of the Zhongsheng Group goes also via shares in
Blue Natural Development. In all of these firms Mr. Huang Yi and Mr. Li Guoqiang appear as directors or key shareholders
or trustees. These two individuals control around 60% − 65%of Zhongsheng Group Holdings (Source: 1. Zhongsheng Group
Holdings Limited annual report 2012, pages 30-31. 2. Zhongsheng Group Holdings Limited: Announcement on increase in

7

Another laborious task was identifying members of the same family, so as to aggregate their voting
rights and to construct measures of corporate control taking into account all family members. Using
manual checks and applying strict name matching (and text parsing) algorithms, we managed to partition
the 63 839 diﬀerent individual private shareholders into 20 334 unique families.15

2.2

Samples

After the merging of the databases, data improvements and data "cleaning" (e.g., removing firms with
missing market value), we obtain a sample of 42 720 unique publicly traded firms from 127 countries over
the period 2004 − 2012.16
Baseline Dataset (2012) We estimate the baseline specifications linking corporate ownership
concentration and the type of corporate control to legal origin and other country characteristics in 2012,
the year with the best and widest coverage of countries. The 2012 sample includes 27 913 publicly-traded
firms in 126 countries.17 We drop firms from 34 small countries and financial "oﬀ-shore" centers that
shareholding of the company by controlling shareholders from October 2012.)
(8) Canadian Spirit Resources Inc., (“CSRI”) is a Canadian public company focused on the exploration and production of
natural gas in the Montney Formation of Northeast British Columbia. It is controlled by a private company Elmag Investments
Ic, which is owned by Luigi Liberatore. (Source: CNW Group - which is owned by PR Newswire.)
(9) Playtech Plc is a gambling software development company listed on the London Stock Exchange. ORBIS indiactes
that Playtech is controlled by the private company Brickington Trading Limited. This company was manually examined and
discovered to be a wholly-owned subsidiary of a trust of which Mr. Teddy Sagi, a London-based Israeli businessman, is the
ultimate beneficiary.(Sources: 1. London Stock Exchange, RNS Number : 2785J, 2 April 2015, report on Playtech PLC. 2.
Reuters; 3. Morningstar; 4. The Telegraph)
(10) Dongwon Industries Co is South Korea’s largest fishing company and owner of StarKist Tuna. Using BvD data we
identifiied that it is controlled by a private holding Korean company, Dongwon Enterprise Co. We have manually discovered
that Dongwon Enterprise Co. Ltd. was ultimately controlled by its founder, the Korean Jae-Cheol Kim. (Sources: 1. Credit
Risk Monitor. 2. Ungson G.R, Steers R. M. and Seung-Ho P, Korean Enterprise: The Quest for Globalization, 1997. Pages
186-187. 3 Bloomberg Business.)
15
In addition to name matching algorithms we used external sources of shareholdings data to enhance our matching. These
sources include: lists of mandatory reports on interested parties (shareholders) that are family members which are reported
by the firms directly to the stock exchange and the Securities Authority, company annual reports, Dun and Bradstreet, media
reports and google search engine. We then replaced identified family members of the same family in the ownership data using
only one representative shareholder for each family. If two or more matched family members held voting shares in the same
company at the same date we aggregated their voting rights and assigned them to the family representative shareholder. In
the aggregating the voting rights of family members we face a trade-oﬀ between two potential misclassifications: First, we
may aggregate voting rights of family members who are actually in dispute, and may vote in opposite direction in crucial
strategic decisions (e.g. appointing a CEO). This would influence our classification if the family is severely divided into smaller
blocks of agreement that determine votes outcomes anymore (and thus cannot exercise control), as opposed to partisan family
members who do not have much influence on aggregate voting power (and do not aﬀect the control of the family). Thus, we
may mistakenly classify a firm as family controlled, in which the divided/disputed family does not exercise actual control. On
the other hand, by not aggregating voting rights of family members we may misclassify true family controlled firms as widely
held because family shareholders eventually will vote in the same direction in crucial strategic matters.
16
Compared to the initial sample of 134 countries, we lose 7 countries where we do not have data on the market capitalization
of any firm in any of the years 2004 − 2012. In particular, we lose in total 36 firms in Bolivia, El Salvador, Fiji, Guatemala,
Honduras, and Iran. In addition, we lose 3 943 firms from other countries, for which we do not have data on market
capitalization in any year.
17
Compared to the initial dataset we lose listed firms from Togo.

8

are not covered in Datastream or with just one firm (in 2012).18 This leaves us with 27 539 listed firms
in 92 countries in 2012. To have representative coverage in each country, we require having 20% of the
number of incorporated firms to the total number of listed firms in each country and 50% of the total
market capitalization. The sample drops slightly, as we lose 100 firms from 7 countries with thin equity
markets.19 So our baseline sample consists of 26 843 firms in 85 countries. These 85 countries represent
(in 2012) approximately 952% of global GDP and 85% percent of global population. In terms of market
capitalization our sample reflects approximately 89% of the total value of market equity in the world sample
of Datastream (and approximately 83% of market capitalization when we use World Bank’s estimates).
Appendix Table 1 reports the country sample and provides details on coverage. The sample includes
industrial, emerging, and under-developed countries. The average (median) coverage in terms of market
capitalization across the 85 countries is 83% (85%); as we miss data on small firms (mostly in the United
States, Canada and Japan that are mostly traded over-the-counter markets), the mean (median) coverage
in terms of number of listed firms is lower at 645% (66%).20 Coverage is almost perfect for 40 countries,
as our data includes more than three-fourths of listed firms and coverage in terms of market capitalization
exceeds 75% (e.g., Turkey, New Zealand, France, Poland, Italy, Spain, and Argentina). For 26 countries
coverage is high, as we have more than half of the listed firms and market capitalization exceeds 75% (e.g.,
Sweden, Germany, Hong Kong, South Africa, Malaysia, Colombia). The 2012 sample also includes firms
in 19 countries, where coverage in terms of market capitalization is high (average/median around 70%),
but we have less than half of the total number of listed firms. Examples include the United States where
coverage in terms of market capitalization is 865%, but as we miss OTC-traded firms, coverage in terms of
listed firms is 41%. Likewise in India and South Korea coverage in terms of market capitalization is high
(928% and 837%), but in terms of the number of publicly-listed firms coverage is around 40% (393% and
443%, respectively).
Pre-Crisis Dataset (2007) We also estimate specifications in 2007, the year with the widest
coverage before the global financial crisis. Again we drop oﬀ-shore financial centers and tiny countries
(with no coverage from Datastream and where we have just one firm) and require to have at least 20% of
the number of incorporated firms to the total number of firms and 50% of the market capitalization. This
leaves us with 25 976 firms in 74 countries (Kazakhstan is the only country that is included in the baseline
18

See Appendix Table 1. Specifically: (1) We drop firms from (financial centers), Barbados, Anguilla, Bahamas, Bermuda,
Cayman Islands, Curacao, Gibraltar, Isle of Man, Jersey, Liechtenstein, Virgin Islands and Rwanda, where we have just one
firm and in Palestine. (2). Data on market capitalization are missing for firms in 21 countries, namely Belize, Benin, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Faroe Islands, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Macao, Malawi, Marshall Islands, Monaco,
Mongolia, Niger, Panama, Senegal, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago.
19
We lose Ecuador, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Mauritius, Tanzania, Vietnam and Zimbabwe. Since we have assembled ownership
data for firms in these countries, for robustness we also report empirical specifications that include all firms, even from those
countries.
20
In Canada we do not have much coverage of the Toronto Stock Exchange Venture that includes early-stage typically small
firms. In the United States we mostly miss ownership information for small capitalization stocks that Datastream classifies as
traded in OTC markets.

9

sample of 2007 and not in the baseline sample of 85 countries of 2012). The mean (median) coverage in
terms of number of listed firms is 66% (72%), while in terms of market capitalization the cross-country
average (median) is 84% (87%). Appendix Table 1 gives details on coverage by country.21 The number
of common firms in the 2007 and 2012 sample is 15 930.
2004-2012 Sample (2004 − 2012) We also estimate specifications pooling all firm observations

in 2004 − 2012. This leaves us with 42 720 unique firms in 127 countries. The pooled cross-country mean

(median) coverage in terms of number of listed firms is 68% (74%), while in terms of market capitalization
the pooled cross-country average (median) is 82% (91%).

2.3
2.3.1

Control Algorithm
Previous Works

Identifying control across publicly traded firms is challenging as corporate law (on managerial power,
shareholder rights, civil procedure, etc.) diﬀers considerably around the world (La Porta et al. 1998, 2006).
And ownership structures are complex, as there are cross-holdings of shares, pyramids, and shareholders
may control firms via holdings of various intermediate firms (below we present some examples).
Most previous works have abstracted from the technicalities of identifying the controlling shareholder(s) using voting-rights cutoﬀs to identify controlled corporations. La Porta et al. (1999) identify
firms as controlled if a shareholder (bank, individual, family, state, other private or publicly-traded firm)
holds more than 20% of the equity. Lins, Volpin, and Wagner (2013) employ a 25% stake, while Holderness
(2009) a 5% cutoﬀ. Using voting-rights cutoﬀs is a natural first-step, as it simplifies the analysis. However,
it has no formal justification and it does not take into account the distribution of equity holdings in a
given firm. In addition firms operate in countries with diﬀerent legal regimes and traditions, diﬀerent
corporate cultures, and having quite heterogenous legacies. Moreover, this simple rule-of-thumb may lead
to erroneous classification (Edwards and Weichenrieder, 2009).
First, if ownership is very dispersed (and held by passive investors, such as mutual and pension
funds) then a shareholder may obtain corporate control with a relatively small stake. For example, Onex
Corporation, the Canadian investment firm is controlled by Gerald Schwartz, who owns about 13% of the
shares, as other shareholders hold much smaller stakes. Another example is Carrefour, which is controlled
by Blue Capital22 holding about 164% of the votes.
Second, even large equity stakes (that are however below 50%) may not yield corporate control if
other shareholder(s) also hold large stakes. This is quite common. For example, in Novatek, Russia’s
largest independent natural gas producer, there are four large shareholders [Leonid Michelson with around
21

Compared to the 2012 country sample, we lose firms in Bangladesh, Bosnia, Botswana, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Israel, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Namibia, Serbia, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia.
22
Blue Capital key shareholders are () 50% of its stock is held by Blue Partners Sàrl, a company controlled by Colony
Capital LLC. () 50% of its equity is controlled by Cervinia SA, a company controlled by Groupe Arnault SAS. [Source:
Carrefour, Annual Financial Report, 2012.]

10

28% of the equity, Volga Group with 23% of the equity, Total SA with 16% and Gazprom with 94%] and
no shareholder can independently control the firm. Another example is EVRAZ Plc, one of the largest
Russian steel and mining companies, in which there are five large shareholders [Roman Abramovich with
3099% of the equity, Alexander Abramov with 2155%, Alexander Frolov with 1076%, Gennady Kozovoy
with 569%, and Alexander Vagin with 563%]; again no shareholder can independently control the firm.
Third, shareholders may use multiple (holding or other type) firms to exercise control and thus
applying a simple cutoﬀ (that is based on direct equity shares) may yield misleading classifications. For
example, Igor Vladimirovich Zyuzin indirectly controls Mechel through three separate firms [Claridge
Holding (245%), Delewave Holding (233%), and Bellasis Holding (116%)]. Another example is the
Quandt family which controls BMW through three separate private firms [Susanne Klatten GMBH & Co.
KG für Automobilwerte (126%), Stefan Quandt GMBH & Co. KG für Automobilwerte (174%), and
Johanna Quandt GMBH & Co. KG für Automobilwerte (163%)].
2.3.2

Procedure

Our control identification algorithm is based on the weighted voting games literature pioneered by Shapley
and Shubik (1954) and Banzhaf (1955) that instead of absolute voting rights cutoﬀs uses relative voting
power cutoﬀs (Aminadav et al. (2011)). For each firm we estimate the voting power of every shareholder
with the Shapley-Shubik power index. This index is calculated for the shareholders of the firm as a playerset in a weighted majority game with weights equal to their proportion of voting rights. The Shapley-Shubik
index - normalized to range from 0 to 1-23 reflects the extent to which a shareholder can aﬀect the outcome
of a collective decision by casting his/her vote, given the distribution of other shareholders’ voting rights
(Felsenthal and Machover, 1998). For the calculation of this index, it is assumed that shareholders join a
coalition in a particular order. A pivotal shareholder for a given ordering is the shareholder whose joining
turns a losing coalition into a winning one. Denoting with  the number shareholders in a specific firm
and with  the number of orderings in which shareholder  is pivotal, the Shapley-Shubik power index
of shareholder  is  −  =


! .

A firm is controlled if there exists a shareholder whose voting

power (Shapley-Shubik power index) is greater or equal to the predetermined threshold24 . Otherwise, the

firm is classified as "widely held". The Shapley-Shubik approach has been applied widely in many fields,
as it allows the measurement of control to be extended to cases in which the majority threshold rule (more
than 50% of voting rights) is not applicable.
We twist the Shapley-Shubik algorithm to account for the possibility that principal shareholders in
the same corporation may themselves be controlled by a common ultimate owner. It is reasonable to assume
that in this situation the two (or more) direct shareholders will act in unison, as they are controlled by the
23

A 0 means that the coalition has no eﬀect on the outcome, while 1 indicates that the coalition always determines the
outcome. The sum of the voting powers (values of the Shapley-Schubik index) of all shareholders in each firm is 1.
24
Since the Shapley-Schubik power index of all shareholders in each firm sums to 1, any threshold above 05 yields uniqueness
of the controlling shareholder. The higher the threshold, the more demanding the condition on the voting power that a
shareholder needs in order to be identified as a controller.

11

same ultimate owner. Therefore, we extend the Shapley-Shubik power index to incorporate the possible
implications of the firm as being embedded in a complex network of ownership. That is, an individual’s or
a group’s capacity for control must be a function of the distribution of direct ownership and the existence of
concerts, groups of shareholders controlled by the same ultimate owner. So we aggregate the voting rights
of shareholders belonging to a "concert" eﬀectively treating them as if they were one blockholder25 . Then
we calculate the Shapley-Shubik power index for the "adjusted" shareholders of the firm - the concerts, and
the individual shareholders who are not members of any concert. Consider, for example, a publicly traded
firm  with 3 direct shareholders, each holding 30% of the firm’s voting rights (with the remaining 10%
being a free float): firm , firm , and individual . If we examine firm  in isolation, we could safely say
that no shareholder exerts control26 . But, suppose that there individual/family (or firm)  controls firms
 and firm  (by holding all of the voting rights). Then firms  and  form a concert of shareholders
in . For the calculation of the Shapley-Shubik power index we aggregate firm ’s and firm ’s voting
rights

3
10

+

3
10

=

6
10

and assign them to a blockholder,  . So now we treat firm  as if it had

only 2 main shareholders: the original individual  with
6
10 .

3
10

of the voting rights, and the  with

We would say that  and individual/family  controls firm .
Our algorithm works as follows. First, we set the key parameters; the majority quota needed to

pass a corporate vote to 50% and the Shapley-Shubik power control threshold to 75%. Second, for each
firm-year we calculate the Shapley-Shubik power index. We need to solve some non-trivial computational
issues, since for  shareholders there are ! permutations to consider. Things are even more complicated as
there are multiple layers of ownership that require repeated calculation of the power index over the entire
sample27 . These challenging computational issues - which are commonplace in large and complex networks
(Battiston et al., 2010)- could explain why they have not been widely used in corporate finance. We use
the eﬀective randomized method for approximating power indices recently developed by Bachrach et al.
(2010) that performs well in terms of running time, accuracy, and confidence. Third, once the ShapleyShubik power index of each shareholder is calculated, we identify controlling shareholders. We classify a
firm as controlled if there exists a shareholder whose Shapley-Shubik power index in that firm passes the
75% threshold. Subsequently, for each controlled firm we identify the ultimate owner by searching up the
direct control chains. The ultimate owner is defined as a single non-controlled shareholder that controls
the firm. Fourth, we account for the fact that firms themselves are quite often shareholders of other firms.
After identifying the ultimate owners, if a firm has two or more shareholders that are directly or indirectly
25

If the ultimate owner of the concert is also a direct shareholder of the firm, then its direct voting rights in the firm are
added to the voting rights of the concert. So if , , and  are direct shareholders of , and if  ultimately controls  and
, then the voting rights of this concert of shareholders in firm  equals the sum of the direct voting rights of , , and  .
26
The voting power (Shapley-Schubik power index) of each shareholder of X equals 13 .
27
Consider again the example discussed above focusing on firm X and its shareholders A,B, and C, where firm A and firm
B are in turn held by shareholder D. In order to identify that  controls firm X we needed first to identify that D
controls firm A and that D controls firm B. Since there are two layers (the first layer is the ownership of D in A and in B; and
the second layer is the ownership of A,B, and C in X), we needed to run the entire calculation of the Shapley-Shubik power
index twice before finding all the possible control relations.

12

controlled by the same ultimate owner, we group these shareholders into a concert block whose voting rights
equals to the sum of the voting rights of its members. The grouping of their shareholders into concerts
changes the balance of power within firms and may shift the status of a widely held firm to controlled,
if the concert has high enough voting power. This solution is the set of all relations, where each firm is
linked to its direct controlling concert (or one controlling shareholder) and to its ultimate owner.
2.3.3

Firm Ownership Examples

We now illustrate our procedure in identifying corporate control using five large corporations as examples.
Fiat (Italy)

Figure 1; Fiat Industrial
Figure 1 shows the 2012 ownership structure of Fiat Industrial. Exor SpA is the largest shareholder holding 305% of voting rights; but this is not enough voting power to be considered a controller
according to the Shapley-Schubik power index, because Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az, the second largest
shareholder, holds 161% of the votes, and other shareholders such as FMR (holding 349%) and Goldman
Sachs International Holdings (holding 256%) have enough voting power to form a solid opposition to Exor.
However, further examination shows that Exor SpA is, in fact, controlled by Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az
that holds 591% of its shares. [Other significant shareholders with 5% blocks in Exor are MacKenzie Investments and Bestinver Gestion]. Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az is a private holding company founded
by Gianni Agnelli and is owned by members of the his family. Thus, we classify Fiat Industrial as family
controlled by the Agnelli family, who controls 4661% of the votes in Fiat Industrial (305% via Exor SpA
and 1611% via Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az ).
13

Fiat is a good example illustrating our methodology in aggregating the voting rights of family
members. The biggest shareholders of Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az, that holds directly 161% of Fiat’s
equity and indirectly via Exor a further 305% are: (i) Dicembre, a private company which is owned
exclusively by John Elkann and by Marella Agnelli his grandmother and wife of former Fiat Chairman
Gianni Agnelli holds 3674% of voting rights. (ii) Maria Sole Agnelli Teodorani, Giovanni Agnelli’s granddaughter, holds 1283%. (iii) 1146% of voting rights are held by the heirs of Umberto Agnelli (Gianni
Agnelli’s youngest brother). (iv) 8 83% is held by the heirs of Giovanni Nasi, Fiat’s founder’s Giovanni
Agnelli grandson (from his daughter Aniceta who married Carlo Nasi). (v) 8 08% is held by the heirs of
Laura Nasi Camerana. (vi) 6 87% is held by Clara Nasi Ferrero de Gubernatis Ventimiglia. (vi) 5 62% is
held by the heirs of Susanna Agnelli Rattazzi. (vii) 3 36% is held by the heirs of Emanuele Nasi. (viiI)
Clara Agnelli Nuvoletti holds 030%. (ix) 0 05% is held Cristiana Agnelli.
After identifying all key shareholders in the firms that held Fiat’s stock, we aggregate the voting
rights of all members of the Agnelli family. There are two companies in which some members of the Agnelli
family appear as shareholders. In Dicembre s.s. we see that John Elkann and Marella Agnelli are the sole
shareholders; aggregating their votes we get that Dicembre is owned exclusively by the "Agnelli Family".
Likewise in Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az, we aggregate the voting rights of all members of the Agnelli
family. The aggregated family voting rights are 574%. As a result, the Giovanni Agnelli e C. S.a.p.az
has two shareholders, "Agnelli Family" with a 574% voting stake and Dicembre s.s. with 3674% voting
rights. Before applying the control algorithm, the two shareholders "Agnelli Family" and Dicembre s.s.
are considered as separate and independent shareholders. Whereas after running the control algorithm
Dicembre s.s. is identified as ultimately controlled by the same shareholder - "Agnelli Family". Thus Fiat
is classified as a family firm, owned and controlled by the Agnelli family.
BMW (Germany) Figure 1 presents the 2012 ownership structure of Bayerische Motoren Werke
(BMW), a German vehicles, motorcycle, and engine manufacturing company. This company appears to
be widely held, as no owner has enough votes (exceeding 20% or 10% or 5%) to control the firm. When
examining the Shapley-Shubik power index, voting power appears relatively uniform among the three
largest owners, Susanne Klatten GMBH (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung, company with limited
liability), Stefan Quandt GMBH, and Johanna Quandt GMBH. Each of these limited liability companies
is solely controlled by one individual, Susanne Klatten, Stefan Quandt and Johanna Quandt, respectively.
These individuals are close family members, as Johanna Quandt was the mother of Susanne Klatten and
Stefan Quandt. Therefore, once we aggregate their voting rights, the Quandt family holds 463% of BMW
votes. Using the Shapley-Shubik power index test for control while also observing that the next largest
shareholder is Allianz with 118% stake we classify BMW as family controlled, and the Quandt family as
the ultimate owner of BMW.

14

Figure 1; BMW
LVMH (France)

Figure 1; LVMH
Figure 1 depicts the 2012 ownership structure for Louis Vuitton Moët Hennessy (LVMH), a French
multinational luxury goods conglomerate (e.g. champagne Moët & Chandon, fashion house Louis Vuitton,
wine producer Château d’Yquem, etc.). This company is controlled by Financiere Jean Goujon, a company
whose sole purpose is to hold LVMH shares; this firm holds a 575% stake in LVMH. A closer examination
reveals that Financiere Jean Goujon is a 100% controlled subsidiary of Christian Dior, a French luxury
goods company. In turn, Christian Dior is controlled by Semyrhamis, an entity whose main purpose is
to hold Christian Dior shares and which in turn is a 100% controlled subsidiary of Financiere Agache, a
French company whose principal business is the ownership of interests in companies active in the retailing

15

business and the luxury products and wine and spirits sectors. Financiere Agache also holds a direct 916%
stake in Christian Dior. Financiere Agache is a 99% controlled subsidiary of the private company Groupe
Arnault SAS, which is the holding company of the French businessman Bernard Arnault and his Family.
Groupe Arnault SAS also controls 51% of the firm Le Peigne, a wealth-management firm which according
to various press reports manages money for Arnault and his family, and which holds 1% of the shares
of LVMH. In sum, LVMH is controlled by Bernard Arnault and his Family, which indirectly holds about
615% stake; 575% via Financiere Jean Goujon, 2% via Financiere Agache, 1% via Groupe Arnault SAS
and 1% via Le Peigne.
Mechel (Russia)

Figure 1; Mechel
Figure 1 presents the 2012 ownership structure of Mechel OAO, one of Russia’s leading mining and
metals companies, comprising producers of coal, iron ore, and steel. At first glance, Mechel seems to be
widely held, as voting power appears to be more or less equally distributed among the largest corporate
shareholders; (1) Claridge Limited (with 24% stake) a Cyprus-incorporated limited liability company;
(2) Dalewave Limited (with 2329% stake), also incorporated in Cyprus; (3) Bellasis Holdings Limited
(with 1157% stake), which is also incorporated in Cyprus; (4). Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas
(with 26% stake) which is a subsidiary of Deutsche Bank AG. However, closer examination reveals that
Claridge Limited, Dalewave Limited and Bellasis Holdings Limited are all 100% controlled by the Russian
businessmen Igor Vladimirovich Zyuzin. Therefore we classify Mechel as family controlled.

16

Schroders (United Kingdom)

Figure 1; Schroders
Figure 1 shows the 2012 ownership structure for Schroders Plc, a UK multinational asset management company, that is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index. Voting power is concentrated in the hands of
the largest corporate shareholders, Vincitas and Veritas, two Bermuda-incorporated firms holding 2697%
and 1735% of Schroders equity. A closer examination reveals that both legal entities are controlled by
the British banker Bruno Schroder and his family. Therefore, we will classify Schroders Plc as a family
controlled firm, and Bruno Schroder’s family as the ultimate owner.

3

Sample Characteristics and Descriptive Patterns

3.1

Main Types of Corporate Ownership

Figure 2 reports the distribution of ownership by shareholder type for the baseline sample in 2012 that
covers 26 843 publicly-traded firms from 85 countries. These listed firms are held by 80 607 unique
shareholders (since we focus on ownership we just examine direct owners). The key types of shareholders
are: () 36 823 single private individuals or families (457%);28 () 19 101 privately held ("Industrial")
firms that are neither banks nor financial companies (e.g., mutual funds, hedge funds) nor institutional
investors (237%);29 () 1 959 publicly listed ("Industrial") firms that are neither banks nor institutional
28

For example, Ma Huateng, is the founder, president, chief executive oﬃcer and main shareholder of Tencent Inc. William
Gates III is the key shareholder of Microsoft Corporation. N. Murray Edwards is the key shareholder of Canadian Natural
Resources Ltd.
29
For example, Rio Tinto International Holdings, a private firm, is a key shraeholder of Turquoise Hill Resources, a Canadian
mineral exploration and development company. Kar-Tess Holding, a Luxembourg based private company, is a direct share-

17

investors nor financial companies (24%);30 () 12 007 institutional investors, mostly mutual and pension
funds, nominees, and trusts/trustees (149%);31 () 1 343 non-state-controlled banks (17%);32 () 655
private equity (PE) firms, venture capital (VC) firms, and hedge funds (HF) (08%);33 () 75 governments,
public authorities, and regional states (01%);34 and () 8 644 with an unclassified type (107%).35 In
Figure 2 we also tabulate the controlling shareholders in 2007. This sample covers 25 976 public firms
from 74 countries. We identified 83 198 unique shareholders in the 2007 sample.

Figure 2a; Shareholders Type in 2012

Figure 2b; Shareholders Type in 2007

holder (23%) of Coca Cola Hellenic Bottling Company. Ramsbury Invest AB, a privately held Swedish real estate company
(controlled by Carl Stefan Erling Persson), is the key shareholder of H&M, founded by his father Erling Persson.
30
For example, Anheuser-Busch InBev, a beverage and brewing company headquartered in Belgium and listed in Euronext,
NYSE, and Johannesburg, is a direct shareholder of Ambev, the biggest brewery in Latin America. A.P. Moller—Maersk, a
Danish publicly listed conglomerate is a direct shareholder of Danske Bank, the largest bank in Denmark. Nestlé S.A, a Swiss
food and beverage company is a direct shareholder of L’Oréal S.A., a French cosmetics company.
31
For example, Aberdeen Asset Management PLC is a direct shareholder of QBE Insurance, Australia’s largest insurer. The
Vanguard Group is a direct shareholder of Exxon Mobil Corp. BlackRock is a direct shareholder of HSBC.
32
For example, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia is a direct shareholder of Qantas Airways. JPMorgan Chase & Co.
is a shareholder of Total S.A., a French multinational integrated oil and gas company. The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ,
Ltd. is a direct shareholder of Honda Motor Co., Ltd.
33
For example, Paulson & Co. Inc. is a direct shareholder of Wells Fargo & Company. Sequoia Capital is shareholder of
LinkedIn. KKR is a major shareholder of Legrand, the French industrial group.
34
For example, the government of Argentina is a direct shareholder of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales, a vertically integrated
Argentine energy compan. The government of China holds a large stake in PetroChina Company Limited. The government
of India is a major shareholder of Coal India Limited, the largest coal producer company in the world.
35
For example, Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America, a trade association that provides life insurance
and retirement annuities for people who work in the academic, research, medical, and cultural fields, is a direct shareholder
of Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc., a company that is engaged in the business of providing oﬃce/laboratory and tech
oﬃce space for lease to the science and technology industries.

18

3.2

Ownership Concentration around the World

Using the information on equity holdings (voting rights) we construct measures of ownership concentration
summing the equity holdings of the single, three, and five largest shareholders for all firms (1, 3, and
5). The construction of these measures is standard in the literature (e.g., La Porta et al. (1999), Faccio
and Lang (2002)); yet in contrast to previous works, we sum all members of the same family. The 1 index
reflects the ownership holding of all family members if they hold together the largest block. In BMW 1
equals the sum of the voting rights of all members of the Quandt family. Table 1 reports the number of
firms and the simple and the market-value-weighted average of the 1, 3 and 5 ownership concentration
index for all 85 countries in the 2012 sample. [Appendix Table 2 reports the same measures by country in
2007]. Table 2 gives firm level summary statistics and Table 2 gives country-level summary statistics
in 2012. [Appendix Tables 3 and 3 tabulate the corresponding summary statistics in 2007].
On average, the single largest shareholder (e.g., individual, family, financial institution, government,
etc) holds 315% of the equity of the publicly-traded corporations in our sample; and the largest three (five)
shareholders jointly hold 417% (446%) of firm’s equity. A controlling shareholder(s) voting rights exceed
slightly 50% (average 537% and median 51% with the minimum stake of control being 20%). Figure 3
reveals the wide distribution of ownership concentration around the world, as reflected on the mean 3
index. Ownership concentration is the highest in Africa and Eastern Europe. In the Czech Republic,
Ukraine, Latvia, Lithuania, and Russia the three largest shareholders hold more than 70% of the equity
of publicly traded firms. Relatively, ownership is disperse in Taiwan, Canada, United States, Australia,
and South Korea, where the 3 index is around 30% and in Japan, India, Ireland, Finland, Sweden and
Singapore where 3 is around 35%. [The patterns are similar when we use market-weighted measures.]

Figure 3; Ownership Concentration (C3) in 2012
19

3.3

Corporate Control around the World

Our aim is to provide the most complete-to-date characterization of control of publicly-traded corporations
around the world. To start with we classify firms as either "widely-held" or "controlled". We further split
widely-held firms to those with a significant block-holder (exceeding 5%) and those without any large block
(dispersed shareholders). Controlled firms fall into the following mutually exclusive categories reflecting the
dominant shareholder(s): () family/individual; () private firms that we could not trace the controlling
(individual or family) shareholder; () government, including municipalities, localities and state agencies;
() private firms that are widely-held (multiple unrelated shareholders where no shareholder is strong
enough to control, e.g. limited partnerships); and () widely-held public firm.
Figures 4 − 4 report the outcome of our algorithm that identifies ultimate control. The charts

portray corporate control across the world using arithmetic and market-cap value-weighted measures.
Approximately half of the firms (47% in 2012 and 487% in 2007) are widely-held corporations which
however do have a block shareholder, i.e., an entity holding more than 5% of the stock. This is consistent
with many country-studies documenting that equity blocks are prevalent even in countries with strong
investor protection and relatively disperse ownership, such as the United States (Holderness, 2009) and
Japan (Franks, et al. 2014)). The share of widely-held corporations without a block shareholder is low,
9% in 2012 and 63% in 2007; yet since these firms are typically large, the market capitalization shares
are 152% in 2012 and 11% in 2007. Turning now to controlled firms, the government controls around
47% of firms in 2012; yet these firms amount to 137% of the total market capitalization, as the state
typically controls large utilities and banks. Family control is about 152%. The share of unmatched firms
is about 146%, but since these firms are small, in market-capitalization terms they capture 26% and
47% of the sample in 2012 and 2007, respectively. While most likely these private firms are owned and
controlled by individuals/families, we keep them as a "separate category" though in our analysis we also
report estimates merging them with family firms (as Faccio and Lang (2002) and Masulis, Pham, and Zein
(2011)). Widely-held private firms ultimately control about 29% of the firms in our sample in 2012, these
ultimate owners are usually private firms held by several families or corporations (e.g. joint ventures).36
Widely held public firms ultimately control about 66% of the firms in our sample. For example, Grupo
ACS controlling Hochtief AG, or Renault controlling Volvo.
36

For example Anheuser-Busch InBev was ultimately controlled by Stichting Anheuser-Busch, a private entity firm owned
by several individuals (who are not family members). Lafarge SA is controlled by Parjointco NV, a private company firm,
jointly controlled by Albert Frère and Paul Desmarais.

20

Figure 4; Corporate Control Type in 2012

Figure 4; Corporate Control Type in 2007
In 2012 about 44% of the firms in our sample are ultimately controlled, with the remaining 56%
classified as widely-held. Many widely-held firms (47% of the total sample) have (at least one) key equity
block-holder, defined as block-holding of equity of more than 5% (but less than the required firm-specific
voting power threshold for classifying the firm as "controlled" according to our algorithm). For the remaining share of widely-held firms (9% of the total sample), we could not identify a shareholder with a
sizable equity block. Table 1 tabulates the cross-country patterns in 2012, while Appendix Table 2 for
21

2007. Table 2 reports summary statistics for all variables of corporate control in 2012 and Appendix Table
3 reports the statistics for 2007. Appendix Table 4 reports the correlation structure of the main variables.
Figure 5 provides an illustration of the considerable heterogeneity on corporate control around the
world. On the one hand, the Berle and Means (1932) type of corporation with many small shareholders is
almost absent in Africa (in Uganda, Ivory Coast, Botswana more than 80% of the firms are "controlled")
and in Eastern Europe (in the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, and Russia more than 80% of the firms have
a controlling shareholder). On the other hand, corporate control is low (below 30%) in New Zealand,
Canada, US, UK, Australia, and in Taiwan, where more listed firms are widely-held (though there are
blocks). The country rankings are in line with previous works (La Porta et al. 1999; Faccio and Lang
2002; Claessens, Laeven, and Lang 2002, Lins, Volpin, and Wagner, 2013) though there are diﬀerences.
The correlation of the identifier for controlled firms with the 1, 3, and 5 concentration measures is
high, though not perfect (073, 064, and 058; Appendix Table 4). In the Appendix we provide a detailed
description ofcorporate control for the G7 countries and the BRICs and connect our paper with case-studies
on corporate control and ownership concentration.

Figure 5; Share of Controlled Firms (simple average) in 2012
We now examine patterns of corporate control, looking at the main types of controlling shareholders.
Figure 6 plots the distribution of family control around the world.37 Family-controlled firms are
pervasive in countries with strong family ties and social values centred around the family, such as Greece
and Italy (see Alesina and Giuliano, 2014). In contrast, there are few family-controlled listed corporations
37

For 152% of the firms in the 2012 sample we could trace an ultimate controlling family or individual; and for 146% of
the firms the ultimate controlling shareholder is a privately held firm (that almost certainty is owned by a family or individual
though we could not trace his/her identity).

22

in Taiwan, Ireland, and Australia.

Figure 6; Family Control (simple average) in 2012
In Figure 6 we add to family-controlled firms listed firms controlled by a private unidentified firm,
as most likely these firms (that we could not trace the ultimate shareholder) are controlled by families/individuals. This approach follows Faccio and Lang (2002), Masulis, Pham, and Zein (2011), and
many other works. The patterns are similar though now the proportion of family controlled firms around
the world increases to 30% and the country level mean (median) increases to 35% (33%).

Figure 6; Family Control Extended (simple average) in 2012
Figure 6 gives a graphical illustration of the distribution of state control around the world. National
23

(federal) governments, state agencies, and municipalities control roughly 4% of sample firms. While state
control is (close to) zero in many countries (United States, Canada, and Taiwan) it is quite high in Uganda,
China, the Arab World (Oman, Qatar, UAE), and also in Eastern Europe (Russia, Slovenia).38

Figure 6; Government Control (simple average) in 2012

3.4

Trends in Ownership Concentration and Corporate Control

We examined the evolution of ownership concentration and corporate control patterns during the period
2004 − 2012. This may be a relatively brief period to study dynamics; yet, as the sample includes the

US financial meltdown of 2007 − 2009, the subsequent global economic recession, and the euro crisis of

2010−2012 it allows examining the impact of these large economic shocks on corporate structure. In Figures
7 and 7 we plot the evolution of the 3 concentration index and the share of controlled firms over the
2004 − 2012; as ORBIS coverage changes over time we plot the concentration index and the corporate

control share both for a broad unbalanced sample that includes 41 329 firms and for a balanced sample

that includes 9 957 firms in 73 countries.39 Ownership concentration and control are persistent. As we
show in the Appendix, these patterns of stability are present across all advanced economies and to a lesser
extent also in the sample of middle and low-income countries. The high inertia in ownership concentration
is consistent with La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1999) and detailed country studies (e.g., Franks,
Mayer, and Miyajima (2014) on Japanese corporations and Morck et al. (2005) on Canadian firms).
38

As control by private banks, institutional investors, and other-than-banks (non-state owned) financial institutions is overall
low, for brevity we do not report graphical illustrations.
39
We are concentrating on 73 countries out of our core sample of 85 countries, because for those 73 countries we have good
coverage not only in 2012, but also for the 9 years between 2004 − 2012.

24

Figure 7 : Dynamics of Ownership Concentration Figure 7 : Dynamics of Corporate Control
While the share of controlled (and widely-held) corporations across the world sample or/and specific
countries may appear persistent over time, there may be changes. The roughly stable share of controlled
firms may either reflect (at the extreme) that ownership does not change over time for any firm or that
there are many changes in control that cancel out (because widely-held corporations become controlled
and at the same time controlled firms become widely-held). We examined this in detail looking both at the
balanced sample of 9 957 firms that we have ownership and control information throughout 2004 − 2012

and for a larger sample of 15 930 listed firms that we have information in 2012 and 2007.

2004 − 2012 Comparison In the sample of 9 957 firms covering the full period, we observe

1 967 distinct firms that have stayed with the exact same controlling owner throughout this period [e.g.,
Petrochina is "controlled" by the Chinese Government throughout this period, Wal-Mart is "controlled" by
the Walton family and Volkswagen AG controlled by the Porsche-Piech family]. 4 412 firms have remained
widely-held throughout 2004 − 2012 [e.g., Exxon Mobil Corp, General Electric Company, Rio Tinto]. So

64% of listed firms did not experience any change on corporate control during this 9-year period. Of the
remaining 36% of the sample, 607 firms have remained controlled throughout the period but there was a

change of the controlling entity. [For example, Banco Patagonia (Argentina) was controlled by the Stuart
Milne brothers until 2010, when Banco do Brasil bought the controlling stake. Bashneft (Russia) was
controlled by Ural Rakhimov until mid-2009, when control moved to the hands of Evtushenkov Vladimir
Petrovich]. The control of the remaining 2 971 firms has changed from either being widely-held to having
a controlling shareholder or/and vice versa.
2007 − 2012 Comparison We now turn to our examination of changes in corporate control in

the sample of 15 930 firms that we have information in 2007 and in 2012. 3 829 firms have the exact
same controlling ultimate shareholder/owner (24%). In addition, 7 502 (47%) firms are classified as widely
25

held in both years 2007 and in 2012. Of the remaining 29% of firms that changed control, 1 461 (9%)
have remained "controlled", but there has been a change of the controlling shareholder in both years but
changed hands. The remaining 3 138 firms have changed classification during the crisis period, as they
either move from being widely-held to controlled or vice versa.

4

Legal Origin and Corporate Control

In this section we report the "reduced-form" estimates linking corporate control with legal origin. First,
we report the baseline cross-country specifications. Second, we search for heterogeneity w.r.t. firm size
and age. Third, we examine the link between legal origin and the key types of controlled corporations.
Fourth, we perform some necessary sensitivity checks.

4.1

Empirical Specification

Our baseline specification exploring the "reduced-form" association between corporate control (and also
ownership concentration) and legal origin reads:
0
Γ + 0 Ψ +  +  +  
 = 0 Φ + 

The dependent variable ( ) is an indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm  in country
 is controlled (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could not identify the ultimate
controlling family/individual, the government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is
widely held (with or without a block). The key explanatory variables capture countries’ legal family ( ).
We include French, German, and Scandinavian civil-law legal origin indicator variables using commonlaw as the benchmark omitted category. To partly account for vast regional diﬀerences in ownership and
economic performance, in many specifications we include regional fixed-eﬀects,  , relying on World Bank’s
classification. Since ownership and control diﬀer considerably across industries, many specifications include
0 is a set of firm-specific controls; following Holderness (2016a,b), we control for
sector constants,  . 

(log) firm age and size (log market capitalization).
Before reporting the results it is important to stress that legal origin may aﬀect corporate control via
numerous channels, such as investor protection, court eﬃciency, product market regulation, labour laws
(see La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2008). Thus the estimated coeﬃcients on the legal origin
indicators capture the "reduced-form" relationship between legal family/tradition and corporate control
(and ownership concentration); in an eﬀort to isolate the role of legal origin from other country features,
in many specifications we include the log of per capita GDP that we take a summary measure of economic,
institutional, and financial development (0 ). Since the legal origin indicators (and GDP) take the same
value for all firms in a country, we cluster standard errors at the country-level (Moulton (1990)).

26

4.2

Baseline Estimates

Table 3 reports the results. As the dependent variable is binary, we estimate probit models with maximum
likelihood. Since probit coeﬃcients are not easily interpretable, the table gives marginal eﬀects estimated
at the mean of the other covariates. Column (1) gives unconditional estimates. The simple test of means
suggests that the share of controlled firms is 33% higher in French civil law countries as compared to
common law countries. Compared to common-law countries, the share of controlled firms is roughly 19%
higher in German civil-law countries and around 5 − 6% higher in Scandinavian countries.

In column (2) we control for (log) GDP p.c. that enters with a significantly negative coeﬃcient.

Ownership concentration is higher in relatively underdeveloped countries, perhaps because of weak investor protection, other institutional of financial frictions. The estimates on the French and German legal
origin variables are not aﬀected much. The coeﬃcient on the French civil-law indicator is positive and
highly significant; the likelihood of listed firms with a controlling shareholder, as compared to widely-held
corporations, is significantly higher (around 30%) for countries whose legal system is build around the
Napoleonic civil code of 1803, as compared to (mostly) British colonies that have a common-law legal
system. The German and the Scandinavian civil-law dummies also enter with positive and significant
estimates; the probability of a listed firm with a controlling shareholder is higher by approximately 11 − 16
percentage points in these countries.

In columns (3) and (4) we condition on continental fixed-eﬀects. The regional constants are highly
significant (coeﬃcients not shown), as widely-held corporations are less common in Sub-Saharan Africa and
Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The coeﬃcient on the French legal origin indicator retains its economic
and statistical significance (0295). The estimates on German and Scandinavian legal origin indicators fall
somewhat and turn statistically insignificant.
In column (5) we control for log firm age and log market capitalization, so as to partly account for
the large heterogeneity of listed firms around the world. Size and age may be related to the legal tradition
and the stage of economic development. Both variables enter with small and statistically indistinguishable
from zero coeﬃcients. As there are no major diﬀerences on firm age and size across legal families, the
coeﬃcients and associated marginal eﬀects on the legal origin indicators retain their magnitude.
In (6)-(7) we augment the specification with a vector of industry (85 SIC2-code) constants. This is
a priori important, as previous theoretical and empirical research shows that there are large diﬀerences
on ownership structure across sectors (e.g., Faccio and Lang (2002)). Since the sample drops when we
condition on firm age and size, we report specifications with and without these controls. The coeﬃcient
on the French civil-law dummy retains its significance. The estimate implies that -conditional on highly
relevant regional features and industry characteristics and conditional on the level of development- the
likelihood of controlled firms in French civil law countries is on average 24% higher as compared to common
law countries. The German legal origin indicator also enters with a significant (at the 90% confidence level)
estimate (013). The estimate on the Scandinavian civil law dummy is smaller (007) and does not pass
27

the standard significance levels.
Examples A couple of examples illustrate the probit marginal estimates. The fraction of controlled
firms in Malaysia, a common-law country, is 050, while the corresponding share in Indonesia, a Dutch
colony with a French civil law system is 076. The share of controlled firms in Cyprus, a former British
colony with a strong common law tradition, is half of the analogous share in Greece, a French civil-law
country (034 compared to 075). Diﬀerences in corporate control across legal families are also present in
Africa, where the share of widely held corporations is overall quite small. The share of controlled firms in
common-law Kenya and Nigeria is 074 and 068, while in French civil-law Ivory Coast is 092.

4.3

Ordered (Hierarchical) Analysis

In most instances there is at least one large block stake shareholder in widely held firms. For example Bill
Gates holds a large stake in Microsoft. Blackrock and Fidelity hold big blocks in Apple, while Berkshire
Hathaway holds a sizable block in IBM. In Europe, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert holds a block on Total, Dodge
and Cox hold a large block in Credit Suisse, and the Kuwait Investment Corporation holds around 57% of
Daimler’s voting rights. In 2012, 47% of the firms are classified as widely held with a block (reflecting 46%
of total market capitalization) and 91% are classified as widely held with no block (152% of total market
capitalization). Block shareholders can exert (at least) some control in these corporations (see Edmans and
Holderness (2016)). We thus defined an ordered index (0, 1, 2) of control that accommodates heterogeneity
on the degree (intensity) of control and repeated estimation. The trichotomous index takes the value of
zero for widely held firms without any block shareholder (all shareholders hold less than 5% of firm’s voting
rights); the index takes the value of one for widely held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess
of 5% and less than 50%), and equals two for firms that our algorithm identifies as controlled, having
a well-identified controlling shareholder of any type (e.g., family/individual, government, private equity,
hedge fund, etc.). We then estimate ordered probit models (with maximum likelihood) that associate the
ordered (0, 1, 2) index of control with legal origin (regression equation (1)); this allows jointly assessing
the role of the legal system structure on the various forms of corporate control.
Table 4 reports ordered probit coeﬃcients. A couple of noteworthy patterns emerge. First, the
threshold parameters are statistically significant from each other, suggesting that the ordered model fits
the data better than the binary model (that merges categories 0 and 1). Second, across all specifications
the coeﬃcient on the French legal origin indicator enters with a positive and highly significant estimate,
suggesting that the likelihood of observing controlled firms and widely-held firms with a block shareholder
is higher in French civil-law countries as compared to common-law countries. Third, the coeﬃcients on
the German civil-law and Scandinavian civil law dummies are also positive, but in most specifications are
statistically insignificant. Fourth, log GDP p.c. continues to enter with a negative coeﬃcient suggesting
that economic development is associated with a higher likelihood of widely-held corporations. This applies

28

even when we look at firms in the same industry and the same continent.
The estimated ordered probit marginal eﬀects, in column (6) imply that, conditional on regional
features and the level of economic development, the likelihood that a listed firm in French civil-law country
will be controlled by a key shareholder (family/individual, government, institutional investor) is 664% [the
sample includes 4 516 firms in 33 French-civil-law countries], quite similar to the unconditional likelihood
of 668%. The ordered probit specifications further imply that in French civil-law countries approximately
31% of listed firms will be widely held with a block shareholder and only 28% of listed firms will have
dispersed ownership without any shareholder holding more than 5% of the firm’s voting rights. These
estimates are again close to the unconditional means. Turning now to firms in common-law countries (the
sample includes 13 984 firms in 28 common-law countries), the ordered probit estimates imply that 10%
of listed firms will be widely dispersed without a block shareholder and 575% of listed firms will be widely
held but with a sizable block. These estimates (that control on income, industry and regional eﬀects)
are close to the unconditional tabulations (125% and 53%, respectively). In Figure 8 we tabulate the
estimated likelihoods of the three outcomes for each legal family using the specification with the rich set
of controls (reported in column (6)), as this allows visualizing at which margin legal origin operates. For
comparability Figure 8 plots the unconditional means/likelihoods of the three outcomes.

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
French
Civil-Law

German
Civil-Law

Scandinavian
Civil-Law

French
Civil-Law

Common-law

German
Civil-Law

Scandinavian
Civil-Law

Firms with a Controlling Shareholder

Firms with a Controlling Shareholder

Widely-held Firms with Blocks

Widely-held Firms with Blocks

Widely-held Firms without Blocks

Widely-held Firms without Blocks

Figure 8; Estimated Conditional Likelihoods

Common-law

Figure 8; Unconditional Likelihoods

Some interesting patterns emerge, that all point out that one has to jointly examine the impact of
legal origin on widely-held firms with and without a block shareholder and one firms with a controlling
dominant shareholder. First, when we look at diﬀerences across legal families on the share of widely held
firms without any block shareholder, the key diﬀerence is between French civil-law and all other legal
families. The estimated likelihood (and the unconditional probability) of widely held firms in French civillaw countries is just 268% and 248% respectively. In contrast the corresponding likelihoods for common
law countries are 1011% and 1246%. Yet the diﬀerences in the share of widely-held firms without a block
between common-law countries and Scandinavian civil-law countries are much more attenuated, as 97% of
Scandinavian firms are widely held (and the estimated likelihood is 811%). Second, when we examine the
29

shares of widely-held firms with a block shareholder across the four main legal families, we also detect large
diﬀerences between French civil-law and common-law. The conditional ordered probit likelihood in common
law countries is 575%, while in French civil-law counties 31%. These estimates are close to the simple mean
values of 528% and 314%. The estimated likelihood of widely-held firms with blocks in German civillaw countries is 371%, significantly lower than the corresponding likelihood in common law countries. In
contrast, the diﬀerences in the share of widely-held firms with a large block between Scandinavian civil-law
and common-law countries are much smaller. Third, when we look at the share of firms with an identified
controlling shareholder, which is typically a family/individual or the government, a clear pecking order
across legal families emerges. The estimated and unconditional likelihood of controlled firms in French
civil-law countries are around 66%; in German civil-law countries the corresponding likelihoods are around
52%; in Scandinavian civil-law countries significantly lower around 39%; and in common-law countries the
lowest around 32% − 32%.

4.4

Heterogeneous Eﬀects

The size distribution of publicly-traded firms is highly skewed, obeying a "power law" (see Gabaix, 2009
for a review).40 In our sample the mean market capitalization is 155 Billion USD, while the median is ten
times lower, 015 Billion USD. Given the skewness of firm size, simply controlling for market capitalization
may be inadequate. Moreover, the "reduced-form" relationship between corporate control and legal origin
may diﬀer for small, medium, large, and very large firms (Holderness (2016a,b)).
Table 5 reports specifications (probit marginal eﬀects) examining in detail heterogeneity and the
sensitivity of our baseline estimates to firm size.41 In column (1) we drop the top 1% of firms in our
sample, namely firms with market capitalization exceeding 30 billion USD, while in columns (2) and (3)
we drop firms at the top 5% and the top 10%, respectively (74 billion USD and 3 billion USD). Across
all permutations, the French legal origin indicator continues to enter with a stable (around 025) and
statistically significant at the 99% level coeﬃcient. .The German civil law indicator also enters with a
significant estimate (at the 90% level), implying that compared to common-law countries, the likelihood
that a firm will be controlled is 14% higher. In line with the baseline estimates, log GDP p.c. enters with
a statistically significant estimate.
In (4) and (5) we split the sample using the median market capitalization (0155 Billion USD) and
repeat estimation in the two sub-samples; this allows us examining whether the impact of legal origin diﬀers
for small and large firms. Legal origin correlates significantly with control in both sub-samples. The French
civil law indicator is significantly positive in both samples. The marginal eﬀect of German civil law dummy
is also similar in the two sub-samples, 011 − 013. And there are no diﬀerences in the share of controlled
40

A power law (with the exponent close to one) seems to characterize firm size distribution, as reflected on employment,
sales, assets, and market capitalization in the United States (e.g., Axtell (2001), Luttmer (2007), and Gabaix and Landier
(2008)), Europe (Fujiwara et al. 2004), Japan (Okuyama et al. 1999), and other countries (Gabaix, 2009).
41
Since age and size to not correlate with ownership concentration and legal origin, to maximize the sample we report results
omitting them from the empirical specification. The results are almost identical if we include them as controls.

30

(as opposed to widely-held) firms between common law and Scandinavian countries. The regressions reveal
an additional (and to the best of our knowledge novel). The negative association between log GDP p.c.
and widely-held listed corporations is particularly strong for large firms. The coeﬃcient on log output per
capita in the large firm sample is negative and highly significant in the sample of above median size firms.
In contrast log GDP p.c. enters with an estimate that is close to zero in the sample of medium-small listed
firms. And the coeﬃcient on log GDP p.c. in this sub-sample is statistically insignificant. This novel result
echoes the findings of Hsieh and Klenow (2014) that compare the life cycle of plants in Mexico, India, and
the United States showing that the key diﬀerences in productivity and size across these countries are on
large plants at late stages of firm’s life cycle.
In columns (6) and (7) we restrict estimation to large in terms of market capitalization firms using
the top 10% and the top 5% cutoﬀ, respectively. The French legal origin indicator enters with a significantly
positive coeﬃcient that is quite similar to the full-sample estimate. Interestingly the coeﬃcient on log GDP
p.c. increases in absolute value (−020) implying that the positive relation between economic development
and widely-held corporations is particularly strong for very large firms.
In columns (8) and (9) we split the sample using median firm age (23 years) and re-estimate the
specification in the sample of "young" and "old" firms. The patterns are similar. The positive marginal
eﬀect of the French civil law is present and similar in magnitude in both sub-samples. Likewise economic
development is associated with a smaller likelihood that a publicly traded firm will be eﬀectively controlled
for both young and old firms.

4.5

Legal Origin and Type of Corporate Control

We also examine whether there are diﬀerences across legal families on the type of corporate control,
estimating multinomial logit models. In these cross-sectional specifications, the dependent variable is a
non-hierarchical categorical score that classifies each firm in our sample either as widely held (with or
without a significant block), or controlled by the state, a family/individual (including private firms that we
could not trace its ultimate controlling shareholder), a widely-held private firm, and a widely-held public
firm. (For an overview of economic choice models see Mc Fadden (2001)).
Table 6 reports the multinomial logit estimates. In columns (1a)-(5a) we report marginal eﬀects of
a simple specification that does not include any controls; in columns (2a)-(2e) we control for the log of
per capita GDP and also include continental and industry fixed-eﬀects. [We omit the controls for firm
size and age that are insignificant correlates of corporate control, so as to maximize the country-firm
sample]. First, the likelihood of observing a listed firm with dispersed ownership is considerably lower
(by approximately 28%) in French civil-law countries, as compared to common-law countries. Second,
this diﬀerence is mostly driven by family firms; the likelihood that a firm will be controlled by a family
or an individual is approximately 15% higher in French civil-law countries, as compared to common law
countries. For comparison the unconditional likelihoods of family control are 4663% and 2348% in French

31

civil law and common-law countries, respectively. There are also diﬀerences between French civil-law and
British common-law countries in the share of state controlled firms (approximately 4%); this estimate is
line with simple mean diﬀerence (223% and 766% are the corresponding likelihoods of state control in
French civil-law and British civil-law countries). Third, GDP per capita is robust correlate of corporate
control by the state and by families/individuals.
In Appendix Table 5 we examine heterogeneity of the multinomial logit estimates with respect to
firm size. First, the diﬀerence in the share of widely-held firms between French civil-law and common-law
countries is considerable and statistically significant in both samples (−027 and −025). Second, state

ownership is higher in civil-law countries both in the sample of large and medium/small listed firms. Third,
family control is higher in French civil-law (and to a lesser extent in Germany civil-law countries), but
the diﬀerences compared to common-law countries are considerably larger in the sample of small firms.
Fourth, economic development is a significant correlate of corporate control only in the sample of medium
and large listed firms, a novel (to the best of our knowledge) finding that echoes the firm-level evidence
from India, China, Mexico and the United States of Hsieh and Klenow (2014). In developed countries the
ownership of large firms becomes more dispersed and control by families and the state falls, but this does
not apply in the sample of small listed firms.

4.6

Sensitivity Checks

In the Appendix we report various sensitivity checks of the reduced-form relationship between corporate
control and legal origin. Appendix Table 6-Panel  reports linear probability model (OLS) estimates, while
Panel  gives logit ML estimates. The French civil-law dummy enters with a positive and highly significant
estimate that is quite similar to the probit marginal eﬀects (025). In the linear specifications the coeﬃcient
on the German civil law indicator is also positive and in most specifications statistically significant. The
coeﬃcient in column (7) implies that compared to common-law countries, the probability that a firm is
going to be controlled (rather than widely held) is 14% higher. Appendix Table 7 reproduces the baseline
specifications in 2007. The marginal eﬀect on the French civil-law dummy is around 025 and highly
significant across all model permutations. Appendix Table 8 reports estimates pooling all observations
across all 117 countries across 2004 − 2012; this is quite useful, as we maximize the country sample. In
these models we also add year constants to account for trends. The coeﬃcient on the French legal-origin

indicator is 026 in the most restrictive specifications in (6) and (7) and highly significant. The estimate
on the German civil-law indicator is also significantly positive (around 017) implying considerable eﬀects.
Appendix Table 9 we average the control index across firms in each country and then run cross-country
regressions using the share of controlled firms in each country as the dependent variable. These models are
far from ideal, as the distribution of firm size diﬀers considerably across the world, and hence the country
means mask sizable heterogeneity across a relevant dimension. The coeﬃcients on the French and German
civil-law countries are positive and significant in most specifications.

32

5

Legal Origin and Ownership Concentration

5.1

Baseline Estimates

The literature has focused on the role of legal origin on ownership concentration, proxied by the voting/control rights of the one, three, or five largest shareholders. We thus estimated the reduced-form
specifications associating ownership concentration with the legal origin. Table 7 reports the baseline results. The unconditional specification in (1) shows that, compared to common-law countries, ownership
concentration is significantly higher in civil-law countries. On average the share of the three largest shareholders/families is 25 percentage points higher in countries whose French legal origin countries, as compared
to countries with a common-law legal system. Ownership concentration is higher by approximately 6 − 7
in German civil-law and the Scandinavian civil-law countries. The legal origin indicators explain 10% of

the total variance in ownership concentration. This is far from negligible, as in total country fixed-eﬀects
explain 25% of the variability in ownership concentration.42 So legal origin explains 40% of the variance
captured by all country features.
Figures 10 −  give a graphical illustration of the diﬀerences on ownership concentration between

common-law countries and French-civil-law countries using the 3 and the 5 measures. The Figures
overlap the histogram of ownership concentration for common-law (13 986 firms in 28) and French civillaw (4516 firms in 33) countries. Ownership concentration in French civil-law countries is titled on the right

of the distribution for common law countries. The median value of 3 in common law countries is 2901%,
while the median value in French civil law countries is 6217%. The 25 percentile of the distribution of
3 in common law countries is 1384%, while in French civil-law countries 4298%. The 75 percentile of
3 in common law countries is 5196%, while in French civil-law countries is 8179%.

Figure 10; Concentration (3) Index in 2012 Figure 10; Concentration (5) Index in 2012
42

The sizable impact of country-level features in explaining variability in ownership concentartion echoes the findings of
Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2007) and Helwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007).

33

In column (2) we control for the log of per capita GDP in 2012. Ownership concentration is higher
in relatively underdeveloped countries. The model fit increases modestly (2 moving to 012), as the
economic significance of GDP is small-to-moderate. As legal origin is not systematically linked to output
per capita, the coeﬃcients on the legal origin indicators are not aﬀected much. In columns (3)-(4) we include
regional fixed-eﬀects to account for continental diﬀerences in ownership concentration, development, and
other hard-to-account-for factors. The inclusion of the highly significance regional constants improves the
model fit (2 increases by 005); but the legal origin indicators explain twice as much of the variance of
the dependent variable as compared to the regional fixed eﬀects. The coeﬃcients on all three civil-law
indicators drop; yet the coeﬃcient on the French civil-law dummy retains significance (at 99% level). The
estimate in (4) implies that ownership concentration (as captured by the ownership holdings of the three
largest shareholders) is 16% higher in French civil-law countries, as compared to common-law countries
(the omitted category) and Scandinavian and German civil-law countries (as the estimates are zero). This
eﬀect is far from being negligible, as the firm level mean of the 3 index is 042 and the standard deviation
across firms (countries) is 0281 (0147). In column (5) we control for log stock market capitalization and
log firm age. This has no impact on the estimates on the legal origin indicators.43 The coeﬃcient on
the French civil-law dummy is stable (0174) retaining significance at the 99% level. In columns (6)-(7)
we add 85 SIC2-code dummies. The industry fixed eﬀects are highly significant and improve the model
fit (2 increases to 018 − 020).44 The coeﬃcient on the French civil-law dummy retains its economic
and statistical significance. The estimate implies that -conditional on highly relevant regional features
and industry unobserved characteristics and conditional on the level of development, firm age and sizeshareholders of firms in French civil law countries have on average 15% more equity as compared to
shareholders in common law countries.
Examples A couple of examples illustrate the regression estimates. The average value of the 3
index for the 14 publicly-traded firms incorporated in Ghana, a former British colony that has a common
law legal system, is 631%, while the mean value of the 3 index for the 14 firms incorporated in (adjacent
to Ghana) Ivory Coast, a French civil-law country, is 729%. [GDP p.c. is similar in the two countries
(1 300 − 1 600 USD per capita) and so is total market capitalization (around 2 billion USD)]. The value of

the 3 index in Nigeria and Kenya, two former British colonies with large stock markets in Africa is even
lower than in Ghana, 484% and 538%, respectively, illustrating again the role of legal origin in shaping
ownership concentration. In East Asia the mean value of 3 in Indonesia that has a French civil-law
system (inherited from Dutch and French colonizers) is 634%, while mean concentration in Thailand, a
country with a common-law system, is considerably lower, 452%.
43

The lack of a systematic association between firm age and ownership concentration echoes the results of Foley and
Greenwood (2010) and Franks, Mayer, Volpin, and Wagner (2011), who show that ownership concentration gets dispersed
after the IPO only in countries with liquid capital markets and strong investor protection.
44
The highest coeﬃcient of the 82 industry constants are for the coal mining, auto repair, and water sectors; the smallest
coeﬃcients are on the trucking, eating and drinking, and instruments sectors.

34

5.2

Heterogeneous Eﬀects

Table 8 reports specifications examining heterogeneity. In columns, (1), (2) and (3) we drop firms at the
top 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Across all permutations, the French legal origin indicator continues
to enter with a stable (around 015) and statistically significant coeﬃcient. This reassures that the link
between corporate ownership concentration and legal origin is not driven by very large firms. In (4) and
(5) we examine whether the impact of legal origin diﬀers for small and large firms. Legal origin correlates
significantly with ownership concentration in both samples. The regressions reveal also an additional
interesting result that regards the correlation of economic development and ownership concentration. The
negative association between log GDP p.c. and ownership concentration is particularly strong for large
firms. The coeﬃcient on log output per capita in the large firm sample is negative and significant, implying
a considerable economic eﬀect; a doubling in GDP p.c. is related to fall in ownership concentration of
4% − 5% percentage points. In contrast log GDP p.c. enters with an estimate that is close to zero in the
sample of medium-small listed firms. And the coeﬃcient on log GDP p.c. in this sub-sample is statistically

insignificant. In columns (6) and (7) we restrict estimation to large in terms of market capitalization firms.
While the country-sample drops, the fit of the model continues to be decent. The French legal origin
indicator enters with a significantly positive coeﬃcient (015). The coeﬃcient on log GDP p.c. increases in
absolute value (−006) implying that the positive relation between economic development and ownership
dispersion is particularly strong for large (and very large) firms. In columns (8) and (9) we split the sample
using median firm age and re-estimate the specification in the sample of "young" and "old" firms. The
patterns are similar.

5.3

Sensitivity Checks

As in the specifications with corporate control, we perturbed the empirical specifications across various
dimensions to examine the stability of the estimates on the average impact of legal origin on ownership
concentration. Below we discuss the key sensitivity checks that we report in the Appendix. In Appendix
Table 10 we examine the link between legal origin and ownership concentration using data before the global
financial crisis of 2008 − 2009. (the ordering of the specifications follows the structure of table 8). The

French civil-law origin indicator enters with a significant estimate that is quite similar to the baseline model
(015 when we control for log GDP p.c. and other features). The association is quite similar across large

and small market capitalization firms. In Appendix Table 11 we maximize the country sample, pooling
all firms across all 117 countries across all years (2004 − 2012). The coeﬃcient on the French legal-origin

indicators is 015 and statistically significant at standard confidence levels. In Appendix Table 12 we
average the concentration index across firms in each country and then run cross-country regressions using
country means. The coeﬃcient on the French civil-law dummy is 010 − 015 and more than two standard
errors larger than zero across all specifications. In Appendix Table 13 we report least-absolute-deviation

(median) regression estimates so as to account for outliers. The median estimate on the French civil-law
35

dummy is quite similar -and if anything slightly larger- to the LS coeﬃcient (018). This applies to both
the 2012 and the 2007 sample. In Appendix Table 14 we show that the association between legal origin
and ownership concentration is present when one proxies the latter with the equity holdings of the single
largest shareholder (1) and when one sums the share holdings of the five largest shareholders (5).

6

A Primer on Mechanisms

The strong association between corporate control by families/individuals and the state (and ownership
concentration) and legal origin begets an explanation on the mechanisms. The law and finance literature
(La Porta et al. (1997, 1998); Djankov, Hart, Mc Liesh and Shleifer (2008)) emphasize the impact of
legal origin on corporate ownership structure via the sound protection of minority shareholders against
expropriation by company insiders (dominant shareholders and/or managers). However, besides corporate
law, legal origin has been linked to many other institutional and regulatory features. Legal formalism and
the quality of the judiciary diﬀer considerably across legal families (Djankov et al. 2003). There are also
non-negligible diﬀerences across legal families in regulatory features of product and entry markets (Djankov
et al. 2002) and labour markets (Botero et al. 2004). As summarized by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Shleifer (2006), in its "strong form" common law promotes dispute resolution with light state involvement
and relatively little regulation. In contrast, civil law is "policy implementing, a strategy of social control"
over markets, that depends on professional judges, who interpret rather than create law, and a strong
government with active involvement in product, labour, and capital markets (see Glaeser and Shleifer
(2002) for a theoretical model and a discussion of the emergence of the key diﬀerences of the two legal
families). In Appendix Table 15 we show that in line with these works legal origin correlates significantly
with proxies of investor protection rights, legal quality, entry and labour market regulatory features.45
To shed light on the channels, we replace the legal origin indicators with various proxies of investor
protection, court eﬃciency, red tape in entry markets, and labour market regulation. While these models
do not identify causal eﬀects, as there are always concerns of omitted variables, reverse causation, and errorin-variables, they allow assessing the strength of the correlation of these features with control, conditional
on the level of development, regional and industry features. Tables 9 − 12 give the results.

6.1

Investor Protection

We start our "channels" analysis examining the association between corporate control and investor protection, as this has been the key mechanism emphasized by the law and finance literature. Table 9 reports
the main results. Panel  gives probit ML marginal eﬀects and Panel  gives ordered probit coeﬃcients;
in these models we allow for diﬀerences between widely-held corporations without and with large equity
blocks. In all specifications we include industry fixed-eﬀects and regional constants to account for diﬀer45
Appendix Table 1 Panel  reports the values of all country characteristics. Appendix Table 4 Panel  gives the correlation
structure across countries.

36

ences on corporate control across sectors and the large continental diﬀerences on ownership concentration.
Besides reporting specifications in the core (2012 and the 2007) samples, the table also gives estimates in
the pooled sample (2004 − 2012), so as to maximize country coverage.

In columns (1), (4) and (7) we proxy investor protection with a 0 − 6 shareholder protection index

and 0 − 4 creditor rights index.46 The measures are retrieved Djankov et al. (2008) and Djankov et al.

(2007), respectively, who expand, correct, and update the original shareholder protection and creditor’s
rights indicators compiled by La Porta et al. (1997, 1998). There is no systematic link between control

and creditor’s right, a result consistent with earlier works. The estimated marginal eﬀect on the antidirectors rights index is negative in all specifications but statistically insignificant. In countries with
stronger minority rights, the likelihood of observing widely-held, as compared to controlled firms is higher;
but the eﬀect is not strong. The results are similar when we use ownership concentration as the outcome
variable (Appendix Table 16).
In columns (2),(5) and (8) we measure shareholder protection with the Djankov et al. (2008) antiself-dealing index that quantifies the legal rights that minority shareholders have against self-dealing transactions of corporate insiders. Djankov et al. (2008) argue that this index is theoretically more appealing
and empirically a stronger correlate of various financial market outcomes. This composite index reflects exante and ex-post private enforcement mechanisms available to minority shareholders to check self-dealing
activities of managers and controlling shareholders. Ex ante mechanisms include requirements for approvals
of disinterested shareholders, disclosure requirements by the seller and buyer, and independent reviews by
auditors or financial experts. Ex post mechanisms include disclosure of the transaction of insiders in periodic filings (annual reports), access of minority shareholders to evidence, and the easiness to sue and hold
liable managers and controlling shareholders for misconduct. Following Djankov et al. (2008) we include
in the regression an index of public enforcement of shareholder’s protection rights, based on prison time for
corporate insiders engaging in self-dealing transactions and fines. The anti-self-dealing index enters with
a negative coeﬃcient that is significant in the 2007 and the pooled 2004 − 2012 samples; the estimate is

marginally insignificant in 2012 (-value 011). These results point out that stronger protection of minority

shareholders from self-dealing transactions by company insiders is associated with a higher likelihood of
widely held listed firms. These results are strengthened when we estimate ordered probit specifications
that allow for widely-held corporations with and without large blocks (Panel ). In contrast, the estimated
marginal eﬀect on the public enforcement index is statistically insignificant, pointing out that imprisonment
and large fines are not related to corporate control.47
In columns (3), (6) and (9) we enter separately in the regression the ex-ante and the ex-post antiself-dealing measures. [The correlation of the two sub-indicators is small, around 015]. While there are
diﬀerences in both components across legal families, the discrepancies are pronounced for the ex-post index
46
47

We insert both measures in the specifications, as the correlation of the two measures is far from perfect (026).
The non-significance of the public enforcement index is consistent with the evidence in Djankov et al. (2008).

37

that mostly captures the easiness to sue directors and insiders for misconduct (see Appendix Table 15).
The mean value of the ex-post anti-self dealing index across French (German) civil-law countries is 047
(058), while in common law countries the mean value is way higher, 089. Across all specifications the
ex-post anti-self-dealing index enters with a negative and highly significant coeﬃcient. The marginal eﬀect
in the 2012 sample implies that a one standard deviation increase in the protection of minority shareholders
against insiders’ self-dealing activities is associated with an increased likelihood that the listed firm will be
widely-held (as compared to controlled) by 75 percentage points, a far from negligible eﬀect. The ordered
probit coeﬃcient on the ex-post anti-self-dealing index is also significant across all samples. And the results
are similar when we associate ownership concentration with anti-self-dealing (Appendix Table 16).
Heterogeneity We searched for heterogeneity on the association between corporate control and
minority shareholder protection. The results (Appendix Table 17) point out that the eﬀect of the ex-post
anti-self dealing index is somewhat stronger for larger firms. Across all specifications the coeﬃcient on the
ex-post anti-self-dealing is larger in absolute value in the sample of large as compared to small firms. Yet
a test of coeﬃcient similarity indicates that the estimated marginal eﬀects at the two sub-samples are not
statistically diﬀerent from each other.
Further Evidence We estimated specifications entering jointly the legal origin indicators and the
ex-ante and the ex-post anti-self-dealing.48 These models are far from ideal, but do shed some light on
whether legal origin impacts corporate control solely via investor protection or whether there are other
mechanisms. The results (in Appendix Table 18) point out that legal origin aﬀects corporate control (and
concentration) through alternative to shareholder protection mechanisms.

6.2

Court System Formalism

Legal origin is related to the eﬃciency of the court system. Djankov et al. (2003, 2007) compiled proxies
of legal formalism for a large number of countries, measuring the days it takes to resolve via courts some
simple disputes. They showed that there are diﬀerences across legal families on courts’ formalism, that is
linked to financial development. While often firms get around ineﬃcient and slow court jurisdictions, legal
quality may be related to corporate control, as in response to a dysfunctional, slow, and formalistic court
system shareholders may want to exercise control fearing managerial misconduct.
In Table 10 we examine the role of legal formalism on corporate control, augmenting the specification
with the logarithm of days it takes to resolve a simple dispute via the court system (from Djankov et al.
(2007)). The mean (median) value in common law countries is 288 (250) days, while in French civil law
countries plaintiﬀs need on average (median) 352 (330) days to resolve an almost identical dispute. Columns
(1)-(3) report probit marginal eﬀects with the control indicator as the outcome variable; columns (4)-(6)
48
We cannot use legal origin dummies as instruments for minority shareholder protection, as the legal system that colonial
powers established aﬀects current levels of ownership and finance via numerous channels.

38

report ordered probit coeﬃcients with the trichotomous index of control in the LHS; and columns (7)-(9)
give OLS estimates with the 3 concentration index as the dependent variable. The coeﬃcient on the
legal formalism proxy is small and does not pass the standard significance thresholds. We experiment with
alternative measures of court quality and speed (e.g. the log of days to solve a commercial sale dispute
from the World Bank Doing Business), finding similar results. The link between corporate control (and
ownership concentration) is not much related to legal formalism.

6.3

Product and Entry Market Regulation

Legal origin is related to product market regulations and entry barriers. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002, 2003)
provide eloquent historical narratives on the diﬀerential rise of the "regulatory" state across legal families,
while Djankov et al. (2002) uncover sizable diﬀerences on entry regulations between common and civil-law
countries. Regulations in product markets impeding entry and protecting incumbents may aﬀect corporate
structure (Tirole, 1988, 2010). For example firms in oligopolistic markets, protected by new entrants, can
finance projects via retained earnings and will not depend much on external sources of financing. Thus
they will be much more likely to be controlled by families/individuals. Moreover, state ownership and
control may be higher in more "interventionist" in product markets governments.
In Table 11 we examine the link between entry regulation and corporate control using three proxies of
entry regulation from Djankov et al. (2002), the log number of days and the log number of administrativebureaucratic procedures needed to start a new business and the cost associated with starting a new business.
Panel  gives probit ML marginal eﬀects, while Panel  reports corresponding ordered probit coeﬃcients
with the hierarchical measure of firm control as the outcome variable. The coeﬃcient on the log number of
days and the cost to start a new business is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero in both the
binary and the ordered probit specifications. The pattern is similar when we use ownership concentration
as the outcome variable [Appendix Table 19]. There is some link between corporate control and the log
number of administrative-bureucratic procedures to start a new business, with the likelihood of widely held
corporations being higher in countries with less red tape. Yet the economic eﬀect is not very large; and
the correlation turns insignificant when we use ownership concentration in the LHS of the specification
[Appendix Table 19]. We also examined whether the conditional correlation between entry regulation and
corporate control (and ownership concentration) diﬀers for large and small listed firms, without finding
much evidence of heterogeneity [Appendix Table 20].

6.4

Labour Market Regulation

Legal origin is related to labour market legislation and regulations. Botero et al. (2004) constructed
measures reflecting the regulation of labour markets through employment, collective relations, and social
securities laws for 85 countries and showed that alongside former socialist countries, French and Scandinavian civil law countries have considerably higher levels of labour market regulation (see Appendix Table 15

39

for similar results in our sample). Pagano and Volpin (2005) develop a political economy model with three
"players", company insiders (managers or controlling shareholders), minority shareholders, and workers,
to examine the link between labour market regulation and corporate control. If there are large private
benefits of control, then managers collaborate with employees oﬀering them long-term contracts, perks,
and other benefits; in turn they get "eﬀective protection" from hostile takeovers. Labour laws making it
hard and expensive to fire workers and regulations promoting unions and collective disputes can sustain
corporate control. Labour market regulation could aﬀect corporate structure via other mechanisms, for
example by raising the cost of bankruptcy, which in turn lowers external sources of financing (Simintzi,
Vig, and Volpin (2014)). And Perotti and von Thadden (2006) emphasize the reverse link, developing a
political economy model where concentrated ownership of companies and wealth may lead to protectionist
labour market institutions.
In Table 12 we augment the specification with the three measures of Botero et al. (2004); () an
"employment laws" index that reflects the existence and cost of alternative to the standard employment
contract, the costs of overtime pay, dismissal procedures and cost of firing; () a "collective relations" index
reflects the statuary protection power of labour unions and the protection of workers via collective disputes;
and () a "social security" index measuring level and duration of unemployment benefits, sickness and
health benefits, and old-age, disability, and death benefits. Legal origin is highly correlated with the
employment laws and the collective relations index, while there are no significant diﬀerences on the social
security index (Appendix Table 15). The probit estimates in columns (1)-(3) point out that there is
a strong positive link between the collective relations index and corporate control. In countries where
unions are powerful, a large fraction of workers are unionized, and where there are strong collective action
resolution mechanisms, listed corporations are much more likely to be controlled by families/individuals
or the state. The estimate in the 2012 sample implies that a 020 point increase in the collective actions
index, that corresponds to the diﬀerence in the mean value in common-law (0287) and civil-law countries
(0498), increases the likelihood that the firm will be controlled (as compared to be widely-held) by 12
percentage points. For comparison the diﬀerence in the share of controlled firms between civil-law and
common-law countries is 24 percentage points, as 56% and 325% of listed firms are "controlled" in civil-law
and common-law countries. In contrast there is no systematic association between corporate control and
social security legislation and the employment laws index.
Since the link between corporate control and labour regulations is (to the best of our knowledge)
novel, we further explored its robustness. Columns (4)-(6) report ordered probit ML coeﬃcients that
allow for a finer classification of listed corporations, into widely-held without block (the dependent variable
equals 0), widely held with one or more equity blocks (the outcome variable equals 1), and controlled firms
(the outcome equals 2). In all three samples, the coeﬃcient on the collective action index is positive and
highly significant. Conditioning on continental factors, the level of economic development, widely held
corporations are more likely in countries that regulate lightly collective labour disputes and in countries

40

with low-powered unions, even when looking at firms in the same industries. In columns (7)-(9) we examine
the role of labour market regulations on ownership concentration, using as the dependent variable the 3
index. The patterns are similar. Labour market regulations, related to the power of unions and the
collective resolution of employment disputes, are associated with more concentrated ownership of listed
corporations. This pattern applies to both small and large firms. However, the impact of the collective
actions index is considerably stronger in the sample of relatively smaller listed firms (Appendix Table 21).
Taking Stock The results in Tables 9−12 point out that the strong link between corporate control
of listed firms (and ownership concentration) and legal origin reflects not only corporate law features
protecting minority shareholders (as the law and finance literature has forcefully argued), but also labour
market regulations, a result in line with the Pagano and Volpin (2005) model and more recent works
stressing interlinks between labour and capital markets. In contrast, the link between corporate control
and legal formalism and entry-product market regulation is weak (see also Appendix Table 22). And
while the cross-country correlations do not necessarily identify causal relationships, they are conditional
on regional and industry fixed-eﬀects as well as the overall level of development (that continues to be a
significantly negative correlate of ownership concentration and corporate control).

7

Conclusion

Employing a plethora of original sources, big data techniques, and manual checks we extend and correct
the ORBIS database of corporate ownership and have constructed a new dataset depicting corporate
control patterns around the world. Our database covers corporate ownership concentration and corporate
control across more than 40 000 listed firms from 127 countries over the period 2004 − 2012. Our sample

includes very large, big, medium-sized, and small publicly traded firms from all continents and from all
income groups. We then apply a game-theoretic algorithm that explicitly accommodates heterogeneity of
shareholders’ voting power and estimate Shapley-Shubik measures that reflect the power structure of the
various shareholders in each firm. Our algorithm also accommodates the complex network structure of
corporate ownership with cross-equity holdings, pyramids, and holding companies. The algorithm allows
classifying firms as either controlled or widely-held without relying on any ad hoc threshold of voting rights.
We also allow for an intermediate category of widely-held firms (without a controlling shareholder) with,
however, sizable equity block(s). Our analysis proceeds in three steps.
First, we provide a detailed autopsy of the patterns of corporate ownership concentration and corporate control around the world. Our analysis suggests that family ownership and control are pervasive
corporate structures around the world, both across industrial, developing and frontier economies. State
ownership is far from negligible, especially in terms of market capitalization, as in many countries (e.g.,
Russia, China, Brazil, India), national and local governments hold controlling equity blocks in many large
firms. We also find that while in many countries the dominant form of listed corporations follows the Berle
41

and Means (1932) paradigm of dispersed ownership, in most widely-held corporations there are large, in
many cases multiple, equity blocks (exceeding 5%).
Second, we examine the link between legal origin and corporate control. The "reduced-form" estimates show that ownership is more concentrated and corporate control by families and the government is
more pervasive in French-civil law (and to a lesser-extent) German civil-law countries. Ownership is more
dispersed and the share of widely-held firms larger in common-law countries that tend to oﬀer superior
protection to investors. These patterns are present both in the sample of very large, big, and mediumsmall listed firms. We also show that while large equity blocks in widely-held firms are common practice all
around the world, they are more pervasive in French civil-law countries. We also find that the (negative)
correlation between economic development and corporate control by families, individuals, and the state is
present only in the sample of large (and very large) corporations. In contrast the correlation between GDP
and ownership concentration is weak and insignificant for small and medium-sized listed firms.
Third, since we examine the mechanisms. Legal origin has shaped various institutional and political
features, related to investor protection rights, legal formalism, product and market regulation, that in
turn may aﬀect ownership concentration and corporate control (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(2008)). We thus associate control (and ownership concentration) to proxies of these institutional features.
The analysis shows that corporate law provisions protecting minority shareholders from self-dealing activities of managers and dominant shareholders is a significant correlate of corporate structure. However,
the reduced-form association between legal origin and corporate control does not only operate via legal
rights of shareholders, as diﬀerences in labour market regulation play a key role. In line with political
economy theories of corporate control modelling the incentives and potential alliances between controlling
shareholders (or managers) with workers at the expense of outside minority shareholders (e.g., Pagano
and Volpin (2005)) we find that ownership concentration is lower and the likelihood of widely-held firms
is lowers in countries with strong employment protection. In contrast there is no link between corporate
control and entry regulation and court quality.
We view this paper as a first-step in reassessing some fundamental issues in corporate finance, related
to the drivers and consequences of corporate structure. More work is needed in identifying the determinants
of corporate control and ownership concentration. Subsequent work could employ the newly-constructed
database to examine the long-run impacts on corporate structure of deeply-rooted cultural traits, such
as family ties and religion. Another issue that deserves follow-up work is examining the international
dimension of corporate control, investigating for example the role of cultural ties on cross-border corporate
ownership and control. Another important issue that we leave for future work is the closer examination of
the complexity of corporate control structures, related to the use of pyramids and the use of intermediate
holding companies that are typically incorporated in oﬀ-shore tax heavens. We plan addressing some of
these questions in future research.

42

References
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano.(2014). "Family Ties". in Philippe Aghion and Steven
Durlauf (eds.), The Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2A, The Netherlands: North Holland, pp. 177-215.
Aganin, Alexander, and Paolo Volpin. (2005) "The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy."
A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, ILL. pp. 325-366.
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. (2014). "Family Ties" in The Handbook of Economic
Growth, Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf (eds.), The Netherlands: North Holland, pp. 177-215.
Almeida, Heitor V., and Daniel Wolfenzon. (2006). "A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and
Family Business Groups." Journal of Finance, 61 (6): 2637-2680.
Almeida, Heitor, Sang Yong Park, Marti G. Subrahmanyam, and Daniel Wolfenzon.
(2011). "The Structure and Formation of Business Groups: Evidence from Korean Chaebols." Journal of
Financial Economics, 99 (2): 447-475.
Aminadav, Gur, Yoram Bachrach, Konstantin Kosenko, Jeﬀrey S. Rosenschein, and
Yoav Wilf. (2011). "Rebuilding the Great Pyramids: A method for Identifying Control Relations in
Complex Ownership Structures." Available at SSRN 1903941 .
Bachrach, Yoram, Evangelos Markakis, Ezra Resnick, Ariel D. Procaccia, Jeﬀrey S.
Rosenschein, and Amin Saberi.

(2010). "Approximating Power Indices: Theoretical and Empirical

Analysis." Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 20 (2): 105-122.
Battiston, Stefano, James B. Glattfelder, Diego Garlaschelli, Fabrizio Lillo, and Guido
Caldarelli. (2010). "The Structure of Financial Networks." in Ernesto Estrada, Maria Fox, Desmond
Higham, Gian-Luca Oppo (eds.) Network Science Complexity in Nature and Technology, Springer, London,
p. 131-163.
Baron, David P., and John A. Ferejohn. (1989). "Bargaining in Legislatures." American
Political Science Review, 83 (4): 1181-1206.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis. (2000). "Stock Pyramids,
Cross-ownership, and Dual-class Equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from
Cash-flow Rights." In Randall K. Morck (Ed). Concentrated Corporate Ownership, University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, ILL, USA. pp. 295-318.
Becht, Marco, Julian Franks, Colin Mayer, and Stefano Rossi. (2010). "Returns to Shareholder Activism: Evidence from a Clinical Study of the Hermes UK Focus Fund." Review of Financial
Studies, 23 (3): 3093-3129.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine. (2003). "Law and Finance: Why
Does Legal Origin Matter?" Journal of Comparative Economics, 31 (4): 653—75.
Bennedsen, Morten and Daniel Wolfenzon. (2000). The Balance of Power in Closely Held
Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics, 58 (1): 113-140.
43

Berkowitz, Daniel, and Karen B. Clay. (2007). "Legal Origins and the Evolution of Institutions: Evidence from American State Courts." Unpublished.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard. (2003). "Economic
Development, Legality, and the Transplant Eﬀect." European Economic Review, 47 (1): 165—95.
Berle, Adolf and Gardiner Means. (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private Property.
Transaction Publishers, Rutgers, New Jersey USA.
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and
Andrei Shleifer. (2004). “The Regulation of Labor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (4): 1339—82
Burkart, Mike, Denis Gromb, and Fausto Panunzi. (1997). "Large Shareholders, Monitoring,
and the Value of the Firm." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (3): 693-728.
Burkart, Mike, Fausto Panunzi, and Andrei Shleifer. (2003). "Family Firms." Journal of
Finance, 58 (5): 2167-2202.
Carvalhal da Silva, A. (2004). "Governanc¸a corporativa, valor, alavancagem e pol´ıtica de dividendos das empresas brasileiras. Revista de Administracao" , 39 (4):348—361
Chapelle, Ariane, and Ariane Szafarz. (2005). "Controlling Firms through the Majority Voting
Rule." Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 355 (2): 509-529.
Chernykh, Lucy.(2008). "Ultimate Ownership and Control in Russia." Journal of Financial Economics, 88 (1): 169-192.
Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and L.H.P. Lang, (2000). "The Separation of Ownership
and Control in East Asian Corporations", Journal of Financial Economics, 58 (1): 81-112.
Coﬀee, John C., Jr. (2001). "The Rise of Dispersed Ownership: The Roles of Law and the State
in the Separation of Ownership and Control", Yale Law Journal, 111 (1): 1—82.
Djankov, Simeon, Oliver D. Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. (2006). "Debt
Enforcement around the World," Journal of Political Economy, 116 (6): 1105-1149.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2002). "The Regulation of Entry," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (1): 1—37.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2003). "Courts." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (2): 453—517.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2008). "The Law and Economics of Self-Dealing." Journal of Financial Economics 84 (2): 299-329
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. (2007). "Private Credit in 129
Countries." Journal of Financial Economics, 84 (2): 299—329.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz. (2007). "Why Do Countries Matter so
much for Corporate Governance?", Journal of Financial Economics 86 (1): 1-39.
Dyck, Alexander, and Luigi Zingales. (2004). "Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison", Journal of Finance 59 (3): 537-600.

44

Edmans, Alex and Cliﬀord Holderness. (2016). "Blockholders: A Survey of Theory and
Evidence," in Handbook of Corporate Governance, forthcoming
Edwards, Jeremy SS, and Alfons J. Weichenrieder. (2009). "Control Rights, Pyramids, and
the Measurement of Ownership Concentration." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 72 (1):
489-508.
Faccio, Mara, and Larry H.P. Lang. (2002). "The Ultimate Ownership of Western European
Corporations", Journal of Financial Economics 65 (2): 365-395.
Felsenthal, Dan S., and Moshé Machover. (1998) The Measurement of Voting Power. Edward
Elgar Publishing. .
Foley, C. Fritz, and Robin Greenwood. (2010). "The Evolution of Corporate Ownership after
IPO: The Impact of Investor Protection." Review of Financial Studies, 23 (3): 1231-1260.
Franks, Julian, and Colin Mayer.

(2001). "Ownership and control of German corporations."

Review of Financial Studies, 14 (4): 943-977.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, Paolo Volpin, and Hannes F. Wagner. (2012). "The Life
Cycle of Family Ownership: International evidence", Review of Financial Studies, 25 (6): 1675-1712.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer and Hideaki Miyajima. (2014). "The Ownership of Japanese
Corporations in the 20th Century," Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 27(): 2580-2625.
Franks, Julian, Colin Mayer, and Luc Renneboog. (2001). "Who Disciplines Management in
Poorly Performing Companies?" Journal of Financial Intermediation, 10 (3): 209-248.
Gul, Ferdinand A.; Jeong-Bon Kim, Annie A. Qiu. (2010). "Ownership Concentration,
Foreign Shareholding, Audit Quality, and Stock Price Synchronicity: Evidence from China." Journal of
Financial Economics, 95 (3): 425-442.
Gabaix, Xavier. (2009). "Power Laws in Economics and Finance," Annual Review of Economics,
1 (1): 255—293.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Andrei Shleifer. (2002). "Legal Origins," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 117 (4): 1193—1229.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. (1980). "Takeover bids, the free-rider problem,
and the theory of the corporation." The Bell Journal of Economics, 42-64.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. (1988). "One Share—One Vote and the Market for
Corporate Control." Journal of Financial Economics, 20 (1—2): 175—202.
Hart, Oliver D. (1995). Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford University Press,
Oxford and New York.
Hayek, Friedrich A. (1960). The Constitution of Liberty. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.
Helwege, Jean, Christo Pirinsky, and Rene M. Stulz. (2007). "Why do Firms Become Widely
Held? An Analysis of the Dynamics of Corporate Ownership", Journal of Finance 62(3): 995—1028.

45

Holderness, Cliﬀord. (2009). "The Myth of Diﬀuse Ownership in the United States," Review of
Financial Studies, 22 (4): 1377-1408.
Holderness, Cliﬀord. (2016a). "Problems Using Aggregate Data to Infer Individual Behavior:
Evidence from Law, Finance, and Ownership Concentration." Critical Finance Review, 5 (1): 1-40.
Holderness, Cliﬀord. (2016b) "Law and Ownership Reexamined." Critical Finance Review, 5 (1):
41-83.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Pete Klenow. (2014). "The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (4): 1035-1084.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling (1976). "The Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure." Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (4): 305-360.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem; Bent Sorensen; Carolina Villegas-Sanchez; Vadym Volosovyc
and Sevcan Yesiltas. (2015). "How to Construct Nationally Representative Firm Level Data from the
ORBIS Global Database." NBER Working Paper No: 21558.
Khanna, Tarun, and Krishna Palepu. (2005). "The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in
India: Broad patterns and a History of the Indian Software Industry." A history of corporate governance
around the world: Family business groups to professional managers. University of Chicago press. pp.
283-324.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh. (2007). "Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons
or Parasites?" Journal of Economic Literature, 45 (2): 331-373.
Kandel, Eugene, Konstantin Kosenko, Randall Morck, and Yishay Yafeh. (2013). "The
Great Pyramids of America: A Revised History of US Business Groups, Corporate Ownership and Regulation, 1930-1950." NBER Working Paper No. 19691.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (1999). "Corporate
Ownership around the World," Journal of Finance, 54 (2): 471-517.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer.
(2004). "Judicial Checks and Balances.” Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2): 445—70.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2002). "Government
Ownership of Banks." Journal of Finance, 57 (1): 265—301.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2006). "What Works
in Securities Laws?" Journal of Finance, 61 (1): 1—32.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2006). "The Economic
Consequences of Legal Origins," Journal of Economic Literature, 46 (2): 285—332
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
(1997). “Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52 (3): 1131—50.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
(1998). “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (6): 1113—55.

46

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
(1999). “The Quality of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15 (1): 222—79.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2008). "The Economic
Consequences of Legal Origins." Journal of Economic Literature, 46 (2), 285-332.
Levine, Ross. (2005). “Law, Endowments and Property Rights.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19 (3): 61—88.
Lins, Karl V. (2003). "Equity Ownership and Firm Value in Emerging Markets", Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 38 (1): 159-184.
Lins, Karl V., Paolo Volpin, and Hannes F. Wagner. (2013). "Does Family Control Matter?
International Evidence from the 2008—2009 Financial Crisis." Review of Financial Studies, 26 (10): 25832619.
Mahoney, Paul G. (2001). “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be Right.”
Journal of Legal Studies, 30 (2): 503—25.
Masulis, Ronald W., Peter Kien Pham, and Jason Zein. (2011). "Family business groups
around the world: financing advantages, control motivations, and organizational choices." Review of Financial Studies, 24 (11): 3356-3600.
Mc Fadden, Daniel. (2001). Economic Choices. American Economic Review, 91 (3): 351-378.
Morck, Randall. (2005), A History of Corporate Governance around the World: From Family
Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Morck, Randall, Michael Percy, Gloria Tian and Bernard Yeung. (2005). "The Rise and
Fall of the Widely Held Firm - A History of Corporate Ownership in Canada," in A History of Corporate
Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers, Randall Morck (Editor),
Chapter 2. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Moulton, Brent R. (1990). "An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Eﬀects of Aggregate
Variables on Micro Units." Review of Economics and Statistics, 72(2): 334-338.
Murphy, Antonin E. (2005). "Corporate Ownership in France: The Importance of History" in A
History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers,
Randall Morck (Editor), Chapter 3. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Okimura, R. T.; A. M. Silvera; K. C. Rocha (2004). "Estrutura de propriedade e desempenho
corporativo no Brasil. In: XXVIII Encontro da Associação Nacional de Pós-Graduação em Administração
(ENANAP), Curitiba. Anais. Rio de Janeiro.
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin. (2005). "Managers, Workers, and Corporate Control",
Journal of Finance, 60(3): 843-870.
Peleg, Bazalel. (1981). "Coalition Formation in Simple Games with Dominant Players." International Journal of Game Theory 10(1): 11-33.
Perotti, Enrico C. and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden (2006). "The political economy of corpo-

47

rate control and labor rents." Journal of Political Economy, 114(1): 145-175.
Roe, Mark J. (2000). “Political Preconditions to Separating Ownership from Corporate Control.”
Stanford Law Review, 53 (3): 539—606.
Roe, Mark, J. (2006). “Legal Origins, Politics, and Modern Stock Markets.” Harvard Law Review,
120 (2): 460—527.
Shapley, Lloyd. S. and Martin Shubik. (1954). "A Method for Evaluating the Distribution of
Power in a Committee System". American Political Science Review, 48 (3): 787—792
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. (1986). "Large Shareholders and Corporate Control."
Journal of Political Economy, 94(3): 461-488.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. (1997). “A Survey of Corporate Governance.”
Journal of Finance, 52 (2): 737—83.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon. (2002). “Investor Protection and Equity Markets.”
Journal of Financial Economics, 66 (1): 3—27.
Simintzi, Elena; Vikrant Vig and Paolo Volpin. (2016). "Labor Protection and Leverage"
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Stulz, René M., and Rohan Williamson. (2003). “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journal
of Financial Economics, 70 (3): 313—49.
Tirole, Jean. (1988). The Theory of industrial organization. MIT Press, MIT, MA, USA.
Tirole, Jean. (2010). The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ, USA.
Wei, Guo. (2007). "Ownership Structure, Corporate Governance and Company Performance in
China. Asia Pacific Business Review 13 (4): 519—545.
Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross-Section and Panel Data. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Wu, Shinong; Nianhang Xu, and Qingbo Yuan. (2009). State Control, Legal Investor Protection, and Ownership Concentration: Evidence from China. inCorporate Governance An International
Review 17 (2) ·

Zucman, Gabriel. (2015). The Hidden Wealth of Nations. University of Chicago Press, Cicago,

ILL, USA.

48

Table 1: Summary Statistics. Ownership and Control by Country in 2012
Ownership Concentration Measures
Firms

Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Belgium
Bosnia-Herz.
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Ivory Coast
Denmark
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Hong Kong
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel

79
1347
96
41
46
161
83
7
276
77
2019
182
1679
35
174
68
21
14
156
87
15
113
788
722
14
229
694
39
19
1478
250
65
457

Number of Listed Firms Controlled by

Market Cap
Mean Weighted Mean Weighted Mean Weighted Controlled
Families GDP p.c.
State
(billion USD)
C1
C1
C3
C3
C5
C5
Firms
Individuals
33.3
1069.1
93
16.5
12.1
305.4
2.6
3
713
4.3
1418.2
272.1
2938.9
197.2
20.3
7.3
41.6
2
176.3
41.7
1.8
126
1448
1152.8
1.9
33.1
1251.6
19.2
5.6
1035.4
311.5
145.4
109.5

14436.6
67511.8
48348.2
23063.1
856.7
44818
4415.9
6935.6
11922.7
7198.5
52733.5
15253.3
6264.6
7885.1
13236
28868.3
19670.4
1281.4
57636.1
3068.2
17132.2
47415.6
40850.4
43931.7
1641.8
22494.4
36707.7
12784.3
44377.4
1449.7
3700.5
48391.3
32514.4

64.7
22.1
49.2
29.8
38.1
38.6
47.7
56.7
47
53.1
25.5
44
37.1
46.7
45.3
27.5
63.6
68
32
41.9
43.8
24.3
46.4
45.3
51.9
44.2
37.9
38
42.6
27.3
51
23.3
39.9

58.1
28
40.8
32.7
44.8
42.9
72.5
66.2
46.2
64.4
23.4
42.3
47.6
69.3
55.5
37.2
60.1
67.6
31.6
52.5
47.2
26.7
39.4
27
51.6
34
50
27.3
61.4
45.5
55.3
16
37.5

69.8
32.9
63.5
45.1
45.6
52.6
63.4
65.3
60.5
64.4
31.6
58.6
47.6
56.8
59.1
35.1
68.1
72.9
44.1
52.6
63.2
36.8
60.2
56.8
63.1
57.1
49.2
61.9
56.9
35.7
63.4
36.3
50.8

72
49.3
57.7
48.8
51.6
53.9
83.6
71.8
62.4
84.4
30.9
58
58.9
75.3
80.4
43.4
66.6
75.3
60.3
58.7
65.7
39.6
52.3
38.9
64.8
49.5
60.2
45.2
73.5
56.5
62.4
24.9
51.9

70
36.8
65.5
47.1
47.7
55.6
67.9
67.4
63.2
65.1
32.2
63.8
50.3
59.7
63.6
36.5
68.1
72.9
46.5
55.7
71.3
42.1
63.3
59.1
66.6
58.6
51.6
66.6
60.8
38.4
65
41
53

74.8
60.5
59.6
51.4
52.7
57.6
86.6
73.6
65.1
85.3
32.6
62.7
60.9
77.9
84.1
43.6
66.6
75.3
65.6
60
74.1
44.8
56.9
42.6
66.9
52.5
63.3
55.2
78.2
59.9
62.9
27.7
54.4

73
282
78
22
28
97
42
6
191
61
513
111
1189
24
98
24
20
13
53
50
11
37
510
478
13
171
396
20
9
669
190
14
269

7
4
7
8
2
9
15
0
25
6
7
7
389
5
7
1
5
0
1
9
0
8
22
25
4
7
30
3
1
83
22
1
3

30
52
19
5
4
28
5
0
61
15
244
16
274
9
28
14
3
1
9
10
6
10
226
184
1
115
142
6
2
301
27
2
138

Private Firms
Widely-Held Widely-Held
(unmatched
Private Firms Public Firms
owners)
18
146
38
4
3
42
16
1
76
30
154
57
488
3
37
7
4
3
26
20
5
15
176
172
1
28
198
10
4
183
102
9
71

10
23
7
2
12
10
5
3
10
1
40
9
32
0
13
1
2
4
9
6
0
1
46
46
1
3
8
0
2
13
7
1
12

8
57
7
3
7
8
1
2
19
9
68
22
6
7
13
1
6
5
8
5
0
3
40
51
6
18
18
1
0
89
32
1
45

Italy
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea
Kuwait
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malaysia
Malta
Mexico
Montenegro
Morocco
Namibia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan

266
1452
119
19
817
155
27
6
34
44
8
528
17
52
161
58
5
133
100
38
201
41
102
4
129
57
713
54
28
152
436
119
106
511
41
54
206
182
74
337
276
962

442.8
2589.9
22.7
8.1
857
82.3
0.8
4.3
4.5
116.2
1.1
369.5
4.1
273.2
1.9
56.9
1.1
639.5
39.4
30.3
224.7
17.4
20.2
21.9
89.4
122.6
143.7
50.8
87.6
14.1
797.9
342.5
3.1
419.2
3.8
6.2
427.1
524
6.9
458.7
1186.6
512.7

34854.4
46679.3
4896.7
1184.9
24454
50896.5
14031.8
9729.3
14333.2
106022.8
4709.5
10507.8
21176.3
9721.1
6519.2
2860.9
5681.6
49128.1
39573.8
2739.9
101563.7
21533.8
1266.4
2151.2
6388.8
2606.2
13036.4
20577.4
94236.1
8445.3
14078.8
24883.2
5659.4
54578.2
17151.4
22488.7
7592.2
28985.3
2921.7
57134.1
83295.3
21269.6

44
28
31.5
44.6
21
32.1
46
49.8
59.2
36.7
48.2
33.3
47.4
46.8
53.6
57.8
53.4
34.6
30.5
43.2
32.4
28.5
41.9
38.5
52.4
47.8
44.7
45.5
32.5
59
53.1
28.4
43.7
30.1
49.8
34.2
30.1
39.6
46
28.7
37.9
12.3

37
20.8
31.6
48.5
21
27.1
48.2
43.3
72.1
44.2
50.2
31.6
65.6
47.2
72.6
54.6
47
35.4
36.4
63.1
44.7
24.4
46.3
49.9
50.6
40.6
50.8
40.6
44.8
45.2
54.7
45.4
56.4
36.9
58.6
28.2
30.3
38.9
44.1
31.9
25.1
16.8

58.8
32.5
46.1
53.8
24.1
43.8
75.4
68.7
73.3
48
53.2
46.2
58.3
52.1
68.7
84.1
58
48.2
43.6
48.4
47.7
38.8
51.8
41.3
70.4
60.8
62.8
66.7
37.9
72.3
70.7
40.8
53.3
36.9
68.2
51
40.8
57.4
52.4
37.7
49.4
18.7

47.8
27
62.4
53.8
27.7
37.3
87.9
73.9
84
52.7
53.1
41.8
72
57.8
86.7
83
54.8
47.1
50.2
65.2
55.9
34.1
59.9
54.8
67.3
55.7
61.1
64.5
46.2
69.1
74.3
58.2
72.7
47.2
68.9
45
43.6
52.8
50.1
42.5
37.5
23.7

63.1
34.1
51.5
55.6
24.4
45.9
80.3
74.1
78.2
49.9
53.3
51
60.2
53.3
71.3
88.7
58.9
54.4
48.6
49.2
53.1
40.9
53.9
41.4
73.7
64.2
66.4
73.4
38.9
73.9
73.5
43.3
55.7
38.7
71.5
57.3
44.2
64.7
54.5
40.8
53.3
21.6

52.4
30.1
69.7
55.2
30
38.2
90.6
85.2
86.3
54.2
53.2
45.1
72.4
59.4
87.7
87
56.7
51.1
56.2
65.3
60.7
35.3
61.9
55
70.2
61
63.3
71.5
46.4
72.5
78.3
61
74.3
52.4
73
51.7
47.2
60
53.5
46.9
41.7
26.2

180
671
52
14
289
82
18
5
24
26
6
269
14
40
114
40
4
54
26
26
75
26
61
3
91
34
422
36
18
112
336
53
65
247
26
32
73
79
54
141
137
143

10
21
3
2
10
18
0
0
2
2
0
29
1
0
9
1
0
3
5
1
9
10
6
1
2
3
21
2
13
13
115
14
13
30
2
14
1
7
6
4
18
6

93
57
24
1
141
15
8
4
7
12
0
80
1
15
44
11
1
13
4
5
26
8
9
0
33
12
202
21
2
31
70
14
14
97
3
4
13
35
5
45
53
20

59
105
11
1
41
21
9
0
12
6
3
131
5
12
53
19
0
23
7
7
29
5
11
0
42
9
158
9
2
50
111
13
33
87
15
11
21
13
11
64
39
37

6
30
1
3
9
8
0
0
0
5
1
4
6
6
7
5
0
8
4
3
8
1
5
1
2
1
10
2
1
4
23
6
4
7
1
2
10
10
1
12
15
8

12
458
13
7
88
20
1
1
3
1
2
26
1
7
1
4
3
7
6
10
3
2
30
1
13
9
31
2
0
14
17
6
2
26
5
1
28
14
31
16
12
72

Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Zambia

126
32
296
4
102
94
1347
4461
14
12

205
7.5
237.5
0.7
23
110.3
2444.4
14499
11.1
2

5448.8
4197.5
10646
670.2
3855.4
41587.5
41050.8
51456.7
12339.4
1686.6

37
41.4
50.1
67.8
55.5
36.9
19.5
21.4
40.5
48.2

42.4
43.1
50.7
75.7
66.8
48.2
17.3
13
65.4
62

45.2
55.7
63.3
67.8
74.1
51.6
31.9
30.5
47.1
51

51
52.7
73.2
75.7
82.6
56.6
28.4
22.1
68.9
66

47
57.7
64.5
67.8
78.8
55.1
37.1
33.9
48.8
51.1

53.5
53.4
75.9
75.7
84.8
58.5
34.1
27.2
69.2
66.2

79
21
222
4
74
59
226
1112
10
9

22
3
8
2
12
31
9
9
5
1

22
3
84
0
19
18
117
584
2
4

10
5
83
0
40
6
61
264
3
0

2
4
21
0
2
2
16
150
0
1

23
6
26
2
1
2
23
105
0
3

Table 1 reports the number of firms, their total market capitalization, real GDP per capita, the simple and the market-value-weighted average of the C1, C3 and C5 ownership concentration measures,
the total number of controlled firms and the number of firms in each ownership category (Family controlled, Government controlled, controlled by a private firm with an unmatched ultimate owner,
controlled by a widely held private firm, controlled by a widely held public firm, Widely Held with at least one blockholder (stake >5%), and widely Held without any blockholder - dispersed) for all
85 countries in the 2012 sample.

Table 2A: Firm-Level Summary Statistics in 2012

C1 (Ownership Concentration Index, Largest Shareholder)
C3 (Ownership Concentration Index, Three Largest Shareholders)
C5 (Ownership Concentration Index, Five Largest Shareholders)
Controlled Binary Index
Mean Ownership Stake of Controlling Block
Ultimate owner is State/Government
Ultimate owner is Individual/Family
Ultimate owner is Private Firm without a matched Owner
Ultimate owner is Widely Held Private Firm
Ultimate owner is Widely Held Public Firm
Widely Held Corporation with at least one blockholder (>5%)
Widely Held Corporation Without blockholders (dispersed)
Market Capitalisation (Billion USD)
Age of Firm (in years)

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

min

p5

p25

median

p75

p95

max

26843
26843
26843
26843
11719
26843
26843
26843
26843
26843
26843
26843
26843
21763

31.46
41.73
44.6
0.44
53.71
0.05
0.15
0.15
0.03
0.07
0.47
0.09
1.55
34.32

25.28
28.13
28.8
0.5
20.83
0.21
0.36
0.35
0.17
0.25
0.5
0.29
8.84
34.1

0.01
0.01
0.01
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3.2
4.53
4.65
0
23.3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6

10
16.3
18.51
0
38.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.02
13

24.11
39.09
44.1
0
51
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.1
22

51
62.85
67.18
1
66
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0.57
43

82.72
93.73
95.71
1
96.8
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
5.79
107

95
100
100
1
100
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
546.08
647

The table reports summary statistics at the firm-level for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis in 2012.

Table 2B: Country-Level Summary Statistics in 2012
Obs.

Average C1 (Ownership Concentration, Largest Shareholder)
Market-Cap Weighted C1 (Ownership Concentration Largest Shareholder)
Average C3 (Ownership Concentration, Three Largest Shareholders)
Market-Cap Weighted C3 (Ownership Concentration, Three Largest Shareholders)
Average C5 (Ownership Concentration, Five Largest Shareholders)
Market-Cap Weighted C5 (Ownership Concentration, Five Largest Shareholders)
Average Share of Controlled Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of Controlled Firms
Average Share of State Controlled Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of State Controlled Firms
Average Share of Family/Individual Controlled Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of Family/Individual Controlled Firms
Average Share of Controlled Firms by Unmatched Private Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of Controlled Firms by Unmatched Private Firms
Average Share of Controlled Firms by Widely-Held Private Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of Controlled Firms by Widely-Held Private Firms
Average Share of Controlled Firms by Widely-Held Public Firms
Market-Cap Weighted Share of Controlled Firms by Widely-Held Public Firms
Average of Widely Held Corporations with a Block
Market-Cap Weighted Average of Widely Held Corporations with a Block
Average of Widely Held Corporations without a Block
Market-Cap Weighted Average of Widely Held Corporations without a Block
Average Ownership Stake of Controlling Blockholder

85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
85

mean st. dev.

min

p5

p25

median

p75

p95

max

41.31
44.59
53.08
57.14
56
60.29
60.24
67.33
8.43
20.96
16.73
15.83
18.19
9.07
5.69
7.37
11.21
14.11
34.39
28.26
5.34
4.4
57.5

12.34
12.95
18.65
22.1
21.61
26.22
14.86
10.41
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
36.9

22.08
20.78
31.93
27.67
34.11
30.11
24.93
18.75
0
0
2.08
0.26
0
0
0
0
0.36
0.05
7.59
1.75
0
0
46.24

32.37
34.03
45.12
47.77
47.08
52.41
48.34
56.23
1.55
3.28
8.7
4.48
9.76
1.93
1.4
0.46
3.7
2.92
23.53
12.63
1.31
0.03
52.18

42.62
44.83
52.63
56.62
55.62
60.02
62.77
74.84
5.26
14.17
15.38
10.95
16.67
4.1
3.62
2.43
6.9
7.08
31.58
22.78
4.18
1.39
57.64

48.16
54.63
63.2
68.86
65.49
72.37
73.33
85.59
9.38
29.8
20.59
23.45
25.64
9.52
6.37
7.91
13.46
17.44
44.63
41.16
8.05
5.73
62.19

59.19
69.3
72.89
83.58
74.08
86.3
92.41
96.07
28.57
64.72
37.97
46.08
37.5
32.14
25
31.29
36.84
49.61
66
68.4
14.44
18.61
70

67.95
75.74
84.06
87.86
88.65
90.59
100
100
50
85.52
66.67
62.9
40.8
83.87
42.86
68.01
60
75.61
73.87
84.41
37.84
36.88
77

11.5
14.74
13.07
15.66
13.38
15.52
18.87
22.63
10.28
21.39
11.52
15.24
10.85
13.15
7.55
12
12.19
16.94
16.38
20.21
5.81
6.93
7.71

The table reports summary statistics at the country-level for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis in 2012.

Table 2C: Country-Level Summary Statistics - Laws

Employment Laws
Colletctive Relations
Social Security
Time to Start a Business
N. Procedures to Start a Business
Revised Anti Director Index
Anti Self Dealing Index
Ex Post Private Self Dealing
Ex Ante Private Self Dealing
Public Enforcement
Protecting Investors
Ease Sharheolder Suits
Director Liability
Disclosure
Days to enforce a contract
Days to Solve Commercial Sale Dispute (WB)

Obs.

mean

st. dev.

65
65
65
79
79
64
64
64
64
64
78
78
78
78
76
71

0.48
0.45
0.62
35.89
8.68
3.46
0.46
0.55
0.37
0.43
55.09
5.92
4.82
5.78
343.20
513.28

0.19
0.13
0.21
29.48
3.53
1.10
0.24
0.23
0.33
0.44
15.88
2.17
2.24
2.65
228.19
180.63

min

p5

p25

median

p75

p95

max

0.15
0.17
0.34
0.47
0.65
0.74
0.83
0.19
0.21
0.36
0.45
0.54
0.65
0.71
0.11
0.18
0.49
0.70
0.76
0.84
0.87
3.00
5.00
16.00 29.00 46.00 104.00 143.00
2.00
3.00
6.00
9.00
11.00 16.00
17.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
3.50
4.00
5.00
5.00
0.08
0.16
0.28
0.42
0.63
0.95
1.00
0.08
0.16
0.37
0.53
0.70
0.95
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.14
0.23
0.59
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.00
1.00
23.33 30.00 46.67 53.33 63.33 86.67
96.67
1.00
2.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
9.00
10.00
0.00
1.00
3.00
5.00
6.00
9.00
9.00
0.00
1.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
10.00
27.00 60.00 204.00 325.00 423.00 730.00 1390.00
120.00 216.00 395.00 510.00 595.00 880.00 987.00

The table reports summary statistics at the country-level for the labour, product market, protecting investors and enforcement variables employed in the empirical
analysis.

Table 3. Corporate Control and Legal Origin
Baseline Cross-Country Probit (ML) Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

French Legal Origin

0.3287*** 0.2916*** 0.2947*** 0.2564*** 0.2951*** 0.2370***
(0.1248)
(0.0961)
(0.1569)
(0.1561)
(0.1789)
(0.1572)

0.2430***
(0.1733)

German Legal Origin

0.1876**
(0.2062)

0.1614*** 0.1244
(0.1690)
(0.2391)

0.1350*
(0.2123)

0.1215
(0.2543)

0.1309*
(0.2004)

0.1352*
(0.2172)

Scandinavian Legal Origin

0.0558
(0.1211)

0.1126*** 0.0681
(0.1028)
(0.2364)

0.0804
(0.2393)

0.0745
(0.2481)

0.0714
(0.2423)

0.0848
(0.2517)

Log Market Capitalization

0.0095
(0.0251)

0.0084
(0.0282)

Log Age

0.0061
(0.0410)

-0.0019
(0.0342)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.0670***
(0.0421)

-0.0585***
(0.0580)

-0.0521*** -0.0558***
(0.0560)
(0.0582)

Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects

No
No

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

R-squared
Observations
Countries

0.05
26843
85

0.07
26843
85

0.06
26843
85

0.07
26843
85

0.07
21751
85

0.09
26835
85

0.09
21743
85

The table reports firm-level probit model (maximum-likelihood) estimates (marginal effects). The dependent variable is an
indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm is controlled in 2012 (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could
not identify the ultimate controlling family/individual, the government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is
widely held (with or without a block). The key explanatory variables are legal origin indicator variables that take the value of one
for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries, respectively, with British-origin common law serving
as the omitted category. The specifications in columns (3)-(7) include regional fixed effects (constants not reported). The
specifications in columns (6) and (7) include industry fixed effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not
reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the
country-level standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 4. Corporate Control and Legal Origin
Baseline Cross-Country Ordered Probit (ML) Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

French Legal Origin

0.8174***
(0.1131)

0.7509*** 0.7068*** 0.6392*** 0.7075*** 0.6120*** 0.6232***
(0.0926)
(0.1474)
(0.1506)
(0.1700)
(0.1484)
(0.1632)

German Legal Origin

0.3402
(0.2196)

0.2897
(0.1995)

0.1965
(0.2391)

0.2178
(0.2259)

0.1870
(0.2557)

0.2335
(0.2077)

0.2419
(0.2216)

Scandinavian Legal Origin

0.1321
(0.0946)

0.2371*** 0.1161
(0.0896)
(0.2107)

0.1428
(0.2167)

0.1224
(0.2195)

0.1376
(0.2119)

0.1578
(0.2186)

Log Market Capitalization

0.0265
(0.0227)

0.0227
(0.0242)

Log Age

0.0020
(0.0388)

-0.0155
(0.0347)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.1314***
(0.0446)

-0.1124**
(0.0510)

-0.1008**
(0.0501)

-0.1127**
(0.0516)

cutoff 1

-1.1557*** -2.5127*** -1.2563*** -2.3319*** -1.0635*** -2.2628*** -2.1801***
(0.0824)
(0.4759)
(0.1087)
(0.4934)
(0.2214)
(0.4968)
(0.5132)

cutoff 2

0.3893***
(0.1089)

-0.9563**
(0.4570)

0.3019*** -0.7679
(0.1159)
(0.4986)

0.4718**
(0.1863)

-0.6786
(0.4957)

-0.6157
(0.5238)

Regional Fixed Effects
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Industry Fixed Effects
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
R-squared
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
Observations
26843
26843
26843
26843
21751
26843
21751
Countries
85
85
85
85
85
85
85
The table reports ordered probit (maximum likelihood) coefficients. The dependent variable is an ordered index of
corporate control. The trichotomous index takes the value of zero for widely held firms without any shareholder holding a
significant block (all shareholders hold less than 5% of firm's voting rights); the index takes the value of one for widely
held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess of 5% and less than 50%), the index equals two for firms with a
well-identified controlling shareholder of any type. The key explanatory variables are legal origin indicator variables that
take the value of one for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries, respectively, with
British-origin common law serving as the omitted category. The specifications in columns (3)-(7) include regional fixed
effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (6) and (7) include industry fixed effects, using SIC-2
sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and
sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard errors are reported in parentheses below
the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 5. Corporate Control and Legal Origin. Heterogeneity
Sample

Excl. Top 1% Excl. Top 5% Excl. Top 10%
(1)
(2)
(3)

Small
(4)

Large
(5)

Only Top 10% Only Top 5%
(6)
(7)

Young
(8)

Old
(9)

French Legal Origin

0.2622***
(0.0650)

0.2600***
(0.0659)

0.2558*** 0.2529*** 0.2304*** 0.2602***
(0.0664)
(0.0751) (0.0677)
(0.0886)

0.3098*** 0.2595*** 0.2682***
(0.0801)
(0.0649) (0.0670)

German Legal Origin

0.1481*
(0.0853)

0.1466*
(0.0854)

0.1410*
(0.0853)

0.1095
(0.1025)

0.1351*
(0.0774)

0.1642
(0.1049)

0.1440
(0.1102)

0.1662*
(0.0887)

0.1172
(0.0795)

Scandinavian Legal Origin

0.0867
(0.1007)

0.0802
(0.1013)

0.0695
(0.1015)

0.0372
(0.1028)

0.1239
(0.1166)

0.2641*
(0.1364)

0.3486**
(0.1525)

0.1279
(0.0974)

0.0479
(0.0998)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.0614***
(0.0228)

-0.0575**
(0.0224)

-0.0523**
(0.0220)

-0.0116 -0.1147*** -0.2013***
(0.0168) (0.0248)
(0.0411)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

21526
85

20654
85

19566
85

10859
84

10876
85

2154
55

1071
62

11000
83

10735
84

Firm-level Controls
Regional Fixed-Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
Observations
Countries

-0.2066*** -0.0592** -0.0555***
(0.0424)
(0.0300) (0.0162)

The table reports firm-level probit model (maximum likelihood) estimates (marginal effects). The dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of
one if a firm is controlled in 2012 (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could not identify the ultimate controlling family/individual, the
government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is widely held (with or without a block). The key explanatory variables are legal origin
indicator variables that take the value of one for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries, respectively, with British-origin
common law serving as the omitted category. In all specifications, we control for the logarithm of real GDP p.c. in 2012. In columns (1), (2), and (3) we drop
the largest in terms of market capitalization firms, using the top 1%, 5%, and 10% cut-off, respectively. In columns (4) and (5) we focus on small and large
firms using as a cut-off the (world-sample) median value of market capitalization. In columns (6) and (7) we restrict estimation to large in terms of market
capitalization firms using the top 10% and the top 5% cut-off, respectively. In columns (8) and (9) we focus on relatively young and old firms using the as cutoff the (world-sample) median of firm age (years since incorporation). All specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported); industry fixed
effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported); and firm-level controls for size (log market capitalization) and age (log number
of years since firm incorporation). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the countrylevel standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 6. Types of Control and Legal Origin
Multinomial Logit Estimates (Marginal Effects)

Type of Corporate
Control

State
(1a)

Model (1)
Family /
Private
Individual Unidentifie
(2a)
(3a)

WidelyHeld
(4a)

WidelyHeld Public
(5a)

State
(2a)

Model (2)
Family /
Private
Individual Unidentifie
(2b)
(2c)

WidelyHeld
(2d)

WidelyHeld Public
(2e)

French Legal Origin

0.0543** 0.0956***
(0.0231) (0.0276)

0.136***
(0.0250)

0.0255***
(0.00623)

0.0301***
(0.0117)

0.0248
(0.0162)

0.0352
(0.0355)

0.141***
(0.0327)

0.0147**
(0.00699)

0.0616***
(0.0222)

German Legal Origin

0.0537
(0.0402)

0.0103
(0.0349)

0.0725
(0.0448)

0.00188
(0.00672)

0.0568
(0.0485)

0.0353
(0.0225)

-0.0000248
(0.0373)

0.0562
(0.0476)

0.00841
(0.00788)

0.0370
(0.0272)

Scandinavian Legal Origin 0.00554
(0.0139)

-0.0228
(0.0208)

0.0665***
(0.0222)

0.0151**
(0.00711)

-0.00865
(0.0116)

0.0364
(0.0299)

-0.0551
(0.0362)

0.104**
(0.0447)

0.0106
(0.00987)

0.0149
(0.0206)

-0.0186
(0.0161)

-0.00196
(0.00351)

0.0105
(0.0119)

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

Log GDP Per Capita

Firm-level Controls
Regional Fixed-Effects

-0.0255*** -0.0269**
(0.00829)
(0.0112)
No
No

No
No

No
No

No
No

No
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

The table reports firm-level multinomial logit model (maximum likelihood) estimates (marginal effects). The dependent variable is a categorical variable that identifies
(i) widely-held firms without a dominant controlling shareholder; (ii) controlled by the state firms; (iii) controlled by families or individuals firms; (iv) controlled firms
by privately held firms with a disperse wonership base; and (v) controlled firms by listed widely-held corporations. The key explanatory variables are legal origin
indicator variables that take the value of one for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries, respectively, with British-origin common
law serving as the omitted category. In all specifications, we control for the logarithm of real GDP p.c. in 2012. All specifications include regional fixed effects
(constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard
errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 7. Ownership Concentration and Legal Origin
Baseline Cross-Country Estimates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

French Legal Origin

0.2534*** 0.2373*** 0.1771*** 0.1591*** 0.1743*** 0.1497*** 0.1523***
(0.0245) (0.0249) (0.0363) (0.0377) (0.0409) (0.0368) (0.0396)

German Legal Origin

0.0734
(0.0536)

0.0616
(0.0514)

0.0181
(0.0505)

0.0226
(0.0478)

0.0120
(0.0524)

0.0242
(0.0455)

0.0212
(0.0475)

Scandinavian Legal Origin 0.0644** 0.0890*** 0.0083
(0.0305) (0.0317) (0.0560)

0.0143
(0.0584)

0.0076
(0.0604)

0.0131
(0.0544)

0.0161
(0.0583)

Log Market Capitalization

0.0073
(0.0049)

0.0074
(0.0048)

Log Age

-0.0003
(0.0091)

-0.0037
(0.0080)

Log GDP Per Capita

Regional Fixed-Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

-0.0302**
(0.0143)

-0.0287**
(0.0145)

-0.0251*
(0.0142)

-0.0239*
(0.0137)

No
No

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

0.1
26843
85

0.12
26843
85

0.15
26843
85

0.16
26843
85

0.17
21751
85

0.18
26843
85

0.2
21751
85

The table reports firm-level OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the C3 index of ownership concentration in 2012.
The C3 index reflects the equity stake (voting rights) held by the 3 largest shareholders (while treating family members as
one representative shareholder with aggregated voting rights). The key explanatory variables are legal origin indicator
variables that take the value of one for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries,
respectively, with British-origin common law serving as the omitted category. The specifications in columns (3)-(7)
include regional fixed effects (constants not reported). The specifications in columns (6) and (7) include industry fixed
effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed
variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard errors are
reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

Table 8. Ownership Concentration and Legal Origin
Heterogeneity w.r.t. Firm Size and Age
Sample

Excl. Top 1% Excl. Top 5% Excl. Top 10%
(1)
(2)
(3)

Small
(4)

Large
(5)

Only Top 10% Only Top 5%
(6)
(7)

Young
(8)

Old
(9)

French Legal Origin

0.1499***
(0.0399)

0.1493***
(0.0404)

0.1490***
(0.0409)

0.1541*** 0.1293***
(0.0453)
(0.0396)

0.1190***
(0.0410)

0.1525***
(0.0425)

0.1447*** 0.1549***
(0.0388)
(0.0405)

German Legal Origin

0.0201
(0.0475)

0.0198
(0.0475)

0.0177
(0.0468)

0.0251
(0.0533)

-0.0156
(0.0460)

-0.0083
(0.0589)

-0.0334
(0.0598)

0.0390
(0.0468)

-0.0101
(0.0491)

Scandinavian Legal Origin

0.0114
(0.0589)

0.0094
(0.0597)

0.0048
(0.0599)

-0.0086
(0.0597)

0.0277
(0.0661)

0.0627
(0.0701)

0.0967
(0.0587)

0.0308
(0.0520)

-0.0074
(0.0613)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.0234*
(0.0137)

-0.0223
(0.0135)

-0.0203
(0.0129)

-0.0052
(0.0096)

-0.0422**
(0.0162)

-0.0605***
(0.0225)

-0.0556**
(0.0239)

-0.0226
(0.0156)

-0.0193
(0.0127)

Firm-level Controls
Regional Fixed-Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.20
21534
85

0.20
20663
85

0.20
19575
85

0.24
10870
84

0.19
10881
85

0.27
2176
55

0.33
1088
62

0.22
11006
83

0.21
10745
84

The table reports firm-level OLS estimates. The dependent variable is the C3 index of ownership concentration in 2012. The C3 index reflects the equity stake (voting
rights) held by the 3 largest shareholders (while treating family members as one representative shareholder with aggregated voting rights). The key explanatory variables
are legal origin indicator variables that take the value of one for French civil-law, German civil-law, and Scandinavian civil-law countries, respectively, with British-origin
common law serving as the omitted category. In all specifications, we control for the logarithm of real GDP p.c. in 2012. In columns (1), (2), and (3) we drop the largest
in terms of market capitalization firms, using the top 1%, 5%, and 10% cut-off, respectively. In columns (4) and (5) we focus on small and large firms using as a cut-off
the (world-sample) median value of market capitalization. In columns (6) and (7) we restrict estimation to large in terms of market capitalization firms using the top 10%
and the top 5% cut-off, respectively. In columns (8) and (9) we focus on relatively young and old firms using the as cut-off the (world-sample) median of firm age (years
since incorporation). All specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported); industry fixed effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors,
constants not reported); and firm-level controls for size (log market capitalization) and age (log number of years since firm incorporation). The Data Appendix gives
detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 9. Corporate Control and Protecting Investors
Panel A: Cross-Country Probit (ML) Estimates
Sample

2012
(1)

(2)

2007
(3)

(4)

(5)

2004-2012
(6)

(7)

Revised Anti Director Index

-0.0326
(0.0212)

-0.0123
(0.0291)

-0.0229
(0.0263)

Creditors Rights

-0.0220
(0.0409)

-0.0366
(0.0413)

-0.0272
(0.0427)

(8)

Anti Self Dealing Index

-0.1778
(0.1610)

-0.2946**
(0.1196)

-0.2693**
(0.1268)

Public Enforcement

0.0401
(0.0492)

0.0848
(0.0524)

0.0735
(0.0506)

(9)

Ex Ante Private Self Dealing

0.0082
(0.0993)

-0.1315
(0.0932)

-0.0842
(0.0950)

Ex Post Private Self Dealing

-0.3553**
(0.1361)

-0.2391
(0.1460)

-0.3037**
(0.1465)

Log GDP Per Capita

Time Fixed Effects
Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

-0.0577**
(0.0271)

-0.0602*
(0.0352)

-0.0508*
(0.0263)

-0.0531*
(0.0297)

-0.0552*
(0.0320)

-0.0496
(0.0300)

-0.0543*
(0.0285)

-0.0559*
(0.0331)

-0.0468*
(0.0280)

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
25688
62

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
25751
64

No
Yes
Yes
0.08
25751
64

No
Yes
Yes
0.06
25383
59

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
25460
61

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
25460
61

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
215941
67

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.07
216581
69

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.07
216581
69

Panel B: Ordered Probit (ML) Estimates
Sample
(1)
Revised Anti Director Index

Creditors Rights

2012
(2)

(4)

2007
(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0757

-0.0421

-0.0605

(0.0634)

(0.0700)

(0.0686)

-0.0342

-0.0867

-0.0609

(0.1133)

(0.0983)

(0.1062)

Anti Self Dealing Index
Public Enforcement

-0.7675***

-0.6509**

(0.3953)

(0.2784)

(0.2902)

0.1762

0.1609

0.2092*

(0.1195)

(0.1290)

(0.1231)

Ex Post Private Self Dealing
-0.1276*
(0.0677)

2004-2012
(8)

-0.3629

Ex Ante Private Self Dealing

Log GDP Per Capita

(3)

-0.1318
(0.0907)

(9)

0.0977

-0.2784

-0.1446

(0.2463)

(0.2086)

(0.2144)

-1.0122***
(0.3237)

-0.7496**
(0.3203)

-0.9114***
(0.3264)

-0.1068*
(0.0573)

-0.1126
(0.0700)

-0.1196
(0.0792)

-0.0983
(0.0682)

-0.1242*
(0.0676)

-0.1288
(0.0845)

-0.1003
(0.0613)

Time Fixed Effects
Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

R-squared

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

25696
62

25759
64

25759
64

25390
59

25467
61

25467
61

215970
67

216610
69

216610
69

Observations
Countries

The table reports in Panel A firm-level probit model (maximum-likelihood) estimates (marginal effects) and in Panel B ordered probit (maximum likelihood) coefficients. In Panel A the dependent
variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm is controlled (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could not identify the ultimate controlling family/individual, the
government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is widely held (with or without a block). In Panel B the dependent variable is an ordered index of corporate control. The
trichotomous index takes the value of zero for widely held firms without any shareholder holding a significant block (all shareholders hold less than 5% of firm's voting rights); the index takes the
value of one for widely held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess of 5% and less than 50%), the index equals two for firms with a well-identified controlling shareholder of any type.. In
both panels the results are reported in 2012 (columns (1)-(3)), in 2007 (columns (4)-(6)) and in 2004-2012 (in columns (7)-(9)). The key explanatory variables are various measures of investor
protection..The specifications in columns (7)-(9) include time effects (constants not reported). All the specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported) and industry fixed effects,
using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the countrylevel standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 10. Corporate Control / Ownership Concentration and Court system formalism
Sample

Log of days to enforce a contract

Log GDP Per Capita

Control

Ordered Index of Control

C3

2012

2007

2004-2012

2012

2007

2004-2012

2012

2007

2004-2012

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.0423

-0.0975

-0.0882

-0.0955

-0.2447*

-0.2147*

-0.0079

-0.0477

-0.0372

(0.0439)

(0.0601)

(0.0536)

(0.1145)

(0.1452)

(0.1289)

(0.0283)

(0.0291)

(0.0287)

-0.0822**

-0.1014***

-0.0961***

-0.1764**

-0.2352*** -0.2236***

-0.0409*

-0.0448**

-0.0477**

(0.0338)

(0.0352)

(0.0338)

(0.0864)

(0.0902)

(0.0220)

(0.0224)

(0.0203)

(0.0861)

Time Fixed Effects

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Regional Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Industry Fixed Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.05

0.05

0.15

0.13

0.14

26336

25729

220046

26344

25737

220072

26344

25737

220072

Observations
Countries

76

67

94

76

67

94

76

67

94

The table reports firm-level probit model (maximum-likelihood) estimates (marginal effects) for control, ordered probit coefficients for the ordered index of
control, and OLS estimates for C3. The three dependent variables are: (i) columns (1)-(3): control - an indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm is
controlled (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could not identify the ultimate controlling family/individual, the government, banks, or
institutional investors) and zero when the firm is widely held (with or without a block); (ii) columns (4)-(6): An ordered index of corporate control. The
trichotomous index takes the value of zero for widely held firms without any shareholder holding a significant block (all shareholders hold less than 5% of firm's
voting rights); the index takes the value of one for widely held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess of 5% and less than 50%), the index equals two
for firms with a well-identified controlling shareholder of any type; (iii) columns (7)-(9) The C3 index of ownership concentration in which reflects the equity
stake (voting rights) held by the 3 largest shareholders. For each dependent variable the results are reported in 2012 (columns (1),(4),(7)), in 2007 (columns
(2),(5),(8)) and in 2004-2012 (in columns (3),(6),(9)). The key explanatory variables are various measures of Court system formalism..The specifications in
columns (3),(6), and (9) include time effects (constants not reported). All the specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported) and industry
fixed effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources.
Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 11. Corporate Control and Product and Entry Market Regulation
Panel A: Cross-Country Probit (ML) Estimates
Sample
(1)
Time to Start a Business (Log Days)

2012
(2)

0.0345
(0.0374)

N. Procedures to Start a Business (Log)

Time Fixed Effects
Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

(4)

2007
(5)

(6)

0.0282
(0.0485)
0.1249**
(0.0522)

Cost to Start a Business (% of income pc)

Log GDP Per Capita

(3)

(7)

2004-2012
(8)

(9)

0.0327
(0.0460)
0.1178**
(0.0506)

0.0003
(0.0017)

0.1320***
(0.0482)
0.0014
(0.0020)

0.0008
(0.0017)

-0.0479
(0.0383)

-0.0478*
(0.0267)

-0.0639*
(0.0380)

-0.0476
(0.0415)

-0.0432
(0.0260)

-0.0512
(0.0376)

-0.0454
(0.0390)

-0.0426*
(0.0247)

-0.0548
(0.0360)

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
26476
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
26476
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
26476
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.06
25787
69

No
Yes
Yes
0.06
25787
69

No
Yes
Yes
0.06
25787
69

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
220957
106

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
220957
106

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
220957
106

Table 11. Corporate Control and Product and Entry Market Regulation
Panel B: Cross-Country Ordered Probit (ML) Estimates
Sample
(1)
Time to Start a Business (Log Days)

2012
(2)

0.0418
(0.1166)

N. Procedures to Start a Business (Log)

Time Fixed Effects
Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

(4)

(6)

0.0418
(0.1086)
0.2334
(0.1435)

Cost to Start a Business (% of income pc)

Log GDP Per Capita

(3)

2007
(5)

(7)

2004-2012
(8)

(9)

0.0455
(0.1106)
0.2528**
(0.1220)

0.0025
(0.0046)

0.2660**
(0.1195)
0.0044
(0.0052)

0.0029
(0.0045)

-0.1166
(0.1082)

-0.1041
(0.0723)

-0.1177
(0.0949)

-0.1146
(0.0998)

-0.0942
(0.0662)

-0.0999
(0.0929)

-0.1159
(0.0983)

-0.0992
(0.0650)

-0.1151
(0.0904)

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
26484
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
26484
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
26484
79

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
25795
69

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
25795
69

No
Yes
Yes
0.04
25795
69

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.04
220983
106

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.04
220983
106

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.04
220983
106

The table reports in Panel A firm-level probit model (maximum-likelihood) estimates (marginal effects) and in Panel B ordered probit (maximum likelihood) coefficients. In Panel
A the dependent variable is an indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm is controlled (by either an individual/family, a private firm that we could not identify the ultimate
controlling family/individual, the government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is widely held (with or without a block). In Panel B the dependent variable is
an ordered index of corporate control. The trichotomous index takes the value of zero for widely held firms without any shareholder holding a significant block (all shareholders
hold less than 5% of firm's voting rights); the index takes the value of one for widely held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess of 5% and less than 50%), the index
equals two for firms with a well-identified controlling shareholder of any type.. In both panels the results are reported in 2012 (columns (1)-(3)), in 2007 (columns (4)-(6)) and in
2004-2012 (in columns (7)-(9)). The key explanatory variables are various measures of product and entry market regulation. The specifications in columns (7)-(9) include time
effects (constants not reported). All the specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported) and industry fixed effects, using SIC-2 sectoral classifications (85
sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level standard errors are
reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 12. Corporate Control / Ownership Concentration and Labour Market Regulation
Sample

Ordered Index of Control

2012

2004-2012

2012

2007

2004-2012

2012

2007

2004-2012

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Employment Laws

0.0574
(0.1703)

-0.0676
(0.1471)

-0.0230
(0.1630)

0.0649
(0.4897)

-0.0436
(0.3692)

Colletctive Relations

0.5476***
(0.1728)

0.7837***
(0.1406)

0.7113***
(0.1525)

1.4252***
(0.5275)

Social Security

0.0586
(0.2477)

0.0067
(0.1885)

0.0487
(0.2169)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.0763*
(0.0432)

-0.0808**
(0.0385)

No
Yes
Yes
0.08
25760
65

No
Yes
Yes
0.09
25411
61

Time Fixed Effects
Regional Fixed Effects
Industry Fixed Effects
R-squared
Observations
Countries

C3

Control
2007

0.0883
(0.4273)

0.0905
(0.1226)

0.0415
(0.1165)

0.0883
(0.1163)

1.8813*** 1.6602***
(0.3809)
(0.4377)

0.2676**
(0.1250)

0.3360*** 0.2974***
(0.1029)
(0.1070)

0.1686
(0.6722)

0.1690
(0.4194)

0.2287
(0.5265)

0.0086
(0.1409)

0.0231
(0.0879)

0.0452
(0.1029)

-0.0809**
(0.0394)

-0.1791
(0.1109)

-0.1926**
(0.0950)

-0.1917*
(0.1003)

-0.0373
(0.0246)

-0.0296
(0.0204)

-0.0370*
(0.0209)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.09
216489
77

No
Yes
Yes
0.05
25768
65

No
Yes
Yes
0.07
25418
61

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.06
216518
77

No
Yes
Yes
0.17
25768
65

No
Yes
Yes
0.16
25418
61

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.16
216518
77

The table reports firm-level probit model (maximum-likelihood) estimates (marginal effects) for control, ordered probit coefficients for the ordered index of control, and OLS
estimates for C3. The three dependent variables are: (i) columns (1)-(3): control - an indicator that takes on the value of one if a firm is controlled (by either an individual/family, a
private firm that we could not identify the ultimate controlling family/individual, the government, banks, or institutional investors) and zero when the firm is widely held (with or
without a block); (ii) columns (4)-(6): An ordered index of corporate control. The trichotomous index takes the value of zero for widely held firms without any shareholder holding a
significant block (all shareholders hold less than 5% of firm's voting rights); the index takes the value of one for widely held firms with at least one block shareholder (in excess of 5%
and less than 50%), the index equals two for firms with a well-identified controlling shareholder of any type; (iii) columns (7)-(9) The C3 index of ownership concentration in which
reflects the equity stake (voting rights) held by the 3 largest shareholders. For each dependent variable the results are reported in 2012 (columns (1),(4),(7)), in 2007 (columns
(2),(5),(8)) and in 2004-2012 (in columns (3),(6),(9)). The key explanatory variables are various measures of labour market regulation..The specifications in columns (3),(6), and (9)
include time effects (constants not reported). All the specifications include regional fixed effects (constants not reported) and industry fixed effects, using SIC-2 sectoral
classifications (85 sectors, constants not reported). The Data Appendix gives detailed variable definitions and sources. Heteroscedasticity adjusted and clustered at the country-level
standard errors are reported in parentheses below the estimates. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

