NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FACTORY-FREE ECONOMY:
OUTSOURCING, SERVITIZATION AND THE FUTURE OF INDUSTRY
Lionel Fontagné
Ann Harrison
Working Paper 23016
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23016

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

This is a version of a chapter that has been accepted for publication by Oxford University Press in
the forthcoming book The Factory-Free Economy: Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of
Industry edited by Lionel Fontagné and Ann Harrison due for publication in 2017. This paper will
constitute the introduction of a book edited by the two authors under the same title, to be
published in March 2017 by Oxford University Press, and comprising eleven contributions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We acknowledge financial support from the
CEPREMAP and the Wharton School (University of Pennsylvania).
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Lionel Fontagné and Ann Harrison. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Factory-Free Economy: Outsourcing, Servitization and the Future of Industry
Lionel Fontagné and Ann Harrison
NBER Working Paper No. 23016
January 2017
JEL No. F16,F23,O14
ABSTRACT
The shift towards a “factory-free” economy has drawn the attention of policy makers in North
America and Europe. Some politicians have articulated alarming views, initiating mercantilist or
‘beggar-thy-neighbour’ cost-competitiveness policies. Yet companies that concentrate research
and design innovations at home but no longer have any factories there may be the norm in the
future. This paper summarizes the key themes emerging from a conference on deindustrialization. De-industrialization is a process that happens over time in all countries, even
China. The distinction between manufacturing and services is likely to become increasingly
blurry. More manufacturing firms are engaging in services activities, and more wholesale firms
are engaging in manufacturing. One optimistic perspective suggests that industrial country firms
may be able to exploit the high-value added and skill-intensive activities associated with design
and innovation, as well as distribution, which are all components of the global value chain for
manufacturing. Although this ongoing transformation of the industrial economies may be
consistent with evolving comparative advantage, it has significant short-run costs and requires
far-sighted investments. These include the costs to workers who are caught in the shift from an
industrial to a service economy, and the need to invest in new infrastructure and education to
prepare coming generations for their changing roles.

Lionel Fontagné
Paris School of Economics - University Paris 1
Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne
106-112 Boulevard de l'Hôpital
75647 Paris Cedex 13
FRANCE
and CEPII
lionel.fontagne@univ-paris1.fr
Ann Harrison
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2016 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6370
and NBER
annh@wharton.upenn.edu

De-industrialization was accelerated by the 2008-2009 crisis in most high income
countries. Yet the trend began decades earlier, as comparative advantage of emerging economies
shifted towards more advanced goods and their growing populations commanded an increasing
share in global demand. This shift towards a factory-free economy in high income countries has
drawn the attention of policy makers in North America and Europe. Some politicians have
articulated alarming views, initiating mercantilist or beggar thy neighbor cost-competitiveness
policies. Yet companies like Apple, which concentrates research and design innovations at home
but no longer has any factories in the USA, may be the norm in the future.
This ongoing transformation of the industrial economies may be consistent with evolving
comparative advantage, but has significant short-run costs and requires far-sighted investments.
These include the costs to workers who are caught in the shift from an industrial to a service
economy, and the need to invest in new infrastructure and education to prepare coming generations
for their changing roles. A conference held in Paris aimed to provide an economic analysis of this
phenomenon. Since then, authors have revised their papers, prolonged their research, refined their
conclusions, and drafted stimulating papers summarized here.
Richard Baldwin starts off the volume by dividing global forces for trade and
industrialization into two historical periods.

In the first period, which he refers to as

“globalization’s first unbundling”, falling transport costs and freer trade allowed the industrial
countries to rapidly industrialize and dominate manufacturing (Baldwin, 2017).

From the

industrial revolution to the early 1980s, rich countries benefited from a virtuous cycle of
innovation, agglomeration, and increasing competitiveness in manufacturing. Manufacturing
wage increases were more than offset by productivity increases, and G7 nations saw their share of
world GDP soar from a fifth in 1920 to two-thirds by 1990. Baldwin attributes most of the

impetus from globalization during this period to improvements in transport, which radically
lowered transport costs and allowed countries to exploit scale economies and comparative
advantage. With agglomeration, cities grew in size and the North industrialized while the South
de-industrialized.
Beginning sometime between 1985 and 1995, according to Baldwin, this trend reversed.
This is the so-called “second unbundling”, when the nature of globalization changed and led to the
upheaval which is the focus of our book.

Baldwin zeroes in on the information and

communication technologies (ICT) revolution as the driver of this change, as telecommunications
became cheaper and more reliable. The ICT revolution was accompanied by the increasing
integration into the global economy of a small number of developing countries, which rapidly
increased their share of global manufacturing as well as global GDP. While the first unbundling
made it easier to buy and sell goods internationally, according to Baldwin “the ICT revolution
changed this. High-tech firms found it profitable to combine their firm-specific know-how with
low-wage labour in developing nations”.

European firms could now combine their

manufacturing technology with labor outside of Europe.
Baldwin describes the changing nature of globalization as shifting the drivers from lower
transport costs and tariffs which made it possible to concentrate production and exports in the
North, to ICT innovations which allow manufacturing to be dispersed and sent to the South. He
also introduces the concept of “smile curve economics”, first proposed by Acer founder Stan Shih,
whereby the share of who appropriates value added follows a so-called smile: high at the design
phase, lower during the manufacturing phase, and high again in the distribution phase. He points
out that the smile “deepened” during the second unbundling, as manufacturing’s share in value
added fell with industrialization in the South.

2

What does all this imply for manufacturing jobs in Europe? Baldwin paradoxically
concludes that while industrial country manufacturing firms are likely to retain a leading role,
manufacturing jobs in the North will continue to decline. Industrial country firms will continue to
extract a large share of value added through their role in product design and research and
development, as well as sales, marketing and after sales services, and will contract out or oversee
manufacturing in the “South”.

While some manufacturing jobs will remain at home, they will

more likely be the high skill-intensive jobs.

While value added may remain in industrial

countries, it is unlikely that this will bring more factory jobs.

These shifts will support the

ever-increasing importance of cities, which Baldwin concludes “are to the twenty-first century
what factories were to the twentieth century. Urban policy will be the new industrial policy.”
The bottom line is that there is nothing like a traditional factory in the twenty-first century.
Tasks have been split according to Adam Smith’s view of the pin factory, but thanks to digitization
at the global level. This has led to a dramatic reshaping of tasks maintained in the high level
economies. Growth is now fueled by talents and their agglomeration. Services and industry are one
and the same thing, and if there is something like a factory, this is now the big city where talents,
ideas, and services can be combined. Hence the economic competition between agglomerations
and the related policies to support their development. The big challenge, from a macroeconomic
perspective is the induced disconnection between the creation of value added and the creation of
jobs. Although the other face of this coin is productivity gains, distributional issues will become
increasingly relevant in advanced economies as value is now shaped by intangible assets.
Japan is certainly one of the most affected of the advanced economies: specialization in
electronic equipment, scarcity of resources, and offshoring to low-cost locations for most
industrial tasks combine here in a large shock to the domestic industry. Japan’s hollowing out is

3

the focus of Michael Ryan and Farid Toubal’s analysis (Ryan and Toubal, 2017). They use a
unique dataset following Japanese firms between 1982 and 2001. Their data allows them to
identify whether Japanese multinational firms were responsible for the hollowing out of that
economy in shifting manufacturing jobs abroad.
Ryan and Toubal focus on the so-called lost decade which followed Japan’s economic
collapse in 1991.

They begin by documenting that an enormous expansion in Japanese

multinational activity began around that time. The number of Japanese multinationals jumped by
290 per cent between 1985 and 1992, and continued to rise at a slower pace after that. While
Japanese overseas production was just over 3 per cent in 1982, it increased by five fold over the
next twenty years to reach 17 per cent in 2002. Ryan and Toubal also document that over these
decades Japanese multinational firms reallocated their networks from North America to Asia and
Europe. The share of Japanese vertical affiliates (located in a different business line than their
parents) more than doubled in these two regions while it halved in North America.
The aggregate employment data for Japanese multinationals is strongly suggestive of a
hollowing out. Between 1997 and 2012, for the manufacturing sector as a whole Japanese parents
reduced domestic employment by almost 3 per cent. While employment in Japan shrank in most
sectors, Japanese multinationals expanded employment abroad. Econometric evidence confirms
that Japanese multinationals contracted domestic employment post-1991, although over the entire
two decades the effect is surprisingly small and insignificant. This is partly because other
Japanese companies also experienced employment stagnation, so that in comparison Japanese
multinationals do not appear to engage in significant hollowing out. Compared to
non-multinationals, Japanese multinational companies (MNCs) reduced domestic employment by
0.17 per cent per year from 1992 to 2001, mostly in vertically-organized firms.

4

Ryan and Toubal conclude that there is only limited evidence of hollowing out of the
Japanese economy by Japanese MNEs moving production abroad. They hypothesize that the
limited effect on domestic employment of outward Japanese MNE activity could be due to the
well-known lifetime employment policies adopted by many Japanese firms. Since their formal
analysis stops in 2001, it is also possible that the negative effects accelerated after that period, as
suggested by their tables showing significant employment reallocation between 2001 and 2012.
An alternative way to think about de-industrialization in rich countries is through the
concept of structural transformation. Recent databases on trade in value added show that goods
trade cannot easily be distinguished from services trade, and the more so for advanced economies.
This mirrors the shift from manufacturing to services which has been documented by Hollis
Chenery and Moises Syrquin, among others. As income per capita increases, there is a shift in the
sectoral structure of the value added, employment and consumption patterns. All in all, the shift in
value terms is magnified, compared to evolutions of value added in volume. But the implied
reduction in the labor share (as labor shifts towards less productive sectors) is at odds with a
balanced growth path combining a constant growth rate of real per-capita output, a constant
capital-output ratio and a constant labor income share over time.
Jean Imbs describes this structural transformation taking place in countries of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

He documents that

de-industrialization of rich economies is accelerating, as labor moves away from industrial sectors
(Imbs, 2017). Imbs notes that “this reallocation is taking center stage in political circles, where
calls for industrial policy, rising regulation or protectionism are heard increasingly loudly.”
Imbs documents the main features of structural change in fifteen OECD countries since
1970. He identifies that de-industrialization began in the OECD in the 1980’s, but only in terms of

5

changes in the allocation of labor, not the allocation of value added. Beginning in the mid-1980s,
employment shares decreased in manufacturing, and increased in services. Imbs measures the
changes in sectoral shares over four decades. He finds that on average, employment shares in
manufacturing have declined by 1.7 per cent per year since 1970, whereas employment shares in
services have increased by 1.3 per cent per year. Measured in terms of employment per se,
manufacturing employment fell by 1.2 per cent per year while services employment increased by
1.8 per cent. But the same is not true of the sectoral allocation of value added. In particular,
between 1970 and 2011, the share of manufacturing in value added does not display any
significant trend. As labor productivity rose more quickly than elsewhere, this translated into
higher wage growth for manufacturing than for services. The reallocation of employment away
from manufacturing is consistent with Baumol’s (1967) view that sectors with relatively high
productivity growth lose employment.
Imbs finds that for the OECD countries, the share of the manufacturing sector in value
added exhibited no clear downward trend between 1970 and 2011, whereas the share of services
increased. This is quite different from the conventional view going back to Chenery, Robinson and
Syrquin (1986), where the reallocation goes from manufactures to services. Falling employment
in manufacturing but stable value-added shares are associated with rising productivity and wages
in the manufacturing sector. As Imbs points out, “de-industrialization would not be apparent just
on output data”, which “suggests quite some resilience in industrial production.”
Imbs also unpacks the trends within both manufacturing and services.

While light

industries fell precipitously, the share of heavy industries (including metals, metal products,
machinery, equipment, and transport equipment) increased as a share of value added. In services,
the number one recipient of employment was administrative services, and the star in terms of

6

output gains was ICT–where employment, value added, and productivity growth all increased.
Examining changes in structural transformation between 1970 and 2011, Imbs makes three
additional observations. First, de-industrialization did not begin until the mid-1980s, and the
share of manufacturing value-added remained roughly constant until the year 2000, when
de-industrialization accelerated.

We comment in passing that the precipitious decline in

manufacturing around this period has been noted by others, particularly Justin Pierce and Peter
Schott, who associate it with China’s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) in late 2001.
Second, Imbs notes that the share of construction in value-added contracted somewhat in
the 1990s but accelerated following the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Finally, services has both
accelerated its share in GDP and its share in employment, with the result that employment is being
drawn to the lowest productivity sector.

Imbs concludes by noting that one reason why

“structural change is back with a vengeance in policy conversations” is that post-2000 output
shares of manufacturing in value-added in the OECD finally declined. In the last six years of his
sample, both labor and output shares collapsed simultaneously in heavy manufacturing. It was
not until the 2000s, and the great recession, that manufacturing output shares collapsed across all
sectors in the OECD.
Whatever the mechanisms at play, Matthieu Crozet and Emmanuel Milet show that the
shift from industry to services is to some extent a matter of definition (Crozet and Milet, 2017). In
their words, “the frontier between manufacturing and services is quite blurry.” How do we define
an industry? Does one refer to large-scale production, increasing returns, new consumption items
that are increasingly affordable to the consumer? Taking such a broad view, many services could
compare with industries. And even within manufacturing industry in the usual sense, services
represent an increasing share of value added. The shift towards services within the manufacturing

7

sector is known as the “servitization” of the manufacturing sector.
Crozet and Milet document the importance of the servitization of French manufacturing
firms over the 1997-2007 period. They define servitization as the increase in the share of services
in a firm’s production sales. They have a database of about 635,000 French manufacturing firms,
which allows them to identify trends in the percentage of services produced and sold within
manufacturing firms during that time period.
While most of the literature on de-industrialization focuses on the types of shifts from
industry to services documented by Jean Imbs and Richard Baldwin, Crozet and Milet show that
these same trends are very much present within French firms themselves. They document a
moderate, but significant and steady trend of servitization over the period. They also decompose
the trend into between and within firm changes, and find that servitization is mainly driven by
changes that occur within firms. By the end of their sample period, in 2007, they document that
83 per cent of manufacturing firms sold some services, 40 per cent sold more services than goods,
and 26 per cent did not even produce goods.
There are both positive and negative implications of the evidence provided by Milet and
Crozet. On the one hand, taking servitization into account provides a harsher diagnosis about the
de-industrialization of the French economy. Milet and Crozet estimate that the decline in the
proportion of workers involved in the production of goods has been up to 8 per cent higher than the
usual measures of de-industrialization based on the proportion of workers employed in
manufacturing firms. On the other hand, Milet and Crozet argue that this kind of within firm shift
towards services has a much more benign and likely beneficial impact on workers than the
intersectoral shifts occurring at the macro level. While job losses in manufacturing and job
creation in services sectors in the aggregate industrial economies are creating large social costs, the

8

services provided by manufacturing firms are quite different. These services – think of an Apple
or a Rolls Royce – are typically strongly linked to the product they sell. Crozet and Milet
optimistically conclude that “this strong complementarity is likely to support the sales of
manufacturing products and to defend manufacturing employment and enhance productivity.”
From a statistical point of view, a redefinition of sectors and activities is needed as soon as
manufacturing firms perform services. In contrast, some firms are outside the manufacturing
sector according to official government statistics but nonetheless are heavily involved in the
production of manufactured goods. Although not actually producing such goods, how do we
classify firms like Apple designing and selling products without factories? Andrew Bernard and
Teresa Fort refer to these firms as “Factoryless Goods Producers” and document their importance
using US census data (Bernard and Fort, 2017).
Bernard and Fort shift the focus outside of manufacturing to examine the importance of
factoryless goods producers, or FGPs for short, defined as firms classified as part of the wholesale
trade sector but that “design the goods they sell and coordinate the production activities.”

In

their words, these FGPs are “manufacturing-like” in the sense that they might take a product from
the concept through production and delivery but do not actually engage in the production
themselves. Examples of such companies include Apple, Mindspeed Technologies (a fabless
semiconductor company), and the British appliance firm Dyson, which designs and sells
innovative vacuum cleaners but no longer manufactures them itself.
The analysis by Bernard and Fort is important insofar as there exists little evidence to date
about these kinds of enterprises. This analysis is also particularly timely as beginning in 2017 the
US Census Bureau will move FGP establishments to manufacturing. Bernard and Fort estimate
that this reclassification of FGPs would have increased the number of manufacturing employees in

9

the USA in 2007 by a minimum of 431,000 to a maximum of 1,934,000, an increase of between 3
and 14 per cent.
While the servitization of firms implies an overly optimistic estimate for manufacturing
employment according to Crozet and Milet, the significance of factoryless goods producers
suggests the opposite in that many wholesalers are engaging in important aspects of the
manufacturing process.

Indeed, according to Baldwin, the highest value-added aspects of

manufacturing are captured by these FGPs, with possible benefits for firm productivity,
innovation, and wage compensation.
Using the US Census Bureau Census of Wholesale Trade, Bernard and Fort estimate that
FGPs accounted for 37 per cent of these establishments in 2002. Bernard and Fort suggest that
“these results challenge the stereotype of a wholesale establishment that simply intermediates
between producer and consumers. The wholesale sector is a heterogeneous mix of traditional
resellers and plants that are actively involved in production activities.”
Crozet and Milet (2017) and Bernard and Fort (2017) present contrasting phenomena:
manufacturing

firms

increasingly engage

in

services

–

which

represents

“hidden

de-industrialization” – while sourcing and design activities are now performed by “factoryless
goods producers” whose activities were once done within manufacturing. There is indeed no
contradiction here: the boundaries of the firm – and the more so for multinational companies – are
permanently adjusted to focus on core competencies (catering is not a core competence for a car
maker, but designing new software might be). Thus the question is what should be internalized,
what can be performed arms-length (Antras, 2003) and how productivity has shaped this choice
(Defever and Toubal, 2013). Making a decision on outsourcing is even more difficult in an
international context: in the presence of incomplete contracts, only the largest and most efficient

10

firms will benefit from offshoring (Antras and Helpman, 2004). All in all, there is nothing like a
one-size-fits-all strategy: different firms, with different productivity levels, working in industries
resorting differently to intangible assets, will make different choices. Some firms may even be
contemplating offshoring, but eventually deciding against it.
Lionel Fontagné and Aurélien D’Isanto focus explicitly on this critical question of what to
retain within the firm and what to outsource or offshore (Fontagné and D’Isanto, 2017). They
present results from the 2012 survey of global value chains in fifteen European countries to
uncover the main determinants of international sourcing choices. They focus on a survey of
28,000 firms located in France, with more than fifty employees at the end of 2008, belonging to
industry, trade, and non-financial services sectors.
This survey, carried out by the French National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies
(INSEE) in 2012, is innovative in many aspects. The questionnaire aimed to uncover the strategic
choices made by firms to either perform activities themselves inside the firm, source in France, or
abroad. One may criticize the joint treatment of domestic and offshore sourcing, but presenting the
questionnaire in that way avoided focusing on the always sensitive question of offshoring.
Offshoring of an activity was defined as total or partial transfer of this activity to another firm
located abroad, which may, or may not, be part of the parent’s group.
The survey made a useful distinction between the core business activity and the support
business activities of the respondents. A core business activity is usually the firm’s main activity,
while support business activities are carried out by the firm to allow or facilitate the production of
goods or services for the market or for third parties. Six segments of the value chain were
considered beyond the core business of the surveyed firm: distribution and marketing, sales and
after sales services, ICT services, administrative and management functions from legal services or

11

accounting to corporate financial and insurance services, Research and Development, and a
residual category.
Fontagné and D’Isanto identify reasons why leading firms decide not to offshore certain
activities, and tentatively assess the direct consequences for employment of French firms’
offshoring strategies. The survey covered the decision to offshore over a three-year period
between 2009 and 2011. Only 4 per cent of French firms, representing 6.5 per cent of employees in
the firms within the scope of the survey, reported at least one decision to offshore. An additional 3
per cent of the firms contemplated offshoring, but eventually decided not to. Firms that chose not
to offshore cited as reasons uncertainty about the quality of goods and services produced in the
offshore location, the need for close interaction with clients, or legal and administrative barriers in
the host country and union problems in the home country.
Reasons for offshoring, as reported by respondents, are very much in line with the usual
predictions of theories addressing the boundaries of the multinational firms. Distance (a proxy for
transaction and information costs, beyond transport) is an important barrier to offshoring. Also the
strategic segments of the value chain, when offshored, are kept within the firm’s boundaries
pointing to the potential for problems related to incomplete contracts. Offshoring firms are shown
to be different: the larger the firm’s employment, the larger the proportion of firms that offshored
parts of their activity. Similarly, the proportion of firms that offshore is increasing with the share of
exports in their turnover. For a given sector, size, and firm type, exporters offshored on average
four times more often than non-exporting firms. Larger firms source to more remote places, where
enforcement of contracts can be more difficult, confirming that in the presence of incomplete
contracts, only the largest and most efficient firms will benefit from offshoring. Finally, firms that
offshore are not only bigger, they are also members of international groups.

12

Lastly, Fontagné and D’Isanto estimate that 20,000 jobs (or 0.3 per cent of employment in
the surveyed firms in 2011) were offshored between 2009 and 2011. This figure, however, takes
no account of general equilibrium effects, and is not based on a proper counterfactual. This is
where surveys, although very informative on certain decisions (like not offshoring), are
intrinsically an incomplete source of information. Another, less obvious, limitation is worth
mentioning: given the design of the survey performed on behalf of EUROSTAT, the definition of
offshoring used excludes situations where relocations of activity abroad goes hand-in-hand with
an expansion of the activity at home. Although defining international sourcing as a substitute to
domestic production is restrictive enough to avoid misinterpretation of the questions by
respondents, it neglects more complex strategies where outsourcing and domestic activity are
complements. The measure of job losses provided must accordingly be considered as indicative, as
it excludes by assumption all offshoring activity that could be complementary with domestic
activity.
Fontagné and D’Isanto provide a transition from documenting de-industrialization in the
North to measuring the implications for labor markets. Indeed, de-industrialization has been
accompanied by real costs for industrial country workers. Those costs take the form of a lower
demand for less skilled workers, rising inequality, negative effects on real wages and the declining
power of unions. It is evident from the papers in this volume that the transition from industrial to
factory-free or primarily service economies is painful for many segments of the population.
Rosario Crino and Paolo Epifani suggest that large and rising global imbalances –
illustrated by China’s trade surpluses and US trade deficits – have directly led to rising inequality
in industrial countries (Crino and Epifani, 2017). They show, using a model which allows for a
continuum of intermediate traded goods, that trade deficits in industrial countries and surpluses in

13

lower-skilled countries can explain increases in demand for skill in both regions. In their
empirical work, they employ US data to suggest that the results are consistent with their theory.
They also rule out other explanations for increasing skill intensity, such as skill-biased technical
change (SBTC).
The model developed by Crino and Epifani builds on the insights of Gordon Hanson and
Robert Feenstra who showed that capital flowing from a skill-intensive Northern country to the
South could result in greater inequality in both countries. The intuition comes from the fact that
more capital in the South leads to a fall in the return to capital there, allowing the South to produce
a greater set of skill-intensive goods which can be traded and at the same time narrowing the set of
skill-intensive goods in which the North has a comparative advantage. Crino and Epifani apply
the same intuition to a trade surplus in the South (resulting in a trade deficit in the North) and show
that in their model this also leads to greater demand for skill in both regions.
In their empirical section they present estimates consistent with their theory and take into
account other competing explanations for the rising demand for skill, including the role of
offshoring as well as skill-biased technical change. They focus on within-industry changes in the
US manufacturing sector, and use as their measure of skill bias the share of non-production
workers in value-added at the disaggregated industry level. They begin by documenting at the
aggregate level a positive correlation between skill upgrading and the trade deficit, which holds
strong even after controlling for standard proxies for offshoring, trade openness and technical
change.
Next, using a panel of 380 6-digit US manufacturing industries for the 1977 through 2005
period, they test whether sector-level trade deficits are associated with a systematic
within-industry increase in the relative demand for skills. Consistent with their aggregate results,

14

they find a strong association between sector level trade deficits and skill upgrading within US
industries. They also find that this effect is statistically larger than the effects of offshoring, trade
liberalization, and SBTC.
Between 1983 and 2008, US manufacturing employment declined from 22 to 16 million
workers. After the 2008 financial crisis, the manufacturing sector lost an additional 2 million jobs.
Avraham Ebenstein, Ann Harrison and Margaret McMillan evaluate claims by critics of
globalization that “good” manufacturing jobs were shipped overseas, and that China is to blame
(Ebenstein, Harrison and McMillan, 2017).
Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan identify shortcomings of research that is restricted to
analyzing workers within the manufacturing sector. The wage effects of import competition on
wages is typically identified by exploiting variation in the prices (or quantities) of imported goods
across different manufacturing industries. Insofar as globalization affects the US labor market by
pushing workers out of manufacturing and into services, a better measure of globalization’s impact
is found by focusing on occupational exposure to globalization, as workers can more easily switch
industries than occupations, and so the wage declines will be felt by workers who are forced to
leave manufacturing or their occupation entirely.
In their previous work, Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2014) presented evidence that
an occupation-based analysis is more effective at uncovering the impact on worker wages of
global competition. This new paper allows them to extend their previous analysis up to 2008,
which includes a period characterized by rapid increases in offshoring, especially to China.
They also disaggregate the impact of geographically distinct sources of offshore
employment changes on domestic US wages. In particular, they measure the impact of offshore
employment by US parents in China, Mexico, India, and other low income locations on home

15

employment. They then compare the effects of import competition from China and offshore
employment in China on US worker wages.
Consistent with their earlier work, they find that offshoring to low-wage countries is
associated with wage declines for US workers, and the workers most affected are those performing
routine tasks. Their results indicate that a 10 per cent increase in occupational exposure to import
competition is associated with a 2.7 per cent decline in real wages for workers who perform routine
tasks. They also find substantial wage effects of offshoring to low wage countries: a 10 percentage
point increase in occupation-specific exposure to overseas employment in low wage countries is
associated with a 0.27 per cent decline in real wages for workers performing routine tasks for our
entire sample, and nearly a 1 per cent decline for 2000 through 2008.
The downward pressure from trade and offshoring on US wages using occupational (but
not industry-level) measures of globalization explain the puzzling results found by Autor, Dorn,
and Hanson (2013). David Autor and his co-authors find a positive, but insignificant impact of
import competition on local wages, leading them to conclude that “manufacturing plants react to
import competition by accelerating technological and organizational innovations that increase
productivity and may raise wages”. Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2017) suggest that
occupational exposure to globalization puts significant downward pressure on wages because such
a measure captures the movement of workers out of manufacturing and into lower wage services.
Using a subset of the Current Population Surveys (CPS) data where they are able to follow the
same worker over time, they measure what happens to worker wages when they switch industries
or occupations. They find evidence that while the wage impacts of switches within manufacturing
are mild, leaving manufacturing for services is associated with an appreciable loss in wages, and
larger losses still for workers who are forced to switch occupation upon leaving manufacturing.

16

This highlights the importance of examining the impact of globalization by looking beyond
workers only employed directly in manufacturing.
Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2017) then turn to a more in-depth analysis of
competition from China, the US’s second largest trading partner and second most popular
destination for offshoring (after Mexico) in 2008. They present evidence that both imports from
China and offshoring to China are associated with lower US worker wages. Increasing
occupational import penetration from China by a 10 percentage point share of a market is
associated with a 5.6 per cent wage decline, and increasing occupational offshore exposure to
China is associated with a further 1.6 per cent decline in wages. They compare for the first time the
impact of both import competition from China and offshore activities by US multinationals in
China. The results suggest that focusing on imports alone understates the role of globalization in
contributing to falling US wages.
Lastly, they examine the role played by trade and offshoring in explaining US labor force
participation. In the wake of the global financial crisis, the US suffered persistently high rates of
unemployment relative to historical averages, and generational lows in labor force participation
rates. Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2017) show that neither offshoring nor international
trade are associated with a significant reduction in labor force participation. Their results indicate
that the most important factors associated with a reduction in US labor force participation during
the sample period were computer use rates or increasing capital intensity, and that offshore
activities to China or elsewhere played a very small role. These last set of results suggest that
declining labor force participation in the US is better explained by technical change as computers
replaced routine jobs, than by globalization.
Francis Kramarz also focuses on the costs to the labor market of increasing international

17

competition (Kramarz, 2017). He examines the impact of globalization on the labor market in
France. The Single Market Program (SMP), an attempt to implement the European Community’s
internal market, was conceived in 1985, launched in 1988, with the hope of being achieved around
1992. It entailed decreased tariffs and barriers within the EC, leading to a rapid increase in import
competition in France during the second half of the 1980s. Kramarz addresses two questions:
with increased competitive pressures and expanded opportunities due to the SMP, was foreign
outsourcing a possible response to the high wages and strong unions? Second, he asks what was
the impact of increased outsourcing on wages and employment.
Kramarz begins his analysis with a formal theoretical model that shows how the threat of
offshoring forces workers in firms with strong unions to accept a lower share of the profits.
Offshoring creates a threat point that reduces the size of the rent to be shared after bargaining. This
pushes firms facing strong unions to outsource. Through these changes in the quasi-rent, this effect
depresses wages. One important contribution is to trace out the mechanism from offshoring to its
(negative) impact on worker wages, which occurs as firms with stronger union activity are able to
bargain more effectively with their workers.
Kramarz employs a unique French dataset that has firm level information on outsourcing
decisions, imports, and union strength. He combines that data with matched employer and
employee data that allows him to measure the impact of globalization on wages at the disaggregate
level. He uses the exogenous shock of the SMP to trace out first its effect on the bargaining
strength of unions at the firm level, and consequently the impact on firm level decisions to
outsource employment. Outsourcing and import competition at the firm level in turn affected
domestic wages and employment.
Kramarz shows, both theoretically and empirically, that in France there are essentially two

18

types of firms: firms facing strong unions in which workers capture half of the rents and firms
facing weaker unions where workers are paid their opportunity wage. Kramarz first identifies the
exercise of union power with firm size, in particular with firms having at least fifty employees.
The fifty employee cutoff is associated with the Auroux Laws in France, which stipulate that
bargaining should take place every year in an establishment or a firm with more than fifty
employees. Kramarz then goes beyond the firm size cutoff and uses firm level information on
union activity to confirm the extent of union strength.
Kramarz finds that large firms decrease domestic employment when their offshoring
increases. At the same time, rent sharing declines. In terms of magnitudes, he finds that a 10
percentage point increase in the share of offshoring in sales is associated with a 1.3 percentage
point decrease in employment. Kramarz concludes that firms facing strong unions increased
offshoring and decreased employment while other firms increased relative employment and used
outsourcing much less intensively. He concludes that “Union strength may well have backfired.”
Matteo Fiorini, Marion Jansen, and Weisi Xie document increasing globalization,
structural change in all economies, and employment losses in manufacturing (Fiorini, Jansen, and
Xsie, 2017). One issue that remains unresolved is the relative importance of offshoring, labor
saving technological change and finally the natural shift of economies towards services in
explaining these global trends. Such shifts are not independent: offshoring is one consequence of
the shifting comparative advantage of industrialized economies, and technical change is partly a
response to competition from low-wage countries. If structural change observed in industrialized
countries goes hand-in-hand with offshoring, it should also have a mirror image: structural change
in the developing world.
Fiorini, Jansen, and Xsie take a comprehensive view of structural change by comparing

19

and contrasting trends in both developing and industrialized countries. Two questions are the focus
of their research: (1) has structural change accelerated in recent years, and (2) has the movement of
factories to the developing world been systematic and global?
On the first question, focusing in particular on the relative role of the manufacturing sector
in the United States, the authors suggest that changes in recent years are not dramatic. The decline
in manufacturing employment has been steady over the past three decades. A somewhat different
picture arises in terms of value added, as a result of changes in relative prices and productivity
differentials: the sector’s role in terms of (the volume of) value added declined less than
employment.
On the second question, they find that in most industrialized countries the decline of the
manufacturing sector has occurred in conjunction with increased imports from the developing
world. While such a trend might imply causality between the two, changes observed in the
sectoral composition of economic activity are far more complex than what would be expected
from this pure offshoring story. Interestingly, even China experienced a decline in the relative
importance of manufacturing employment in the 1990s. They also find that Japan, Germany and
Korea, went through significant labor shedding in manufacturing in the 1990s but now have trade
surpluses with China. Such structural transformation in China suggests that the gradual decline in
employment shares of manufacturing cannot be attributed primarily to emerging market
competition but is part of a global and perhaps universal process of structural transformation.
In the light of this inconclusive prima facie evidence, Fiorini, Jansen, and Xsie seek to
properly measure structural change. They develop a structural change index which reflects the
share of a given economy that has shifted sectoral allocations over a certain period of time. This
index does not indicate the direction of change (it does not say whether economic activity has

20

moved away from manufacturing towards services or vice versa) but the intensity of change. This
measure can easily be compared across countries and can be calculated using sectoral value-added
or employment data.
Like Imbs (2017), they find that structural change in terms of value added has not
accelerated over the past three decades for the United States, whereas it has in terms of
employment. This acceleration does not necessarily hold for other developed countries and one
should refrain from drawing general conclusions based on the US example only.
Finally, Fiorini, Jansen and Xsie explore the relationship between growth and structural
change, but find that no general pattern arises. In most advanced economies, the values of their
structural change indices are comparable across decades while decade level growth rates have
declined. In Asia, growth rates have remained relatively stable across the decades, while most of
the reshuffling took place in the 1980s. Finally, for Latin America their research suggests a
negative relationship between growth and structural change. All in all, they conclude that there is
no clear link between growth and structural change. Structural change can take place in a context
of positive, no or negative growth.
These inconclusive findings, which refute the popular view of a direct relationship between
growth in developing countries and de-industrialization in the developed world, lead Fiorini,
Jansen and Xsie to conclude that structural change is not automatically associated with
productivity increases or growth. Episodes of large structural changes in economies at different
level of development do not necessarily coincide.

Microeconomic evidence, ideally using

matched employer employee data, is needed to precisely assess what are the ultimate
consequences of offshoring and de-industrialization on the labor market.
The final chapter explores whether so-called "cluster policies" could address the policy

21

challenges of de-industrialization and worker dislocation. Philippe Martin, Thierry Mayer, and
Florian Mayneris explore why some firms were able to weather the 2008-2009 crisis better. In
particular, they focus on the role of cluster policies in allowing some exporters to survive the
collapse of international trade in 2009 better than others (Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris, 2017).
They are specifically interested in French cluster policies, the “pôles de compétitivité”
(which translates as “clusters for competitiveness”) which were launched in 2005. Their results
show that the agglomeration of exporters positively affects the survival probability of firms on
export markets, and conditioning on survival, the growth rate of their exports. However, these
spillover effects were not stronger during the crisis; if anything, the opposite is true. They then
show that this weaker resilience of firms in clusters is probably due to the fact that firms in clusters
are more dependent on the fate of the largest exporter in the cluster.
As Martin and his co-authors point out, “clusters are popular among policy makers. There
are good reasons for this: geographical concentration of firms operating in the same industry has
been extensively shown to favor firm-level economic performance.” In contrast, the literature
shows modest gains from public policies that provide incentives for more clustering. This is
because agglomeration gains are already partly internalized by firms in their location choices.
Philippe Martin and his co-authors fill the gap in the business cycle literature by
investigating whether firms in clusters are better able to resist economic shocks than others. They
highlight an interesting feature of clusters that has been ignored so far: by reinforcing the
relationships and the interdependencies between firms, clusters might amplify the transmission of
shocks, and thus increase the volatility of activity at the local level. They suggest that policy
makers interested in promoting clusters may want to take into account this possible amplification
of shocks when evaluating the costs and benefits of cluster policies.

22

All these contributions address the new role for technology, which makes it possible to
handle complexity and to exchange an unprecedented amount of information on a global scale
instantaneously. Recent developments in the literature on global value chains give a better
understanding of the extent to which trade in intermediate goods changes the overall picture of
traded value added.

Such changes may lead researchers to compute adjusted revealed

comparative advantage indicators (Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2014).
Choices made by firms clearly affect their total employment, conditional on the
complementarity or substitutability of the offshored tasks. But beyond the volume of hours
worked, choices regarding the boundaries of the firm affect the nature of tasks performed within
the firm. In a factory-free economy, the content of tasks performed in the industrial sector has little
to do with the physical transformation of materials into products. The two main activities are
designing new products, or new bundles of products and services (iPhone and iTunes), and
supervising the global value and logistic chains leading to the physical product delivered to the
final consumer. Most of the tasks are focused on research and development, and treatment of
complex batches of information. Associated tasks being skill-intensive, the skill content of tasks
performed within the factory-free company are likely to rise.
We know since Feenstra and Hanson (1996) that the vertical fragmentation of production
at the international level contributed to rising wage inequalities in the United States. What is
different in the case of “factory-China” is the size of the country where physical production
activities are offshored. In such a case, trade imbalances (only partially compensated by services
income, e.g. royalties) may well reinforce the mechanisms at stake on industrial country labor
markets. International trade is no longer about products, but tasks (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg,
2008). Low-wage countries tend to specialize in offshorable tasks, while advanced countries

23

specialize in the less offshorable segments of sequential value chains handling complexity, while
unskilled non-offshorable tasks may be maintained as well.
Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2017) show that reorganization of production on a
global scale is leading to the reallocation of workers away from high-wage manufacturing jobs
into other sectors or other occupations within industry. Trade in tasks can affect a wider class of
workers than those directly affected in handling physical products. Displaced workers will face a
reduction in their earnings, as they shift industries (even from manufacturing to services), but
continue performing tasks that are routine and offshorable. Indeed, Kramarz shows that unions can
paradoxically reinforce the desirability of offshoring for firms confronted by competition, but
could also limit the ultimate recourse to offshoring as well.
If the distinction between industry and services is no longer relevant, if tasks performed are
the relevant prism to analyze transformations in the labor market, and if cities are the twenty-first
century “factories”, how will public policies adjust? One likely outcome is that public policies will
be redesigned to target individuals, rather than industries (manufacturing or services), when
addressing employment issues. The other dimension is about the promotion of cities. How do we
interpret the evidence presented by Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris that productivity gains are
associated with clusters? Denser areas are more productive. This can be due to selection, as only
the most productive firms can survive in more competitive environments. This can also be due to
agglomeration economies, associated with a better access to a variety of inputs, or the circulation
of ideas (Duranton and Puga, 2004). If such difference in the efficiency of big cities is mainly the
outcome of a selection issue, and if firms internalize agglomeration economies in their location
decisions, the gains to be expected from policies reinforcing clustering might be limited.
Fortunately, selection is only part of the answer. The comparison of the empirical firm

24

productivity distribution across high- and low-density locations confirms that there is a substantial
efficiency premium associated with city size, and that it is even higher for highly productive firms
(Combes et al., 2012). Fontagné and Santoni (2016) explain this outcome in terms of firm
optimization implying the reallocation of inputs. Resource misallocation and the associated effect
on productivity is not only related to firms characteristics but also to the environment in which
firms operate. Denser locations offer a better match between employers and employees, hence
higher overall productivity, beyond individual firm characteristics.
The contributions summarized here point to a renewal of interest in the process of
de-industrialization and present a daunting picture of a new, factory-free world. As shown by
Richard Baldwin (2017), de-industrialization is happening in all the industrial countries. Jean
Imbs reinforces the picture. Such macro level trends away from manufacturing are reinforced by
the volume’s authors using individual firm-level data for Japan, the United States, and countries in
Europe.
Richard Baldwin, Jean Imbs, and Fiorini, Jansen, and Xsie all concur that structural
transformation towards a factory-free economy has been happening in industrial countries for
many decades. The evidence discussed here suggests that de-industrialization is a process that
happens over time in all countries, even in China today. One implication is that the current vogue
of China-bashing is not likely to provide a solution to these long-term trends. Another implication
is that the distinction between manufacturing and services is likely to become increasingly blurry.
More manufacturing firms are engaging in services activities, and more wholesale firms are
engaging in manufacturing. One optimistic perspective suggests that industrial country firms
may be able to exploit the high value-added and skill intensive activities associated with design
and innovation, as well as distribution, all components of the global value chain for manufacturing.

25

A less optimistic picture emerges when we turn to an evaluation of the impact of these
trends on industrial country labor markets. While over the longer term economies may adjust to the
shift towards a factory-free economy, in the medium term the personal and political costs are
significant. The most painful adjustment is for workers who do routine jobs, who are older and less
educated, and cannot easily adjust to the demands of this factory-free world.
These findings raise challenges for economic policy. If workers do not benefit from
globalization, they will cease to support it. The goal of this book is primarily to document the
trends in industrial economies and the impact on labor markets, but as the editors we would like to
offer some concluding observations. A first issue relates to the statistical definition of
manufacturing and services. This collection of papers shows that there in no longer a boundary
between the two: services increasingly rely on immobilized capital and technology as exemplified
by data centers, cloud computing, exploitation of big data; manufactured goods are increasingly
bound to services to the client; factory-less producers develop and market new products without
any single tangible intervention on goods or materials.
Second, a clear challenge is how to design public policies that address the structural
changes documented in this book. In a situation where the value chain is long and highly
fragmented, policy makers are likely to promote the creation, design and marketing of attractive
bundles of products and services. These are areas of innovation, economies of scale, and high
productivity. Industrial policy, be it horizontal or more targeted, is likely to become dedicated to
innovation across all sectors, not only manufacturing.
Funding declining activities with public money and raising obstacles to the development of
new activities will not stop the movement described in these pages. These changes are global,
rapid and result from a combination of technical progress and raising capabilities of the new

26

players in the world economy. However, Aghion et al. (2015) suggest that promoting new
activities across all economic sectors and combining that promotion with greater competition
could be highly effective. A side effect of the new organization of the world economy is the rising
importance of big cities as clustering talents; nations are less relevant with globalization, while
cities gain in importance.
The third issue highlighted in this volume is the cost to displaced workers, and the
consequences for educational policies and redistribution. The evidence suggests that certain
occupations are particularly hit by the ongoing process. Policies like safety nets or vocational
training are likely to be effective if targeted at individuals, rather than positions. In the United
States, legislation passed in 2015 extends assistance to workers hurt by trade to the service sectors.
However, research shows that only half of the US workers who could benefit from trade
adjustment assistance actually apply for it. Particularly in the United States, educational
opportunities are skewed towards the better off. A more globalized world requires significantly
greater investments in education, infrastructure, and social safety nets.
Current policies were designed for an a era very different from the factory-free economies
described here. Ultimately, the disconnection between value added and physical production is a
big challenge for public budgets: the tax base is highly mobile and the value added is increasingly
associated with intangibles.
A last issue goes beyond the economic analysis.There is now good evidence (Autor, Dorn,
Hanson, and Majlesi 2016) that locations particularly exposed to the changes that we described
elect more extremist members of the traditional political parties (in the US) or even vote for
extremist parties (in Europe). This is the big challenge for our democracies: creating the policies
and the political dialogue to make the structural transformations acceptable for citizens.

27

While international economists for many years downplayed the transitional costs
associated with structural changes, it is increasingly evident that globalization imposes significant
adjustment costs. Those costs are borne disproportionately by less skilled workers. One of the
great challenges of the twenty first century will be how to improve the lives and opportunities for
those left behind.

28

References
Acemoglu Daron and Veronica Guerrieri (2008), Capital Deepening and Non-Balanced
Economic Growth, Journal of Political Economy, 116(3): 467-497.
Aghion, Philippe, Jing Cai, Mathias Dewatripont, Luosha Du, Ann Harrison, and Patrick
Legros,(2015), Industrial Policy and Competition, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, October.
Antras Pol (2003), Firms, Contracts and trade Structure. Quarterly Journal of economics,
118(4): 1375-1418.
Antras Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2004), Global Sourcing, Journal of Political Economy,
112(3): 552-580.
Antras, Pol and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2009), Organizations and Trade, Annual Review
of Economics, 1: 43-64.
Autor, David H., David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States, American Economic
Review, 103(6): 2121-68.
Autor, David, Dorn, David, Hanson, Gordon H., and Kaveh Majlesi (2016), Importing
political polarization? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure. NBER Working
Paper, 22637.
Baumol, William J. Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: the anatomy of urban crisis.
American Economic Review, 1967, 57(3): 415-426.
Baldwin, Richard (2012), Global supply chains: Why they emerged, why they matter, and
where they are going. CEPR discussion papers 9103.
Baldwin, Richard (2017), Factory-Free Europe? A Two Unbundlings Perspective on
Europe’s 20th Century Manufacturing Miracle and 21st Century Manufacturing Malaise,
chapter 1 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing,
Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Bernard, Andrew B. and Teresa C. Fort (2017), Factoryless Goods Producers in the US,
chapter 5 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors, The Factory-Free Economy.
Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Boppart, Timo (2014), Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model With
Relative Price Effects and Non-Gorman Preferences, Econometrica, 82(6): 2167-2196.
Bryan, Jon L. (2013), Offshore Outsourcing: Will the Robust Growth Continue?, mimeo,
Bridgewater State University.
29

Chenery, Hollis B., Robinson, Sherman, and Syrquin, Moshe (1986), Industrialization and
growth. World Bank.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga and Sébastien
Roux, S. (2012), The Productivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing
Agglomeration From Firm Selection. Econometrica, 80(6):2543-2594.
Costinot, Arnaud, Vogel Jonathan and Su Wang (2013), An Elementary Theory of Global
Supply Chains. Review of Economic Studies, (80): 109-144.
Crinò, Rosario and Paolo Epifani (2017), The Skill Bias of the US Trade Deficit, chapter 7
in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing,
Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Crozet, Matthieu and Emmanuel Milet (2017), The Servitization of French Manufacturing
Firms, chapter 4 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy.
Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Defever, Fabrice and Farid Toubal (2013), Productivity, relationship-specific inputs and
the sourcing modes of multinationals. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 94,
345-357.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Gene M. Grossman (1982), Trade and Protection with Multistage
Production, Review of Economic Studies, 49: 583-94.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga (2004), Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration
economies. In Henderson, J. V. and Thisse, J. F., editors., Volume 4 of Handbook of
Regional and Urban Economics, chapter 48: 2063-2117. Elsevier.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Harrison Ann and Margaret McMillan (2017), Why Are American
Workers Getting Poorer? China, Trade, and Offshoring, chapter 8 in L. Fontagné and A.
Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of
Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon Hanson (1996), Foreign investment, outsourcing and
relative wages, in (R. C. Feenstra et al. editors.) The Political Economy of Trade Policy:
Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, MIT Press: 89-127.
Fiorini, Matteo, Jansen Marion and Weisi Xie (2017), Globalization and Structural
Change: Upheaval in the Nineties or in the Noughties?, chapter 10 in L. Fontagné and A.
Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of
Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Fontagné, Lionel and Gianluca Santoni (2016), Agglomeration Economies and Firm Level
Labor Misallocation, CEPII working paper, 2016-24.

30

Fontagné, Lionel and Ann Harrison editors. (2017), The Factory-Free Economy.
Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, 368 p.,
March.
Fontagné, Lionel and Aurélien D’Isanto (2017), Fragmentation: Survey-Based Evidence
for France, chapter 6 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy.
Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Fort, Teresa C. (2013), Breaking up is hard to do: Why firms fragment production across
locations, working paper, Tuck School of Business.
Grossman, Gene M. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2008), Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory
of Offshoring, American Economic Review, 98(5): 1978-97.
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan (2011), Offshoring Jobs? Multinational and U.S.
Manufacturing Employment, the Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3): 857-75.
Head, Keith, Mayer Thierry and John Ries (2009), How Remote is the Offshoring Threat?,
European Economic Review, 53(4): 429-444.
Helpman, Elhanan, Melitz Marc J. and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004), Export Versus FDI with
Heterogeneous Firms, American Economic Review, 94(1): 300-316.
Hijzen, Alexander, Jean Sébastien and Thierry Mayer (2011), The effects at home of
initiating production abroad: evidence from matched French firms, Review of World
Economics, 147(3): 457-483.
Hummels, David, Ishii Jun, and Kei-Mu Yi (2001), The nature and growth of vertical
specialization in world trade. Journal of international economics, 54(1): 75-96.
Imbs, Jean (2017), Structural Change in the OECD: Some Facts, chapter 3 in L. Fontagné
and A. Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the
Future of Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera (2012), Accounting for intermediates:
Production sharing and trade in value added, Journal of International Economics, 86(2):
224-36.
Koopman, Robert, Wang, Zhi and Shang-Jin Wei (2014), Tracing Value Added and
Double Counting in Gross Exports, American Economic Review, 104(2): 459-94.
Kramarz, Francis (2017), Offshoring, Wages, and Employment: Evidence from Data
Matching Imports, Firms, and Workers, chapter 9 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison
editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry,
Oxford University Press, March.

31

Martin, Philippe, Mayer Thierry and Florian Mayneris (2017), Are Clusters More Resilient
in Crises? Evidence from French Exporters in 2008-2009, chapter 11 in L. Fontagné and A.
Harrison editors,The Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of
Industry, Oxford University Press, March.
Melitz, Marc J. (2003), The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and
Aggregate Industry Productivity, Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
Miroudot, Sébastien., Rainer Lanz and Alexandros Ragoussis (2009), Trade in
intermediate goods and services, OECD, TAD/TC/WP(2009)1/Final.
Ngai, Rachel and Christopher A. Pissarides (2004) Structural change in a multi-sector
model of growth, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 627.
Nunn, Nathan (2007), Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts and the pattern of
trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 569-600.
Ryan, Michael J. and Farid Toubal (2017), Hollowing Out of the Japanese Economy: A
Long-Term Perspective, chapter 2 in L. Fontagné and A. Harrison editors,The
Factory-Free Economy. Outsourcing, Servitization, and the Future of Industry, Oxford
University Press, March.
Rowthorn, Robert and Ramana Ramaswamy (1998), Growth, Trade and
Deindustrialization, IMF working paper, WP/98/60.
Sanyal, Kalyan K. and Ronald W. Jones (1982), The theory of trade in middle products.
The American Economic Review, 72(1): 16-31.
Stehrer, Robert (2012), Trade in Value Added and Value Added in Trade, WIIW working
papers, 81, The Vienna Institute for International Economics.
Thoenig, Mathias, and Thierry Verdier (2003), A theory of defensive skill-biased
innovation and globalization, The American Economic Review. 93(3): 709-728.
Yeaple, Stephen R. (2006), Offshoring, Foreign Direct Investment and the Structure of US
Trade, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3): 602-11.

32

