                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CHILDHOOD CIRCUMSTANCES AND ADULT OUTCOMES:
                                  ACT II

                                         Douglas Almond
                                           Janet Currie
                                         Valentina Duque

                                       Working Paper 23017
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23017


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We thank Steven Durlauf and five anonymous referees for very helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Almond thanks NSF award SES-1357608.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23017.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Childhood Circumstances and Adult Outcomes: Act II
Douglas Almond, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque
NBER Working Paper No. 23017
January 2017
JEL No. H4,I14

                                          ABSTRACT

That prenatal events can have life-long consequences is now well established. Nevertheless,
research on the Fetal Origins Hypothesis is flourishing and has expanded to include the early
childhood (postnatal) environment. Why does this literature have a “second act?” We
summarize the major themes and contributions driving the empirical literature since our 2011
reviews, and try to interpret the literature in light of an overarching conceptual framework about
how human capital is produced early in life. One major finding is that relatively mild shocks in
early life can have substantial negative impacts, but that the effects are often heterogeneous
reflecting differences in child endowments, budget constraints, and production technologies.
Moreover, shocks, investments, and interventions can interact in complex ways that are only
beginning to be understood. Many advances in our knowledge are due to increasing accessibility
of comprehensive administrative data that allow events in early life to be linked to long-term
outcomes. Yet, we still know relatively little about the interval between, and thus about whether
it would be feasible to identify and intervene with affected individuals at some point between
early life and adulthood. We do know enough, however, to be able to identify some interventions
that hold promise for improving child outcomes in early life and throughout the life course.

Douglas Almond                                  Valentina Duque
Department of Economics                         University of Michigan
Columbia University                             Postdoctoral Fellow in the
International Affairs Building, MC 3308          Population Studies Center and
420 West 118th Street                           Department of Economics
New York, NY 10027                              426 Thompson Street
and NBER                                        Room 2034
da2152@columbia.edu                             Ann Arbor, MI 48104
                                                vduque@umich.edu
Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
              The fetal origins literature has been particularly active over the last several years

rendering reviews by Currie (2009) and Almond and Currie (2011a, b) somewhat dated. Figure

1 shows the number of papers about “fetal origins” in several leading journals by year.1




              Why does this literature “have legs"? By now, the rudimentary point is familiar. Currie

and Hyson (1999) using longitudinal data showed that long-term outcomes seemed to respond to

circumstances in utero; Costa (2000) found that chronic health conditions among older men were

predicted by early-life infant mortality rates in their natal areas, which can proxy for the disease

environment. Papers exploiting natural experiments to show the long-term impact of fetal and



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
 Figure 1 shows the number of annual publications from January 1993 to October 2015 in the Quarterly Journal of
Economics, American Economic Review, Journal of Political Economy, Econometrica, Review of Economic
Studies, Journal of Labor Economics, Journal of Econometrics, Journal of the European Economic Association,
Review of Economics and Statistics, Journal of Human Resources, Journal of Public Economics, American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Journal of Development Economics, American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, and Journal of Health Economics.
                                                                                                                  2
!
!
early life shocks such as Almond (2006), Van Den Berg et al. (2006), and Bleakley (2007), are a

decade old.

       One reason for continued interest is that the large magnitude of the fetal origins effects

that have been found, and the short time interval in utero suggest that in principle, Pareto

improvements can be made by re-allocating resources from later to earlier in the life cycle.

Given the common definition of economics as the study of the allocation of scarce resources

(e.g., Blackhouse and Medema, 2009), this literature resonates with a core interest of economists:

efficiency. Of course, the separation in time and across people (first the mother then the child)

makes it far from obvious how this potentially high-return reallocation of resources can best be

achieved.

       A second reason for enduring interest in the Fetal Origins Hypothesis (FOH) is that it has

proven to describe a surprisingly general phenomenon. Although FOH was first formulated as a

specific theory about the effects of prenatal nutritional deprivation on chronic health conditions

in adulthood (Barker, 1998), economists have found that a wide range of early life experiences

matter and that many other (non-health) outcomes are affected. Outcomes of surpassing interest

to economists, including IQ and wages, have been linked to early life influences, as have some

newer areas of focus such as personality traits.

       This evolving discovery speaks to another area of abiding interest for economics: the

debate about nature versus nurture. It has become increasingly clear that we are shaped by many

occurrences in early life which interact with our genetic endowments to either help or hinder us

in reaching our potential and/or adapting to our environment (Manski, 2011). The FOH

literature suggests that it may be possible to respond to entrenched disadvantage by altering the

                                                                                                     3
!
!
environment in a way that promotes economic equality (Currie, 2011). Thus, the FOH remains

important because it suggests that it may be possible to counter-balance forces leading to greater

inequality (such as skill biased technical change) with investments in pregnant women, children,

and their environments broadly defined.2

              In addition to surveying studies that focus on shocks that occur while the child is in utero,

this review considers shocks in early childhood. Angrist and Pischke (2010) herald a “credibility

revolution” in which clear a priori definitions of treatment and control groups combined with

time-series variation in environmental conditions help to generate sharp predictions. The FOH

hypothesis lends itself to “severe tests” (Dinardo, 2007) given that the in utero period is very

well defined, and children subjected to an external shock in utero can often be compared to

similar children born a little earlier or later, who escaeped the shock. The beginning and ending

dates of the period of “early childhood” are less well defined than the period in utero making it

somewhat more difficult to find clean “natural experiments.” It is nevertheless possible to

employ compelling identification strategies and we feel the majority of papers discussed in this

review employ compelling research designs.

              In view of the large number of relevant studies, we organize the review around a series of

“handbook” style tables that we present in the supplemental file (which can be found using the

link in the abstract page). In lyric opera fashion, the tables briefly summarize each study’s

highlights. We also report the datasets used, sample sizes, the empirical strategy employed, main

results obtained, and any heterogeneity by subgroup in the tables. We have also tried to express !
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
2
    !In describing “Six examples of the Long-term Benefits of Anti-Poverty Programs”, the White House’s Council of
    Economic Advisers summarized recent research in this literature by economists, noting:

               Economists have traditionally argued that anti-poverty policy faces a “great tradeoff” —
               famously articulated by Arthur Okun — between equity and efficiency. Yet, recent work suggests
               that Okun’s famous tradeoff may be far smaller in practice than traditionally believed and in
!              many cases precisely the opposite could be the case.
!                                                                                                                    4
the main effects both as a percent with respect to the outcome mean (when the outcome mean

was provided in the paper) and in terms of a standard deviation (when the outcome’s standard

deviation was provided). To some extent, reporting estimates in % and in SD facilitates the

comparison of the effects across studies when these focus on a similar outcome (e.g., test scores).

         Consistent with the broader trend in economics, many of these papers pay particular

attention to the use of large-scale administrative datasets. Beyond reducing measurement error

and recording additional outcomes, the use of administrative data can help mitigate problems of

selective attrition from surveys and the large sample sizes contribute statistical power to detect

milder treatments. These tables largely speak for themselves, so rather than walk through them,

we focus in the text on a few studies from each table in an attempt to draw some general lessons

from the existing literature and to identify promising areas for future research.

       We begin by providing a conceptual framework for our review in Section 1. This

framework emphasizes the child's human capital accumulation process and parent’s optimal

investment decisions in the presence of in-utero and early childhood shocks given production

functions and budget constraints. The framework can be used to elucidate potential pathways

that underlie the empirical findings that we observe in the literature. Section 2 then provides an

overview of the literature on the importance of “mild” shocks in the early years. In addition to

new evidence about the wide range of factors that matter to child development, an important

theme that emerges is that there is often considerable heterogeneity in the effects of specific

shocks. Some of the heterogeneity in the effects of shocks may be due to parental responses that

either exacerbate or mitigate the effects. Hence, we will also consider the evidence documenting

some of these responses and their impacts in Sections 3.


                                                                                                     5
!
!
       In addition, a small but growing literature exploits situations where there are “two

shocks” in order to either separately identify the effects of initial shocks and responses to them,

or to investigate potential interactions between various types of shocks. Since this is an

interesting and novel development that resonates with the theory of capacity formation

(Heckman, 2007), some of these studies are highlighted in Section 4.

       As discussed above, economists are beginning to investigate policy responses to the

FOH. Recent contributions to this literature are reviewed in Section 5. A striking feature of the

most recent literature is that the growing accessibility of administrative data has allowed

researchers to conduct policy evaluation by linking current adult outcomes with past “exposures”

to policies in a way that was not possible previously.

       One practical difficulty with this approach is that it takes many years to see the effects of

fetal or early childhood shocks on adult outcomes while timelines for policy decisions are

typically much shorter. Thus, one of our conclusions is that it would be extremely useful to

know more about the “missing middle” years, and whether long term effects can be predicted

using indicators in early and middle childhood. This question is explored in Section 6. We

summarize our impressions of the literature and its future directions in Section 7.

       Because the literature is growing so rapidly and in so many directions, this review will

not do justice to it all. To make the review more tractable we focus mainly on studies that

appeared after our previous reviews were published, and we do not do justice to the “disaster”

literature which relies on lethal natural catastrophes such as famines, pandemics, wars, and

hurricanes, as natural experiments. Although these papers were very important in the emergence

of the FOH, most economists now accept that disasters early in life are likely to have negative

                                                                                                      6
!
!
long-term effects on survivors, i.e., that shocks which are “extreme enough” are likely to have

persistent effects. Moreover, the fetal origins perspective will never be pivotal in a cost-benefit

analysis of measures designed to forestall such disasters.3 Even without the benefit of the recent

economic and scientific evidence on the FOH, those suffering disaster often acted in a way to

shield pregnant women and young children (such as by giving them larger food rations in a

famine). Third, the long term effects of events that involved high mortality can be difficult to

discern given the possibility of mortality selection. If the individuals most vulnerable to

catastrophe die, then the remaining population could possibly be stronger on average. Selection

can be a particular problem when risk of death is higher for groups with lower socioeconomic

status, as it often is.

              We will also neglect most of the research on conditional cash transfers, in part because it

have been reviewed elsewhere (see for example, Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). In addition to

these deliberate omissions, we will undoubtedly omit important studies by mistake, given how

active the research area has become.

Section 1: Conceptual Framework

              Following Heckman (2007), the production technology we consider is a two period

Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) function:


                                                                                                              (1)




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3
  We do not intend to suggest that insight and nuance cannot be gleaned from the analysis of such events. For
example, Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2013) study natural disasters and show that the short-run mortality effects are
followed by arguably more important future disinvestments which occur with a lag and kill girls.!
                                                                                                                    7
!
!
where h denotes health or human capital as assessed after childhood, A represents factor

productivity, and                       and          are the investments made in the first and second periods (e.g., parental

investments). The first childhood period is denoted with subscript 1 (e.g., in utero) and the

second period of childhood (e.g., preschool years) with subscript 2.4 A bar superscript indicates

that the first period investment is already set, and what is under consideration is the second

period investment.

              Following Currie and Almond (2011b), we assume that                                 is an exogenous shock to first

period investments (e.g., during pregnancy) and                                    is an exogenous shock to second period

investments (e.g., during pre-school years). The g subscript follows from the fact that exogenous

shocks in observational studies typically appear at the group level, whereas the other components

of investments,                     and          may vary at the level of the individual child. In general, we will

consider the effect of investment shocks                                   and        holding fixed the child-specific

investments during the first period of childhood. If we also hold fixed second period investments

(i.e.,          instead of ), then we might consider impacts from shocks on h to be “biological”

(Royer, 2009). The parameter , where                                             , represents the weight each childhood period

receives in the production of adult health (or more generally, adult human capital).5 The

parameter                , where                                , denotes the extent to which investments in different periods

are substitutes or complements, often a key question determining the efficacy of interventions.

              We assume that parents make the investment decisions for their (only) child.

Investments are costly, and are valued insofar as they improve h. The effects of investments on

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
4
  For simplicity, we consider only two childhood periods, however, this framework can be extended to any number
of periods (Heckman, 2007).
5
    is the “capacity multiplier” in Heckman (2007).
                                                                                                                                 8
!
!
h are traded off against parental consumption, i.e., parents maximize their utility,

which is increasing in both arguments. Parents have a budget constraint (expressed in monetary

units) of:

                                                                      ,


where Y denotes family income, pc and pI are the market prices of consumption and investment,

and r is the interest rate. We assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function of the form:

                                                                                                  (2)


and consider how the production technology can shape the observed investment response. In

particular, we consider two “extreme” production technologies which have polar opposite

predictions for the investment response. The first special case is one of perfect substitutability of

investments. If       , then production technology simplifies to: !


                                                                          !
and optimizing parents set:


                                                                      !
So under this scenario:



                                                                  !
                                                  !


                                                                                !
                                                  !

                                                                                       !
                                                  !

                                                                                                    9
!
!
                                                                                      !

If the               shock is positive (e.g., prenatal Food Stamps), then optimized postnatal investments

fall in response. If                            is negative (e.g., prenatal stress), then postnatal investments increase in

response. That is, period 2 investments are compensatory. When investment responses are

compensatory, reduced form analyses of the impact of                                      will tend to understate biological

effects (Royer, 2009).

              Following Heckman (2007), we now consider the opposite extreme of perfectly

complementary investments:


                                                                                                !
                                                6
Now optimizing parents set:


                                                                                            !
so



                                                                                  !
The period 2 investment response is now reinforcing. Attempting to ameliorate a negative

prenatal shock is completely ineffective, so it is optimal to match period 1 investments (subject

to weighting by ) but consume the rest.

              The takeaway from these two examples is that whether parents reinforce or compensate

shocks can depend on the production technology. Above, we have assumed an “intermediate"

substitutability in parental preferences between consumption and their child’s h: Cobb-Douglas.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6
    For whom period 1 investments are “low”, i.e.,
                                                                                                                         10
!
!
By a similar argument, the substitutability of consumption and child outcomes h will also govern

the response to early childhood shocks. That said, we might suspect that parameters of parental

preferences are particularly difficult to modify.

              We might think that in addition to low income, y, poor families face restricted access to

production technologies. Given a productivity factor                                 for disadvantaged families, we

would see worse child outcomes for equivalent income and investments. It is also possible that

poor families have different values of                          and , which would generate more nuanced predictions

for investments and child outcomes.

              There have been few attempts to estimate this underlying production function (1), in

order to directly measure the key parameters                         and , presumably because of the detailed data

necessary and the strong assumptions which must be made in order to render the production

function simple enough to be estimable (Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Cunha, Heckman, and

Schennach, 2010). However, arguably this underlying framework serves to motivate, guide, and

interpret the more reduced form and observational work that is discussed below.

              The framework also lays bare the multiple mechanisms that can underlie a given

empirical result. For instance, if we observe that parents do or do not make compensating later

life investments in a child who suffered from an early life shock, is this because of parental

preferences, budget constraints,7 or the production function they are facing? Answering this

question is important because without a knowledge of the mechanisms and responses, a policy

designed to address this issue will be a shot in the dark.



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7
    !See!page!1330!(bottom)!and!footnote!7!of!Almond!&!Currie!(2011b).!
                                                                                                                     11
!
!
       Similarly, given the different pathways through which a child’s outcomes can be affected,

it is not surprising to see pronounced heterogeneity in the effect of many shocks by parental

education, income, and other indicators of socioeconomic status (such as race or gender in some

contexts). Subgroups may be more or less exposed to correlated shocks that interact with the

“primary” shock considered, either to magnify or to dampen its effect. And even within finely-

sliced subpopulations, the same group-level shock can yield varying individual exposures. For

example, a house that is airtight may let in less air pollution than a neighboring house that is

drafty. Third, families have differential access to knowledge and resources that can be used to

offset the effects of negative shocks. For instance, while some individuals may have access to

credit markets or savings, others may be credit constrained. They may also have different

preferences for such intervention. For example, in communities where gender discrimination is

the norm, parents may not endorse interventions targeted to girls. Finally, children of low

socioeconomic status may simply be located at a steeper portion of the production function,

yielding a larger effect of a shock of any given size (Almond and Currie, 2011b).

       Even our focus on the missing research on the “middle years” can be seen as a response

to the difficulties involved in understanding the underlying production function for human

capital. If it could be shown that outcome measures in middle childhood satisfied the “exclusion

restriction” (that early childhood impacts adult outcomes only through observed outcomes in the

middle years), this would greatly simplify the data requirements necessary to estimate a

structural production function.

       We should acknowledge that our stylized framework does not lend itself to considering

dynamic complementarities -- the idea that “skill begets skill,” or alternatively that stocks of


                                                                                                   12
!
!
capacities acquired by period t-1 may make investment in period t more productive (Heckman,

2007). Nor does it do justice to “self-productivity” (Heckman, 2007) – which includes the idea

that a given dimension of capacity may also affect the accumulation of another, distinct

dimension.8 For example, cognitive capacity might promote health (or vice versa). Were we to

“force” dynamic complementarities into (1) and consider                               , for instance, one would

find that the interaction of such shocks is always positive (which departs from what some of the

recent empirical literature finds as discussed below). Additionally, dynamic complementarities

are defined by Heckman (2007) in terms of the return to investments and how they vary with the

baseline stock, which is absent from our stylized model. Thus, we will not attempt to model

dynamic complementarities here but merely reiterate Heckman’s (2007) definition, namely:




where ƒ is monotone increasing in its arguments, twice continuously differentiable, and concave

in I, p represents parental capabilities, and                   represents (a vector of) child capabilities. Heckman

assumes that dynamic complementarities are positive. With instruments for both the baseline

stock of human capital and for endogenous subsequent investments, we could shed light on the

magnitude of dynamic complementarities without making assumptions about their sign or

functional form.

              In practice, it is often not empirically possible to distinguish between dynamic

complementarities, self-productivity, and the possibility that parents (or society) invest more (or

less) in children with higher baseline stocks of human capital in unobserved ways (e.g.,

Malamund, Pop-Eleches, and Urquiola, 2016). Nevertheless, distinguishing among these
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
8
    Along with “mechanical” effects on the same dimension.
                                                                                                                  13
!
!
alternatives remains conceptually important because the source of heterogeneity in the dynamic

effects of shocks has implications for the effectiveness of remediation, and specifically, whether

investments later in childhood can reduce or eliminate damage originating from the prenatal or

early childhood period. For instance, if a child has cognitive difficulties as a result of being

premature, a parent may respond by spending more time with the child, reading to them and

assisting with homework. We may wish to examine the effects of these interventions, but the

interventions themselves are endogenous to the child’s state. Moreover, while we would like to

be able to consider each potential investment as a stand-alone intervention, in reality many

aspects of the environment are in flux at any point in time, and different types of investments

may complement or substitute for each other. A few studies that attempt to address dynamic

complementarities are discussed in Section 4 below, and illustrate the challenges researchers

face. We begin below with the simpler case of single shocks experienced in early childhood.

Section 2: Make Mine Mild

       Events and circumstances that are commonly experienced can have lasting effects on

children’s trajectories. For example, there is growing consensus that relatively mild nutritional

deprivation at critical periods can seriously impair fetal and child development. In terms of our

conceptual framework, both             and            may be sizable, even when the shock

considered is small in magnitude relative to total investments or short in duration. Critically,

“mild” prenatal shocks are much more common than extreme ones like famine. Table 1

summarizes much of the recent literature about mild shocks, which are divided into several

categories including: nutrition, stress, disease, pollution, weather shocks, and alcohol and

tobacco. The last column reports on heterogeneity in the estimated effects on different groups, a


                                                                                                    14
!
!
format that is followed in all the Tables that follow. With some exceptions, these papers aim to

capture the biological effect of early-childhood shocks, implicitly assuming that second period

investments are unresponsive to the shocks and fixed (


       a)! Nutritional Shocks

              Panel A of Table 1 summarizes some of the recent literature on nutrition-related shocks.

Fasting is of broad interest as roughly three-quarters of the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims spent

some portion of the in utero period during Ramadan.9 Almond and Mazumder (2011), Almond,

Mazumder, and Van Ewijk (2015), Hoffman (2014), and Greve, Schultz-Nielsen, and Tekin

(2015) all study the effects of Ramadan fasting during pregnancy. Ramadan cycles through the

calendar, enabling the effects of Ramadan fasting to be separated from seasonal variation in

nutrition. Moreover, most people break their fast at sun down so that the fasting is only for a

limited period of time during the day. Nevertheless, this mild and brief nutritional deprivation

appears to have effects on sex ratios (reducing the number of boys who appear to be more likely

to be miscarried). For example, there are large effects on sex ratios among children of Arabian

descent in Michigan. Perhaps surprisingly in view of relatively modest effects on birth weight,

prenatal Ramadan exposure is estimated to have pronounced effects on adult outcomes in a wide

variety of settings (e.g., Uganda, Iraq, Indonesia, England, and Denmark), including to

educational attainment, test scores, adult anthropometrics, mental disability, and wealth

measures.




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
9
 !Almond, Mazumder, and Van Ewijk (2015) speculate that meal skipping, dieting, and morning sickness may all
exert similar effects in non-Muslim populations. For example, Almond, Edlund, Joffe, and Palme (2016) find that
severe morning sickness also reduces the likelihood of male birth in Sweden.
                                                                                                              15
!
!
        Likewise, positive nutrition-related shocks can also have substantial effects even when

relatively mild. For example, Linnemayr and Alderman (2011) examine nutritional

supplementation for pregnant women and 0 to 3 year old children in Senegal and find that

supplementation during pregnancy has a significant effect on the weight-for-age of toddlers, but

that post-birth supplementation had little impact, suggesting the uniqueness of the in utero period

(a common refrain in the literature). Two papers by Feyrer, Politi, and Weil (2013) and

Adhvaryu et al. (2016) build on Field, Robles, and Torero’s (2009) ground breaking study of the

effects of iodine deficiency in Kenya. The more recent studies use historical data about the

rollout of iodine fortification in the U.S. Because the rollout took place at different times in

different places, it is possible to identify the effect of early exposure and to show that it improved

both female labor force participation and the probability that male World War I recruits were

assigned to the Air Force (a marker for ability). They thus provide additional evidence that

relatively mild nutritional deficiency can have large negative long term effects even in otherwise

high-resource settings.

        Adhvaryu et al. (2016) also analyzes measures of parental investments in children, albeit

coarse ones, and find evidence that postnatal investments responded to the shock. In particular,

they argue that postnatal vaccinations and breastfeeding behaviors reinforced the prenatal shock,

i.e.,        , so their reduced form estimates overstate the biological effect. As discussed

above (and further in Almond and Currie, 2011b), to the extent that period 1 and period 2 are

complements, there are stronger tendencies for parents to reinforce endowment shocks.

        Ludwig, Rouse, and Currie (2013) show that maternal weight gain during pregnancy

predicts childhood obesity in the context of sibling fixed effects models. This study is based on

                                                                                                   16
!
!
birth certificates for several entire cohorts of children born in Arkansas, which were linked to

“body mass index (BMI) report cards” issued by the schools. It is one of an increasing number

of studies that show how new access to large-scale administrative data sets can shed light on

FOH questions.

        Fitzsimons and Vera-Hernandez (2014) use a novel instrumental variables strategy for

postnatal nutrition, focusing on non-C-section births to U.K. women. They note that mothers of

infants born on weekends are less likely to receive breastfeeding instruction, and are

correspondingly less likely to go on to breastfeed. Using this variation, they find large effects of

breastfeeding on cognitive development. However, the IV approach involves strong exclusion

restrictions, in this case that there is nothing else about being born on a weekend (or about

having a scheduled C-section) that might lead to poorer outcomes (such as different preferences,

inferior nursing care, or less access to specialists).

        As a group, these studies support the hypothesis that relatively ordinary variations in

nutrition (positive and negative) that are within the experience of many contemporary families

even in rich countries like the U.S. and the U.K., have the potential to impact children health

both at birth and in the longer term.

    b)! Prenatal Maternal Stress

        Panel B of Table 1 focuses on the impact of maternal stress during pregnancy on fetal

outcomes. While the idea that excessive stress has negative health effects is widespread, it is

difficult to assess. Cortisol, the most common biometric measure of stress, is not available in

most health datasets and also varies widely over the course of a day, which even longitudinal

cortisol data do not solve per se. In the absence of a direct measure of stress, the most common
                                                                                                   17
!
!
approach in the literature is therefore reduced form: Evaluating whether an exogenous event that

is likely to have caused maternal stress can be shown to have affected children.

       Currie and Rossin-Slater (2013) identify women in Texas who lived in the announced

potential path of major hurricanes during pregnancy. It is important to note that most of these

women were not in the end affected by the hurricane, so this is not a disaster study in the usual

sense in that it is possible to separate the effect of stress from the direct economic or health

effects of the event. They highlight an issue that often arises in the fetal effects literature, which

is that infants with longer gestations are more likely to have been exposed to any periodic shock

because they have a longer exposure window. Since infants with longer gestations are healthier,

other things being equal, this mechanical relationship tends to bias the estimated effect of shocks

towards zero. They use a sibling fixed effects framework to compare affected to unaffected

children and they address maternal mobility, an issue that frequently arises in a sibling fixed

effects framework. The problem is that mothers may well respond to a shock by moving. In that

case, changes in locational characteristics or exposure between the siblings are endogenous to the

shock. This issue is addressed by instrumenting actual exposure with measures of “potential

exposure” created by assuming that mothers stay in the same place that they were first observed,

and that all gestations last exactly nine months. This counterfactual exposure is in fact highly

correlated with actual exposure because most mothers do stay in the same place, and most

gestations do last nine months. They conclude that stress increases the probability of an

abnormal condition of the newborn, but they found no effects on the incidence of low birth

weight or gestation length, two of the more common measures of fetal health.




                                                                                                    18
!
!
       Persson and Rossin-Slater (2016), and Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas-Serrano (2016)

study the effect of more severe emotional shocks including, the death of a family member in

Sweden, and terrorist attacks in Spain, respectively. The former uses Swedish registry data to

follow affected children up to age 30. An important innovation of their study relative to some

earlier work on the same question is that they compare mothers who lost a family member while

pregnant, to mothers who lost a family member in the year after birth. Since families of lower

socioeconomic status are more likely to lose family members, and since losing a family member

could well have an economic impact, this design is cleaner than comparing mothers with a death

in the family to mothers without such an event. While the effects on birth weight are small

overall, they appear to be concentrated in the lower tail of the distribution, with a 20% increase

in the incidence of low birth weight (birth weight less than 2500 grams). In a second

contribution, they are able to follow affected infants into adulthood, and they find negative

effects on mental health outcomes measured using prescription drug data. For instance, affected

individuals are 23% more likely to use ADHD medication, and 9% more likely to use

antidepressants as adults. Quintana-Domeque and Rodenas-Serrano also find small but

significant effects of terrorist attacks in Spain on overall birth outcomes.

       Lee (2014) asks whether the grandchildren of women who suffered a severe stress are

less healthy? This is a particularly exciting direction for future work, given that thus far, there is

not a great deal of research on intergenerational effects of in utero shocks in humans, although

they are known to exist in animal models. In this case the initial shock is was a massacre of

civilian demonstrators by the civilian military. He finds small but significant effects on the

incidence of low birth weight and prematurity in the grandchildren, with the largest impacts for

grandmothers who suffered the shock during the second trimester that the mothers were in utero.
                                                                                                     19
!
!
       Aizer, Stroud, and Buka (2016) have made an exceptional contribution to this literature

because the data they use (which was collected by a consortium of perinatal centers in the 1960s)

actually includes measured stress during pregnancy using cortisol. The data set includes a large

number of sibling pairs, so that it is possible to conduct mother fixed effects analyses. They find

that infants exposed to higher cortisol levels during pregnancy have up to 1 year less school at

age 7 than their siblings, indicating that they have been delayed in starting school or held back.

Given rich background information on the mothers, this study is also able to ask which infants

are most affected by higher maternal stress levels? They find that children born to less educated

mothers suffer larger impacts of exposure to a given cortisol level, suggesting that perhaps there

were fewer resources available to buffer the impact ex-post.

       We have included Aizer’s (2011) study of the impact of assault (overwhelmingly due to

domestic violence) in this Section of the table even though domestic violence can have direct

effects on fetal health in addition to causing maternal stress. Our justification for doing so is that

domestic violence is quantitatively important and vastly understudied as a source either of stress

or physical injury. The study is based on California hospital discharge data linked to birth

records. Variation in the probability of assault is induced by the strengthening of laws against

domestic violence, which occurred at different times in different California counties. She finds

that domestic violence has a large negative effect on birth weight. Since women of lower

socioeconomic status are more likely to be assaulted, violence is therefore an additional cause of

disparities in birth outcomes.

    c)! Infectious Disease




                                                                                                     20
!
!
       Panel C of Table 1 deals with recent evidence about the effects of disease. Some diseases

that have only mild effects in adults are known to have devastating effects on a developing fetus

(e.g., Rubella, Zika), while others, like pandemic influenza killed millions and have also been

shown to have effects on fetuses in utero. Recent studies focus on the related questions of

whether milder diseases can have serious effects; whether the effects of early life exposure to

disease are long-lasting; and whether there are spillover effects of disease eradication to children

who were not directly targeted. The studies we summarize cover a wide range of settings, from

impoverished areas of developing countries, to the historical U.S., to modern Denmark.

       The studies by Baird, Hicks, Kremer, and Miguel (2016) and Oizer (2014) build on the

famous “worms” paper of Kremer and Miguel (2004) in which the authors investigated the effect

of giving children de-worming medication on school attendance and on whether neighboring

children were infected with parasites. The new studies ask (respectively) how the effect of

deworming affects outcomes of affected children 10 years later, and whether other children

benefited from the deworming of their neighbors. Significant and positive effects of deworming

are found on virtually all outcomes examined. Unfortunately Oizer does not examine exactly the

same outcomes as Baird et al., so it is hard to compare the effects on index children to those on

their neighbors, but in keeping with the original paper, deworming initiatives definitely appear to

be very cost-effective.

       Bhalotra and Venkataramani (2013) and Beach et al. (2016) focus on water borne

diseases in Mexico in the 1990s, and in early 20th century America, respectively. The former

examine the effect of a clean water reform in Mexico in 1991, which reduced the incidence of

water borne diseases, including diarrhea, one of the most common causes of mortality and


                                                                                                    21
!
!
morbidity among infants. Beach et al. (2016) use typhoid mortality rates as a proxy for water

quality. Bhalotra and Venkataramani find significantly positive but quite small effects of the

reduction in water-borne diseases on test scores at ages 9-15. These estimates may understate

the effect of clean water given improved survival of the weakest infants, who may end up with

low test scores for reasons unrelated to water-borne disease. The Beach et al. estimates appear to

be larger: They estimate that moving from the top of the typhoid distribution to eradication

would increase educational attainment in surviving children by 1/3 of a year and increase

earnings by 4%. This larger effect is unsurprising given that typhoid is at the extreme end of

potential severity of water-borne contaminants and many of the contaminants addressed by the

water campaigns studied by Bhalotra and Venkataramani would have caused less severe disease.

Thus, a possible interpretation is that more severe shocks have a greater impact than less severe

shocks but with only two data points it is impossible to say much more about the shape of this

relationship.

       Venkataramani (2012) builds on work by Bleakley (2010) and others on the long-term

effects of malaria. He finds large effects of malaria eradication in the birth year, consistent with

those previous studies. Currie and Schwandt (2013) focus on a much milder and currently more

common disease: Seasonal influenza. While Almond (2006) showed that the Spanish flu

epidemic of 1918 had long lasting effects, it was a killer disease. Currie and Schwandt show that

even a relatively mild disease such as seasonal influenza can have negative long term effects if a

fetus is exposed at the wrong time during pregnancy. They show that in the contemporary

northeastern U.S., infants conceived in May have a much higher probability of preterm delivery

(and hence of low birth weight) than infants conceived at other times because they come to term


                                                                                                  22
!
!
at the height of the flu season. Moreover, the H1N1 flu season of 2009 was earlier and more

virulent than usual and the spike in prematurity was correspondingly earlier and larger that year.

              Schwandt (2016) and Ward and Phipps (2014) follow up on these observations by

examining the long-term effects of exposure to flu in utero in Denmark and Canada, respectively.

Schwandt examines rich individual longitudinal Danish registry data about women who were

hospitalized with influenza and follows their children into adulthood. He finds that earnings are

10% lower for affected individuals, and that they are much more likely than others to be

dependent on welfare. These long-term outcomes are driven by maternal admissions during the

2nd and 3rd trimester. Ward and Phipps (2014) exploit province-level data on influenza rates to

identify the effects of exposure. They do not find any overall effect of an additional week of flu

exposure during the pregnancy, but do find a small effect of additional weeks of exposure during

the 1st trimester on test scores and on the probability of having a chronic condition. Given that

the richness of the Schwandt data it seems that for now, the presumption should be that his

conclusions about the timing of the impacts are more likely to be correct. However, the larger

message is that millions of children may be harmed in utero by exposure to relatively mild

diseases even in rich countries.

              Bhalotra and Venkataramani (2015) examine the long-term impact of the introduction of

sulfa drugs in 1937, which reduced pneumonia mortality but presumably also had positive effects

reducing morbidity.10 Combining historical data with the U.S. population Census, cohorts who

were exposed to sulfa drugs in their infancy attained 0.1 more years of schooling, were 1.5%

more likely to graduate from high school, more likely to be employed (0.4%), and earned higher
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10
  An earlier paper Jayachandran, Lleras-Muney, and Smith (2010) established that the introduction of these drugs
did indeed lead to large declines in mortality from causes such as infections after child birth and pneumonia.
Bhalotra and Venkataramani focus on the effects of the introduction on cohorts of children at older ages.
                                                                                                                   23
!
!
wages (1.5%). Long-term benefits varied for African-American men who were exposed to

different levels of segregation in their state of birth, suggesting that despite a strong economic

climate (better early life conditions), institutional environment affects the rewards to investments

in human capital.

    d)! Pollution Exposure

       The last few years have seen an explosion of research on the effects of pollution in early

life, much of which is summarized in Panel D of Table 1. Certain pollutants are well measured

in developed countries, exhibit variation over time and across small areas, and have published

thresholds which lend themselves to asking whether pollution below the threshold can also be

shown to have an adverse effect. Moreover, many sources and types of pollution have been

increasingly well documented in recent years, and have discrete beginning and ending dates

(such as pollution due to industrial plant openings or closings) that assist identification.

       Relative to the literature discussed in our earlier reviews, much of the newest literature

focuses on documenting the long-term effects of fetal or early childhood exposures, often relying

on newly available large-scale administrative data sources to track children over time. For

example, Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker (2015) look at the effects of reductions in air pollution

due to the Clean Air Acts of 1970 on the employment and earnings of adults who were affected

in very early childhood. The Clean Air Acts (CAA) mandated that pollution reduction measures

be implemented in counties that were above thresholds for target pollutants. Counties just below

these thresholds were not required to clean up. The legislation thus lends itself to analysis using

a regression discontinuity framework. In order however to examine outcomes, it is necessary to



                                                                                                     24
!
!
merge data from several large administrative data sets, some of which are held in Census data

centers.

        Specifically, they start with the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Employer Household

Dynamics (LEHD) file, which records a worker’s unemployment insurance covered earnings

each quarter. The authors focus on 24 states that appear continuously in the LEHD and on

individuals who were born in these states. The payoff to all this careful data work is that the

authors are able for the first time to link air pollution changes around the time of birth to adult

earnings and employment. They find an estimated gain of $4,300 in earnings per person for a

total of $6.5 billion (2008 dollars) in gains.

        Another focus of the literature on pollution and early childhood is to ask whether there is

heterogeneity in the effects of pollution. There are many reasons to expect disparate impacts of

the same potential exposures. For example, more educated people may be more knowledgeable

about ways to protect themselves (i.e., have access to a different production function), or may be

more likely to take measures that compensate for the harmful effects of pollution (perhaps

because of looser budget constraints). They may even be more likely to move away from known

pollution sources while the child is still young (Currie, 2011). Richer people may live in housing

that insulates them from the effects of pollution, for example, by having houses that are more

airtight, or houses that are physically located slightly further from sources such as freeways or

factories.

        The literature does generally find more negative effects of pollution on more

disadvantaged people, whether disadvantage is defined in terms of minority race, income, or

education. The only study in Table 1 that finds the opposite is Black et al. (2014) who study the

effect of radioactive fallout from nuclear tests on Norwegians born in the 1950s and early 1960s.
                                                                                                      25
!
!
In this one case, they find that the effects of potential exposure are greater for the more educated,

perhaps because people were unaware of the danger and more educated people were more likely

to spend time out of doors (echoing earlier findings by Lleras-Muney for ozone, 2010).

       Billings and Schnepel (2015) offer some evidence that the negative effects of early-life

pollution exposure might actually be reversed with appropriate interventions, which can be

interpreted as evidence about the substitutability of investments in different life periods. The

authors show that children who were lead poisoned in Charlotte, North Carolina, and who also

received an intense intervention comprised of education for caregivers, lead remediation

services, nutritional and medical assessments, and other nutritional benefits from the Special

Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), experienced

reductions in antisocial behavior and substantial improvements in school performance relative to

peers who did not receive these services because they had slightly lower blood lead levels. Since

we know that the physical effects of lead are irreversible (once deposited in the brain for

example, lead tends to stay there), this result offers hope that compensation for early life insults

is possible even when the physiological effects of such insults cannot be reversed.

    e)! Weather and Climate Change

       With increasing scientific consensus about the reality of human induced global warming,

economists have responded to concerns about the short and long term effects of climate change

on young children. These studies generally extrapolate from what is known about the effects of

short-term variations in weather, including periods of high temperature, variations in the amount

of sunlight, drought, or flooding. These studies are summarized in Panel E of Table 1. Of these

papers, only the one by Wernerfelt, Slusky, and Zeckhauser (2016) is arguably really about

                                                                                                   26
!
!
weather effects per se. The authors find that exposure to sunlight in utero is associated with

lower incidence of asthma in affected U.S. cohorts, a result that they attribute to the effect of

vitamin D on lung development in utero.

       The remaining papers find effects that may work through economic mechanisms as well

as through biological pathways. In terms of the Section 1 framework, these papers are implicitly

considering the optimized response of h to       (changes in parental income). Given the budget

constraint in Section 1, a negative income shock would reduce investments in children in both

period 1 and period 2 so as to equate marginal utilities of parental consumption and investing in

children (at a higher level). If the marginal utility of consumption increases substantially with

reduced consumption, child investments will need to be reduced even more. This may be

particularly true at low baseline levels of consumption.

       Several studies focus on weather shocks in rural populations where conditions outside the

norm may lead to income losses by affecting crop yields; this may be a major pathway through

which weather affects child outcomes. For example, Agüero (2014) examine the effect of high

temperatures in a nationally representative sample of Mexicans, and find that higher

temperatures during early childhood are associated with lower adult height. The effects are

greater in poorer districts which could be either because people in those areas are less able to

shield themselves through, for example, air conditioning (i.e., a biological effect working

through the production function), or because many poorer parts of Mexico are agricultural and

heat may cause crop losses (an economic effect working through the budget constraint). One

limitation of the work to date is that it is often impossible to distinguish between these pathways.




                                                                                                    27
!
!
        The remaining papers in Panel E deal with fluctuations in rainfall, which are probably

even more likely to lead to crop loss, and thus to affect outcomes primarily through economic

channels. The Shah and Steinberg (2016) study is interesting in that it finds that drought has a

positive effect on children’s educational attainment in India. They explain this finding by

arguing that in India, developments that prevent children from working in the fields may benefit

their education. In the context of the model sketched above, one would have to add children’s

potential earnings to the budget constraint and allow weather to affect the market wage for

children’s labor (and thereby the opportunity cost of schooling investments) in order to capture

this effect.

    f)! Effects of Alcohol and Tobacco on Fetal Development

        Finally, Panel F of Table 1 considers three recent papers discussing the effects of alcohol

and tobacco control policies on fetal development. While it is well known that alcohol and

tobacco can harm the developing fetus, these studies focus on heterogeneity in the effects of

policy, and on longer-term effects. Von Hinke, Kessler, and Scholder et al. (2014) find long-

term effects of maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy on children’s test scores up to

age 16 in data from the Avon Longitudinal Study. This study uses genetic variation in the

mother as an instrument for alcohol consumption. Causal interpretation of an alcohol effect

requires the assumption that the genetic variation in question has no effect other than through

maternal alcohol consumption, which is questionable since currently scientists have relatively

little understanding of the multiple pathways through which an observed genetic variation may

impact a person. That is, even if we knew with certainty that a particular gene was associated

with alcoholism, it might also be independently associated with cognitive problems in the


                                                                                                   28
!
!
offspring. An additional concern about the use of genetic data as instrumental variables is that

genetic effect sizes are often very small and therefore raise possible concerns about weak

instruments.

       Using register data from Sweden, Nilsson (2015) investigates the long-term effects of a

policy that permitted strong beer sales in grocery stores, which resulted in a temporary and sharp

increase in access to alcohol among young people. He finds that cohorts affected in utero early

in pregnancy had 24% lower earnings at age 30, as well as lower cognitive, non-cognitive, and

educational outcomes. Effects were particularly concentrated on males and among children from

low-income families. Boys were also more likely to be premature or spontaneously aborted than

girls. In terms of equation (1), Nilsson (2015) floats the possibility that boys and girls have

different values for .


       Bharadwaj, Johnsen, and Loken (2014) study the effect of smoking bans in Norway. The

authors are able to identify mothers who worked in bars and restaurants while pregnant. They

find significant effects on health at birth and also on adult income at age 28, but the effect of the

reform is much stronger for mothers who were smoking at the start of the pregnancy, suggesting

non-linear effects of tobacco exposure.

       Simon (2016) examines the effects of changes in state-level tobacco taxes in the U.S. on

maternal smoking and child health and finds that higher taxes were associated with fewer days

absent from school, and reductions in the utilization of medical care, as well as with 16% fewer

asthma attacks. These effects are much greater for the least educated mothers. Barreca and Page

(2015) use a similar design to consider state-level changes in minimum legal drinking age laws



                                                                                                   29
!
!
and find improvements in birth outcomes among affected cohorts of women. Their estimates are

also suggest improvements in the survival of black infants to term.

              An economic model of a parent’s choice to use alcohol or tobacco while pregnant is

complicated by the fact that while in the short-term the parent trades off utility from their own

consumption against the investment in a child’s health, their actions also directly affect the return

to future investment in child health. That is, future investments are likely to be less productive if

the child is damaged by fetal alcohol syndrome, for example.

Section 3: Parental Investments

              The evidence in Section 2 shows that relatively mild shocks can, if delivered at the right

or wrong time, have lasting positive or negative impacts on the developing fetus and young

child. The question arises then as to whether there are parental investments that can mitigate the

effects of negative shocks. Conceptually, this question centers on the parameters of the CES

production function                          and .11 Knowing that period 1 investments have a large effect on h per

se tells us relatively little about the effectiveness of period 2 investments, including whether

damage from a period 1 shock can be remediated by additional period 2 investments (whereas

knowing                and         would take us closer).


              A related question is how parents respond to positive or negative shocks to one of their

children: Does                       change in response to       ? Framed this way, the question does not require

assumptions about the production technology for h or parental preferences. That said, various

underlying concepts from the model will govern any observed investment response. These

include parents’ preferences (for instance, does the parent wish to equalize outcomes or to
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
11
     !Additionally, it depends on the relative sizes of          and   . See Section 2.1.1 in Almond and Currie (2011b).!!!!!
                                                                                                                                30
!
!
maximize the total productivity of their offspring), and the constraints that they face.12 For

instance if a parent cannot afford the cost of intervening to help a disabled child, but can afford

basic investment in a non-disabled sibling, then their choice may well be obvious. If many

parents are constrained in their investments, then social investments may have an important

impact on parent’s choices by changing the productivity and cost of their own investments.

Thus, distinguishing between behavior due to preferences and behavior due to constraints can be

a key input to intelligent policy responses. Moreover, as Heckman (2008) points out, it may be

the case that timing matters. The productivity of current investments may depend in important

ways on whether past investments have taken place.

              Table 2 summarizes some of the recent literature on parental investments. Hsin (2012)

was one of the first papers to consider that parental investments in their young children may

reflect not only preferences, but also constraints. Using sibling fixed effects models and

employing data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), she showed that college

educated mothers compensate low birth weight children (i.e., invest in order to try to equalize

outcomes) while less educated mothers tended to concentrate resources (such as reading, playing,

and doing hobbies) on higher birth weight children. A limitation of her study is that the number

of low birth weight children with low birth weight siblings is quite small in the PSID so the

results are suggestive rather than definitive about the behavior of U.S. parents.

              Breining et al. (2015) find evidence consistent with parents trying to equalize outcomes

between siblings. They use Danish registry data and examine children whose siblings were either
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
12
   The returns to investment are governed by the elasticity of substitution of investment made at different stages of
childhood. These returns have an impact on whether parents compensate versus reinforce, whatever their
preferences are. For example, if a parent wants to compensate, but there are no suitable investments available or
their return is low, then he or she will might well choose to invest in another child which would have the effect of
reinforcing differences.
                                                                                                                    31
!
!
just above the 1500 gram threshold used to classify children as very low birth weight or just

below it. Children just below the threshold were found to receive more care and be healthier

subsequently (as in Almond, Doyle, Kowalski, and Williams, 2010). The novel finding is that

their siblings also do better in school, which suggests that medical intervention for the very low

birth weight child benefitted all the children in the family. One interpretation of this result is that

parents would otherwise have sacrificed the well-being of the healthy children in order to focus

on the more vulnerable child. Alternatively, however, shocks to one child may work through

the budget constraint to affect other children even in a rich country like Denmark where most

medical care would be paid for by the state.

       Akee et al. (2015) investigate the effects of a casino opening on the Eastern Cherokee

reservation which resulted in an exogenous income transfer to tribal households. They find that

parents reacted to the transfer by investing more in children who had lower levels of mental

health and “worse” personality traits. This result seems to reflect preferences for equal

outcomes—although the mechanism is a change in the budget constraint, the parent has a choice

about which child to spend the “extra” money on. On the other hand, several studies in

developing countries (Yi et al., 2014; Adhvaryu and Nyshadham, 2016) find evidence consistent

with parents reinforcing initial differences between children which could reflect either

preferences, , or budgetary realities.


       Two studies of gender differences in investments also find opposite results for developing

and developed countries. Bharadwaj and Lakdawala (2013) focus on India, China, and

Bangladesh and find that mothers pregnant with a boy get more prenatal care and that boys are

more likely to receive tetanus shots after birth. One only sees the difference in prenatal care


                                                                                                    32
!
!
among mothers who had an ultrasound and so presumably know that they are carrying boys.

However, in Canada, the U.S., and the U.K., Baker and Milligan (2016) find that parents of

children aged 0 to 3 put more time into girls and that this time investment can explain as much as

a third of the gender gap in reading scores in the early grades. It is possible that this pattern

reflects mother’s preferences for girls if mothers are the primary caregivers.

              From this brief description of a number of studies, it should be apparent that there is no

simple answer to the question of whether or why parents compensate or reinforce differences

between their children.13 It does seem that parents are more likely to reinforce differences in

low resource settings, suggesting that the observed behaviors are at least partially a response to

binding budget constraints in many instances.

              The discussion above assumes that parents are making informed choices about

investments in their children. Dizon-Ross (2015) investigates how parental investments

responded to better information about children’s academic performance using a field experiment

in Malawi that targeted parents with young children. Results show that providing parents with

information about how each child is doing causes them to reallocate their educational

investments across children so that investments correspond more closely to their children’s true

achievement level.




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
13
  Fryer, Levitt, and List (2015) focus on a different but related question, which is whether we can incentivize parents
to invest more in their young children? They organized a randomized trial in Chicago in which parents were
rewarded for activities such as attending educational sessions about early childhood, completing homework
assignments with their children, and for their child’s demonstration of mastery on interim assessments. These tasks
were chosen to improve cognition and executive function. They found that the intervention benefited white and
Hispanic children, but not African-American children. Moreover, effects were bigger for children with better
cognitive skills to begin with. This study may illustrate some of the limits of trying to improve children’s outcomes
by working to improve parenting skills.!
                                                                                                                    33
!
!
       Similarly, Cunha, Elo, and Culhane (2015) argue that U.S. mothers have poor

information on the return to early childhood investments. They speculate that if the government

could implement a policy that moved expectations from the median current belief to the true

median return, that parental investments would go up by 4% to 24% and the stocks of cognitive

skills at age 24 months would increase by 1% to 5%. If parents lack information about the likely

impact of investments in their children, then once again their behavior cannot be said to reflect

their underlying preferences; perhaps information could be modeled as an input into child health

production such that parents with incorrect information end up optimizing with respect to the

wrong production function.

       Perhaps an overall take away is that economists have been too quick to interpret parent’s

choices as revealed preference when even a simple economic model suggests that factors such as

available production technologies and budgets, not to mention information, are likely to be

tremendously important.

Section 4: Sometimes Lightning Strikes Twice

       In this Section (and in Table 3) we consider a handful of studies that attempt to examine

dynamic complementarities empirically using cases where there were two shocks. These studies

are often reminiscent of the first generation of fetal origin studies in their reliance on quirky and

exotic instruments (which is why we characterize them as akin to being struck twice by

lightening), and in the fact that it may be difficult to generalize some of their conclusions to other

settings. Nevertheless, they represent the frontier in terms of trying to apply insights from the

theory outlined in Section 1 to applied work in this area.



                                                                                                    34
!
!
       Aguilar and Vicarelli (2015) overlay variation from Mexico's conditional cash-transfer

Progresa program on top of rainfall shocks induced by El Niño. They consider shocks that

affected children both prenatally and up to age 2 and examine anthropometric and cognitive

outcomes at ages 2 to 6. They did not find that Progresa mitigated any of the negative effects of

weather shocks. In contrast, Adhvaryu et al. (2015) use a very similar design and ask whether

Progresa mitigated the effects of rainfall shocks on cognitive test scores and years of education

measured at ages 12 to 21. They estimate that Progresa offset 60 to 80% of the negative effects

of rainfall shocks on child development. It is unclear whether these conflicting results are caused

by subtle differences in the approaches taken, or whether it is really the case that one can see

positive long-term effects even in cases where the immediate short-term effects appear to be

negligible. Certainly much of the literature on early intervention programs has this flavor,

finding initial effects that “fade out” by age 8 or 9 but then reappear in adulthood (Almond and

Currie, 2011b).

       Gunnsteinsson et al. (2016) examine data from a randomized controlled trial of Vitamin

A supplementation in Bangladesh that took place between 2001 and 2007. In 2005, parts of the

study area were devastated by a tornado. The authors find that tornado exposure in early

pregnancy and early infancy had significant negative effects on birth weight and infant

anthropometrics. However, they also find that infants treated with vitamin A at birth were

effectively protected from the effects of experiencing a tornado shock at 0 to 3 months of age in

that there did not appear to be any effect of the tornado on anthropometrics at 6 months. An

unusual feature of this paper is the author’s care in trying to entangle the optimal timing of the

protective investment relative to the timing of the shock.


                                                                                                     35
!
!
       One difference between Gunnesteinson et al. and Advharyu et al., is the amount of time

that occurs between the negative shock and the human capital investment. While in the case of

the tornado in Bangladesh the interval between the shock and the vitamin A supplementation was

only a few months, and the outcome was measured a few months after that, in the Progresa

paper, the interval between the transfer and the weather shock was at least a decade. The

temporal gap between the first and the second event may be relevant to identifying these

interactions, as there may be behavioral responses from parents or teachers that could either

reinforce or undo the impacts of the first or the second event, or both.

       Rossin-Slater and Wust (2015) consider a somewhat different, but related and very

important question of how different types of common public early interventions interact. They

use Danish registry data to study the interaction of a nurse home visiting program that supplies

visits shortly after birth, and a childcare program for three-year-old children. Both programs

rolled out beginning in the 1930s and ending in the 1950s. They find that the childcare program

had large and persistent effects on educational attainment and income, and reduced adult

mortality. In an innovative twist, they also find that the benefits extended inter-generationally to

the children of the originally treated children.

       A surprising finding however given the dynamic complementarities hypothesis, is that the

effects of child care programs were largest for children who had not had exposure to the nurse

home visiting program as newborns. At first blush this finding seems the opposite of the “skills

beget skills” concept that children who got off to a good start due to the home visitors would be

better able to benefit from the child care program. A possible explanation is that the programs

actually provide similar but complementary services. For instance, home visiting often focuses


                                                                                                   36
!
!
on training parents about health and safety, as well as teaching them what they can expect

developmentally from children of various ages. To the extent that a successful program trained

parents to give better care at home, that might lesson the benefit of having better care in another

setting. We are not aware of other studies of this type, so it is impossible to know how much the

complementarities depend on the type of intervention, though it is reasonable to suppose that

they would. Regardless, this handful of early two-shock studies establishes that estimating

dynamic complementarities in a well-identified way is feasible with enough creativity and luck.

Section 5: How Do Resources Mediate the Effect of Early Life Events?

       Broadly considered, there are two types of resources that can be expected to benefit

children: Material resources (Y) and time inputs (It), which might be an argument in the

production of child investments. In addition, parents of higher “quality” may be expected to

make better use, on average, of the resources at their disposal (indeed, perhaps this should be

considered as part of a definition of parent quality along with evidence of altruistic preferences

towards the child). In equation (1), the productivity parameter A might be indexed by parental

type, with          , where H represents “high” quality and L represents “low” quality. At the

same levels of income, type “H” parents could achieve better child outcomes (and higher

consumption) than type “L” parents. As we discussed above, one might think of higher quality

parents as having access to a different production function than other parents. Accordingly, in

this section we focus on policies that affect parental education as well as income and in-kind

support and parental leave policy.

a) Effects of Material Resources



                                                                                                     37
!
!
       Many recent papers examine the effects of cash transfers on child outcomes in a range of

settings. We can think of these policies as exogenously increasing Y, which according to (3),

would increase both childhood investments and consumption. Aizer et al. (2016) assemble

unique historical administrative data about the U.S. mother’s Pension Program (a precursor to

modern welfare programs). They ask whether being accepted into the program affected

outcomes observable on WWII enlistment records or mortality risk (measured using age of death

on death certificates). They find that being accepted increased longevity by 1.5 years on

average, with larger effects in the poorest families.

       Two papers, by Hoynes, Miller, and Simon (2015) and Dahl and Lochner (2012) examine

the effect of the U.S. Earned Income Tax Credit Program (EITC). Although it is administered

through the tax system, these refundable tax credits function rather like a Conditional Cash

Transfer program in that they are mainly available to families who work and file a tax return, that

is, they are conditional on working. Both papers exploit variation stemming from a significant

increase in the generosity of the program in the mid-90s. The first study finds reductions in the

incidence of low birth weight among mothers who benefited from the expansion while pregnant,

while the second finds increases in a range of cognitive test scores, which are larger for children

from the most disadvantaged families. One possible mechanism contributing to these effects is

the positive link between EITC and mother’s health (Evans and Garthwaite, 2014).

       Black et al. (2014) and Milligan and Stabile (2011) consider cash transfers that are

targeted to children (a child care subsidy and a child allowance, respectively). Like Dahl and

Lochner, both also find significant improvements in a range of cognitive test scores. Milligan

and Stabile find that these effects are mainly driven by boys.


                                                                                                  38
!
!
       Set against these generally positive findings is the paper by Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall

(2014) which estimates a structural model based on observational data from a variety of data

sets. Their estimates suggest that monetary transfers will likely have only small effects on

children because most of the transfer is likely to be spent on other types of consumption, or on

parental leisure. However, they are not measuring the effects of an actual transfer policy using

design-based variation in that policy.

       A second group of papers looks “near cash” programs supplying food aid. It is often

argued that if the amount of an in-kind transfer is small relative to the household’s budget for

that item, then in-kind transfers will have much the same impact as cash. The studies of the U.S.

Food Stamp program (now known as SNAP, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) by

Almond, Hoynes, and Schazenbach (2011) and Hoynes, Schazenbach, and Almond (2016) find

(respectively) that the roll out of the program increased birth weights, especially among African

Americans, and that in the long-term the roll out reduced the incidence of metabolic syndrome

(i.e., obesity, high blood pressure, diabetes, etc.) which in turn increased the economic self-

sufficiency.

       Rossin-Slater (2013) examines the opposite type of policy, which is closures of clinics

providing WIC (Supplemental Nutrition for Women, Infants, and Children) in Texas in the late

2000s. WIC closures reduced WIC participation, reduced the probability that a mother gained an

adequate amount of weight during pregnancy, and reduced birth weight. Similarly, Meckel

(2015) finds that crackdowns on WIC fraud caused small retailers to exit the program and

reduced mother’s prenatal participation in WIC with negative effects on birth outcomes.




                                                                                                   39
!
!
       A number of studies look at the broader effects of economic circumstances on child

outcomes. Arguably, good economic times may have effects not only through increasing family

resources but also through increasing employment (with either positive or negative effects for

children depending on the range of child care options available) and social resources. For

example, more money may flow to schools and social services in good times. Hence, studies of

the effects of business cycles may not tell us about precise mechanisms, though they do once

again suggest the vulnerability of young children. The studies by Loken, Mogstad, and Wiswall

(2012) and Adhvaryu et al. (2016) examine the oil boom in Norway and a cocoa price boom in

Ghana, respectively. These find positive effects of good times with the impacts being felt

disproportionately in low-income households.

       Lindo (2011) and Carlson (2015) examine the effects of job displacement during

pregnancy on health at birth outcomes. Lindo focuses on the father’s job loss using data from

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and controlling for mother fixed-effects. Carlson uses data

from!notices filed under the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act aggregated at

the county-month data to examine the effect of anticipated job losses. Both studies find negative

effects on birth weight. Golberstein et al. (2016) go beyond examining effects on health at birth

and examine children’s mental health. The paper finds that a one standard deviation increase in

the state unemployment rate has a negative impact on child’s mental health (assessed using the

Child Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire) and is associated with a 5.7% increase in the use

of special education services for emotional problems. Given the nature of the shock examined

(i.e., the Great Recession) and the magnitude of the effects on clinically meaningful outcomes, it

would be interesting to know whether these impacts will persist over time.


                                                                                                 40
!
!
        Bharadwaj, Lundborg, and Rooth (2014) ask how low birth weight affects vulnerability

to economic shocks later in life using Swedish administrative data and models with twin fixed

effects. Their estimates suggest that a 10% increase in birth weight results in a one percent

decline in the probability of using unemployment insurance during a recession as an adult.

Conversely, using Dutch data, Scholte et al. (2015) find that individuals subjected to economic

downturns early in life are more likely to have chronic diseases and functional limitations in old

age.

        Two studies by Gould, Lavy, and Paserman (2011) and Lavy, Schlosser, and Shany

(2016) study the children of Ethiopian Jews who were air-lifted to Israel either as young

children, or while in utero. Those children air-lifted to Israel experienced large differences in

material conditions depending on where their families were assigned, and families had little say

in this decision. Children who had running water, sanitation, and electricity in early childhood

obtained more education, were more likely to be employed, and were less likely to have health

problems in later life. Children air-lifted while in utero, faced different conditions during their

mother’s pregnancy compared to children air-lifted shortly after birth. Those children who

experienced Israel’s better conditions prior to 8 weeks of gestation did better on standardized

tests and obtained more education. Perhaps curiously, these studies both find that the effects

were concentrated mainly among girls. They attribute this finding to gender discrimination,

particularly in Ethiopia and in the more backward parts of Israel. The idea is that parents would

have been more likely to stint girls, so girls are particularly benefitted by relaxation of resource

constraints. If this explanation is correct, then the result highlights the fact that the effects of a

shock reflect both “biological” effects and the influence of social conditions, and that it is

difficult to disentangle the two.
                                                                                                         41
!
!
       Rossin-Slater (2016) highlights a very different type of policy which also had the

capacity to change many aspects of a child’s living situation: Changes in U.S. laws governing

paternity establishment. Many states adopted policies aimed at making it easier to establish

paternity in the hospital. A goal of these changes was to encourage parents to marry. Since

married families are generally better off than single-parent households, such a policy might be

expected to increase the resources available to children (both in terms of income and possibly

father’s time). However, Rossin-Slater argues that any positive effect on marriage rates was

offset by the fact that the law also made it easier for some mothers to gain child-support without

marrying the father. Overall, she finds little effect on measures of paternal involvement or child

health, but some negative effect on children’s health insurance coverage and utilization of

medical care, which may be a result of losing access to paternal employer-sponsored health

insurance coverage. This is one of very few studies to explicitly consider the role of fathers in

providing resources to households, something that it would be useful to see more of.

       Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016) focus on the Moving-to-Opportunity (MTO)

experiment that randomly offered families living in housing projects vouchers that enabled them

to move. Combining MTO experimental data with administrative data from federal tax returns,

the authors find significant differences in the later-life outcomes of children who moved when

they were less than 13 years old. Moving to a lower-poverty neighborhood improved college

attendance rates by 15% and earnings by 14%. Treated children were also 4% more likely to live

in better neighborhoods as adults and 15% less likely to become single parents. In contrast,

children who moved later in their adolescence either did not benefit or actually faced negative

long-term impacts. One potential explanation for these differential effects is that moving to a

very different environment as an adolescent could disrupt social networks and have other adverse
                                                                                                    42
!
!
effects on child development. The authors discuss potential intergenerational gains to providing

access to better neighborhoods to families in public housing, which ultimately could generate

positive of these policies returns for taxpayers.

b) Policies to Promote Maternity Leave

       If childhood investments are an increasing function of parental time, then maternity leave

policies may increase investments at key developmental stages. Such policies appear to be

predicated on the belief that the elasticity of child investments in (1) with respect to parental time

is large in very early childhood. The key policy question is when specifically maternal (or

paternal) time is most important? Recent studies focusing on the effects of maternity leave policy

on child outcomes are summarized in Panel B of Table 4. At first glance it is difficult to see any

consistent picture in these estimates. However, on closer examination, a story emerges in which

facilitating short maternity leaves is highly beneficial, but extended maternity leaves do not have

a positive effect. This pattern seems plausible if child investments are an increasing but concave

function of maternal time or if the return to childhood investments is diminishing in the

investment level.

       Rossin-Slater (2011) studies the implementation of the Family and Medical Leave Act in

the U.S., a federal law allowing women to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid maternity leave. The

law superseded a patchwork of state laws, creating a good deal of variation which she exploits.

She finds a positive effect on the birth outcomes of college educated women. These women are

more likely than less educated women to have been able to afford to take unpaid leave. Similarly,

Carneiro, Loken, and Salvanes (2015) study the effect of a 1977 Norwegian law which replaced

a legal right to 12 weeks of unpaid leave with four months of paid leave and an additional right

                                                                                                   43
!
!
to take 12 months of unpaid leave. They find that children of affected mothers got more

education and had higher wages at age 30. Thus it appears that allowing some maternity leave in

the first months of life was associated with better outcomes in these two examples.

       In contrast, Baker and Milligan (2015), Danzer and Lavy (2016), and Dahl et al. (2016)

study expansions of paid leave from 25 weeks to 50 weeks, 12 months to 24 months, and 18

weeks to 35 weeks, respectively. Baker and Milligan (2015) actually find some evidence of

negative effects on children’s test scores among boys and among children of more educated

mothers. Dahl et al. (2016) find no effects on adult outcomes. Danzer and Lavy (2016) do not

find any overall effect, but report that there was some benefit to the reform for children of more

highly educated mothers, but negative effects among children of less educated mothers. Thus,

although there is some disagreement about the magnitude and direction of effects, there is little

evidence in any of these studies that long maternal leaves have overall benefits for children. One

possible interpretation is that mothers who go back to work after the first six months manage, on

average, to find child care that approximates the care they would offer in their own homes.

    c)! Policies to Promote Child Care

       Panel C of Table 4 reviews recent work on the feasibility of investing in young children

through organized child care. These studies are organized into three categories: Long-term

follow-ups of small-scale demonstration programs; long-term follow-ups of large, publicly

funded programs; and short-term results of more recent demonstration programs.

       There is a good deal of previous work showing long-term effects of small-scale child care

demonstration programs conducted using randomized controlled trials including Perry Preschool

and the Carolina Abcedarian Program. We have reviewed these programs extensively
                                                                                                    44
!
!
elsewhere.14 Suffice it to say here, these studies involved interventions of medium and strong

intensity (respectively) with groups of very disadvantaged preschool children. At the time these

demonstrations took place the alternative was generally no preschool, rather than some other

type of preschool, which is the default today.

              Studies by Heckman, Pinto and Savelyev (2013), Campbell et al. (2014), and Conti,

Heckman, and Pinto (2015) add to this literature by showing that the interventions had positive

effects on a broader set of outcomes than had previously been considered. In particular, they

find positive effects on personality traits, health behaviors, and health outcomes. All of these

measures have been shown to have important impacts on employment and earnings, though the

focus in evaluations of early childhood interventions is often solely on test scores. These studies

also take care to correct their estimates for complexities such as attrition and imperfect random

assignment, as well as for multiple hypothesis testing (i.e., the problem that if you test 20

hypotheses, it is likely that one of them will fail to be rejected with 95% confidence even if there

are in fact no underlying causal relationships). It is increasingly well understood that it can be

difficult to interpret results from some randomized experiments given these sorts of problems.

              A second set of studies extend the large literature on the effects of public preschool

programs in various ways. Havnes and Mogstad (2015) examine the effect of a Norwegian

reform that extended publicly funded preschools. The availability of preschool varied across

space and time, and the authors exploit this variation to identify its effects. A striking finding is

that the reform increased the eventual adult earnings of affected children in the poorest

households, but reduced the earnings of affected children in the richest households. The paper is

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
  For instance, Almond and Currie (2011b) review some of the studies evaluating these programs in Table 11, p.
1435.
                                                                                                                 45
!
!
therefore a very nice demonstration of the fact that childcare centers do not exist in a vacuum—

hours in child care replace some other form of care for the child. If the care that is replaced is

worse than the child care center, then one can expect improvements in child outcomes and vice

versa. Of course income matters too. To the extent that child care allows women to work and

earn more, their higher earnings may also benefit their children and could possibly offset a mild

negative direct effect of child care. One would expect the marginal value of additional earnings

to be higher in lower income households, even though more educated women are likely to earn

more per hour.

        A recent study by Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2015) showed that the introduction of a

universal child care program in Quebec led to negative effects on children’s non-cognitive

outcomes (with little gain in cognitive test scores), significant declines in long term self-reported

health and life-satisfaction, and behavioral problems and criminal activity among boys. These

results are quite consistent with those of Havnes and Mogstad because the modal child who was

brought into child care as a result of the reform was a middle class child who went into a low-

quality, hurriedly-created, child care facility.

        Aizer and Cunha (2014), Gelber and Isen (2013), and Kline and Walters (2016) examine

the U.S. Head Start program, a publicly funded program that originally served 3 to 5 year old

children, but has increasingly served younger children as well. Aizer and Cunha (2014) focus on

the roll out of Head Start in the mid-1960s using data from the National Collaborative Perinatal

Project and find that children who were able to participate in Head Start had test scores that were

0.1 to 0.2 standard deviations higher at age 7 than those of their older siblings. However, like the

parenting intervention studied by Fryer, Levitt, and List (2015), the effect was greatest for the


                                                                                                     46
!
!
children with the highest initial endowments. Aizer and Cunha also examine the compensation

vs. reinforcement question, and find that in this low-resource setting, parents invested more in

highly-endowed children and that parental investments complemented investments from Head

Start. Gelber and Isen (2013) focus on parenting practices in Head Start cohorts from the early

2000s who were followed as part of the Head Start Impact Study, a randomized controlled trial

intended to examine the short-run impacts of Head Start. They also find that Head Start

enrollment tended to increase parental investments.

       Kline and Walters (2016) offer a re-examination of data from the Head Start Impact

Study. Original analyses found that Head Start had some positive effects on children in the short

run, but that these effects quickly “faded out.” Kline and Walters point out that about a third of

the children treated in the Head Start Impact Study were drawn from other publicly-funded

preschool programs and that many of the controls attended other public preschools. One would

not necessarily expect to see any difference between Head Start children and children in other

similar public preschool programs. Ignoring this fact substantially overstates the cost of

providing Head Start to the study children (since a third of them would have been receiving

preschool at public expense anyway), and also understates the positive effects of attending a

public preschool of some sort; Hence naive estimates substantially understate the cost-

effectiveness of the program. Using estimates from previous work showing that short-term

boosts in test scores are associated with long-term gains in outcomes (e.g., Garces et al, 2002;

Chetty et al, 2011), they estimate that Head Start is likely to be a cost effective program.

Interestingly, the eligible children who were not participating in the early 2000s were those with

the highest potential benefits, suggesting that expansions that drew these children into care could

be even more cost effective.
                                                                                                   47
!
!
       A common theme in these studies of public preschool programs in developed country

settings is that a failure to consider the available alternatives to child care programs leads

analysts to understate the positive social returns to expanding these programs.

       A third group of recent studies (all randomized controlled trials) examine preschool

programs in developing countries. The two papers by Attanasio and collaborators examine the

effects of a home based psychosocial intervention program and a center-based preschool

program that was implemented in poor Colombian towns. Both interventions find positive

effects, though on different domains (cognitive test scores and height-for-age, respectively).

Perhaps the main take away is that such publicly funded, large-scale programs can have positive

effects even in very low resource settings. Gertler, Heckman, and Pinto et al. (2014) examine the

long-term effects of an intervention to provide psychosocial stimulation to impoverished

Jamaican children. An ambitious aspect of this project is that they attempted to track migrants,

pointing out that in Jamaica, many successful people emigrate and are lost to follow up unless

special care is taken to retain them in the study. This study finds large effects of the

psychosocial intervention on adult earnings.

       Taken as a whole, the studies summarized in Panel C of Table 4 add to the extensive

literature on the potential for early intervention programs to improve children’s short and long-

run outcomes. Both high quality center-based programs and home visiting interventions appear

to be effective and have the potential to influence many domains, including education, income,

employment, health, and future health behaviors (see Almond and Currie, 2011b for a review of

work on this topic before 2011).

    d)! Policies to Promote Medical Care

                                                                                                    48
!
!
       Much of the literature on the long-term effects of medical care in childhood exploits the

revolutionary expansions of public health insurance (Medicaid) coverage to children in poor and

near poor families that occurred in the U.S. during the 1980s and 1990s. But other rich countries

have also made efforts to improve medical care for young children, and some of these

investments have also been evaluated. Recent studies of the issue are reviewed in Panel D of

Table 4.

       One noteworthy study by Sievertsen and Wust (2015) uses rich administrative registry

data from Denmark and exploits county-by-county variation policies mandating same-day post-

birth discharge. Same-day discharge following normal deliveries was apparently implemented as

a cost saving measure in a staggered way across Danish counties. They find that same-day

discharge leads to a 75% increase in readmissions during the first month of life and also

increases contacts with general practitioners. The largest effects are found for disadvantaged

mothers (defined in terms of age, education, and income). The authors are able to link

administrative data sets together in order to examine long-term effects of this policy change on

9th grade test scores. They find that the policy was associated with a .2 standard deviation

decline in test scores in children born to disadvantaged mothers. While modest, this effect is in

line with the effect sizes seen in many educational interventions and highlights the inter-

relationship of health and cognitive achievement.

       Bharadwaj, Loken, and Neilson (2013) examine infants in Chile and Norway and exploit

the fact that infants below the 1500g threshold cutoff used to define very low birth weight

received more intensive medical services than those just above this threshold. In addition to




                                                                                                   49
!
!
finding significant effects on infant mortality in each country, they also find that more intensive

medical care increased adult wages by 2.7% in Chile and by 1.8% in Norway.

       Studies of the U.S. Medicaid expansions use a variety of methodologies and data sets, but

generally rely on the fact that the Medicaid expansions were phased in at different rates across

the states (although the expansions eventually became mandatory in every state). Brown,

Kowalski, and Lurie (2015) use U.S. Internal Revenue data from tax returns which allows them

to examine income and payroll taxes as well as college attendance as outcomes. Cohodes et al.

(2016) use publicly available data from the Census, the Current Population Survey, and the

Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System to examine effects on educational attainment. Meyer

and Wherry (2016) and Miller and Wherry (2014) examine effects on mortality using Vital

Statistics data and on obesity, body mass index, and hospitalizations for endocrine disorders

using data from the NHIS, while Wherry et al. (2015) look at hospitalizations and Emergency

Room visits using hospital discharge data.

       All of these studies find positive long-term effects of having been eligible for health

insurance coverage in childhood, suggesting that improved access to medical care in childhood

increases the health and productivity of adults. These findings are significant as Medicaid is

possibly the largest U.S. policy engaging “fetal origins” linkages, and represents one of the

largest social investments that has been made in U.S. children. There is some heterogeneity in

the estimated long-term effects. The effects are strongest for African Americans (who were most

strongly affected by the expansions, given their lower average incomes and resulting higher

eligibility for public insurance). Brown et al. do not see race in the tax data, but find stronger

effects on earnings among women than among men. The take away from these studies is that


                                                                                                     50
!
!
even in rich countries where much of the morbidity is due to behavioral factors rather than

infectious disease, improvements in access to medical care matter for long-term outcomes,

especially among the disadvantaged.

e) Maternal Education

              In Grossman (1972), more educated individuals are more efficient producers of health.

Analogously here, it may be the case that better educated parents have A=                          , which would

yield higher child outcomes h, other things equal. As Currie and Moretti (2003) point out,

maternal education is endogenously chosen, and has possible effects on many aspects of a

woman’s life,15 including fertility choices. McCrary and Royer (2011) and Carneiro, Meghir,

and Parey (2012) examine the effect of policies that affected the amount of maternal education.

The first paper exploits discontinuities created by rules about age-at-school entry. The idea is

that children who are slightly too young to enter school must wait a year and will be in lower

grades when they reach the age at which they can legally leave school causing the marginal

children to end up with less education than children who were just above the age cutoff for

school entry. McCrary and Royer find little overall effect of additional compulsory education on

either fertility or infant health, though for African-American women, they do find some

reduction in the incidence of low birth weight.

              This result contrasts with Currie and Moretti, who examined the effect of additional years

of college education induced by having a college open in the mother’s county when she was 17

years old. These openings were associated with large improvements in infant health, possibly

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15
 !There is no time budget in our stylized model. Were labor income a function of hours worked, then another
margin for optimization would presumably be through the shadow price of parental time spent on investing in
children. Increases in education could increase the return to work and shadow price of time spent investing in
children, with ambiguous predictions on net investments given competing income and substitution effects.!!!!
                                                                                                                 51
!
!
through the mechanism of reducing maternal smoking. McCrary and Royer study a different

margin (years of high school) and find no effect on smoking, so a possible explanation for these

conflicting results is that the studies are looking at different margins presumably affecting

different parts of the distribution of potential mothers. Carneiro et al. (2012) also focus on

college education and instrument for education using variables such as tuition and distance to

college. They find positive effects on child test scores, with slightly larger effects for African

Americans.

         In order to place these results in context, it is important to note that the fraction of U.S.

women with less than a high school degree has fallen by more than 50% in the last 25 years, and

there is increasing evidence that high school dropouts and those with only a high school degree

fare similarly in the labor market (Card, 2009). Hence, college may be the key margin for

maternal education to affect child health in the United States.

Section 6: The Missing Middle and Latent Effects

         In order to examine the long-term impact of policies experienced as young children,

researchers must wait patiently to observe a “fully formed” measure of h. For example, Hoynes

et al. (2016), Dahl et al. (2016), and Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker (2016) study the impact of

policies that were rolled out 30 to 40 years ago. In addition to the usual difficulties identifying

policy effects, these studies must address the problems involved in tracking affected people or

cohorts over decades. In the case of Hoynes et al. (2016) the problem was addressed by gaining

restricted-access information on county of residence over time in the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics, while the other two studies rely on administrative records that geocode county of

birth.

                                                                                                         52
!
!
       Clearly, while long-term follow up is the most reliable way to assess whether a policy is

effective in the long-term, it limits our ability to assess current or even recent policies within a

reasonable amount of time. While economists may be particularly interested in adult productivity

and earnings, skipping the middle years between early childhood and adulthood means that we

have little idea about what typical developmental trajectories look like and how they are shaped

by policies experienced over the life course. If we knew more about the relationship between

early childhood, middle-childhood, and adulthood, it would aid us in making medium-term

inferences about those early childhood policies that are likely to successfully impact adults. Our

lack of knowledge also means that we are largely shooting in the dark when trying to compare

the efficacy of programs targeted at very young children to those targeting older children.

While there is a wide-spread perception that it is more cost-effective to focus on the very young,

there is surprisingly little direct comparison of policies targeting different age groups.

       An additional reason to be interested in the middle years, is that the limited amount that

we do know presents some real puzzles. For instance, a common finding in the literature

evaluating early childhood intervention programs is that there is an immediate gain in test scores,

followed by “fade out” of test score gains in the early elementary school years (Almond and

Currie, 2011b; Currie and Thomas, 1995). However, these same children tracked many years

later often show positive effects of the intervention in terms of completed schooling attainment

and other measures (Garces et al, 2002). Are the initial test score effects a “red herring” in that

the intervention is really affecting something else that matters for future development (such as

non-cognitive skills)? Or do the initial effects on cognition simply become latent for some

period of time and re-emerge?


                                                                                                       53
!
!
       In many cases, data on the “missing middle” is simply unavailable. For instance, Isen,

Rossin-Slater, and Walker know where people were born, and link information about their birth

counties to their adult earnings records. Their data has no information on movement patterns

between birth and adulthood, which is perhaps something that could be examined using tax

records, as in Chetty et al. (2016). However, a few recent papers have begun to examine the

effects of events in early childhood on outcomes during the school years.

       A few of these papers have already been discussed. For example, in student register data

for Pakistani and Bangladeshi families in England, Almond et al. (2015) examined whether

Ramadan's overlap with pregnancy affects subsequent academic outcomes at age 7. They find

that test scores are 0.05 to 0.08 standard deviations lower for students exposed to Ramadan in

early pregnancy.

       A few additional studies focusing on middle childhood are summarized in Table 5.

Figlio et al. (2014) use the universe of births in Florida matched to data from standardized tests.

They find that in models with twin fixed effects, increases in birth weight are associated with

higher performance. The estimates are slightly smaller than those found in Black, Devereux, and

Salvanes (2007) who conducted a similar investigation in Norway. Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and

Neilson (2013) report very similar findings for Chile. A further interesting result is that the

effects of low birth weight are largely stable between the ages of 9 and 14 in Florida, and

between 1st and 12th grade in Chile.

       Another approach to the problem of measuring trajectories is to try to develop better

measures of fetal damage, i.e., quantifying      and     . We know for example, that low birth

weight is an extremely crude measure of fetal damage, which while predictive, is certainly not

                                                                                                  54
!
!
dispositive. There are babies who were low birth weight who seem to be just fine ex-post, and

many babies who are not low birth weight but who nonetheless have developmental problems.

Robinson (2012) attempts to distinguish between “brain sparing” forms of low birth weight, and

low birth weight that is associated with evidence of brain damage. He does this largely by

focusing on head circumference, which may feel uncomfortably close to the preoccupations of

early eugenicists. His estimates suggest that there are no cognitive effects of low birth weight in

the infants with brain sparing. However, his low birth weight infants were more likely than

normal weight siblings to have congenital malformations, and vision, hearing, or speech

abnormalities regardless of head circumference. Biomedicine has proposed some intriguing

alternative metrics to birth weight, e.g., telomere length, methylation patterns, etc., but none that

have gained widespread acceptance as yet.

        The multidimensional nature of both investments (I) and outcomes (h) (Heckman, 2007)

is one reason for the measurement problem. It is unclear whether any unidimensional metric will

ever fully capture the effects of early childhood policies and investments insofar as they will

impact later life outcomes. At present, waiting until cohorts reach adulthood to observe effects

remains useful, though it is severely limiting. For example, how do we know today whether

policy A or B will have bigger long-term effects? Presumably this is where a structural, well-

calibrated model of investments in early childhood and human capital formation could help to fill

the gaps in our knowledge. In addition, a potential avenue of research could be the development




                                                                                                   55
!
!
of “sufficient statistics” to identify key reduced-form elasticities that summarize the human

capital effects of early life shocks or investments.16, 17

Section 7: Discussion and Conclusions

              We now know that variegated shocks, some of them relatively mild and brief, can have

lasting measurable impacts on child outcomes. Many authors start from the basic, scientific

perspective of asking whether shock X has a casual effect on outcome Y. While that is an

important question, it is reasonable to ask whether, given all of this research, we can say

anything yet about the relative magnitudes of the effects and in particular, about which

investments and interventions would be most cost effective in terms of improving young

children’s future outcomes? Answering this question is hampered by the wide range of both

shocks and outcomes that have been considered. However, at this point a large number of

studies have examined three types of outcomes: Birth weight (and low birth weight), test scores,

and wages -- three outcomes that offer glimpses of an individual’s well-being at birth, in

childhood, and in adulthood.

              Table 6 summarizes what some of these studies have found. These estimates do not lend

themselves to comparative analysis of cost-effectiveness. For one thing, we do not have

estimates of what it would cost to prevent or ameliorate some types of shocks such as stress due

to a death in the family or domestic violence. Still, given what we know about interventions that


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
16
   Bleakley (2010), for instance, showed that years of schooling is not a sufficient statistic for measuring the impact
of early-life health on lifetime income as it is possible that when health improves, lifetime income goes up, but years
of schooling declines.
17
   The use of sufficient statistics has been relatively common in other fields of economics such as in public finance,
for welfare analysis. For instance, Chetty (2009) showed that in order to calculate the welfare impact of a tax
policy, one only needs to estimate the elasticity of equilibrium quantity with respect to the tax rate and avoid
estimating all the “primitive” parameters in a structural model.
                                                                                                                    56
!
!
are feasible and a rough idea about the likely costs of intervention, the table can serve as a

starting point for a discussion about what interventions appear to be most promising.

       Studies that focus on birth weight as an outcome are shown in Panel A. Unfortunately,

we don’t know whether small changes in birth weight for babies well above the cutoff for low

birth weight will have meaningful effects on future adult outcomes. Studies that focus on effects

on mean birth weight can answer the rudimentary question of whether a given shock affects the

fetus, but are not necessarily well suited to considering the cost effectiveness of intervention

because we don’t know how much a small change in the entire distribution of birth weight is

likely to be worth.

       On the other hand, we do know that low birth weight is associated in a meaningful way

with future outcomes such as adult health, schooling attainment, and wages (see for example,

Bharadwaj, Lundborg, and Rooth, 2014; Bharadwaj, Eberhard, and Neilson, 2013; Figlio,

Guryan, Karbownik, and Roth, 2014). Table 6 suggests that there is low hanging fruit in terms

of potential for meaningful interventions to reduce the incidence of low birth weight. For

example, Schwandt (2016) finds that reducing severe influenza cases among pregnant women

would have a meaningful effect on the incidence of low birth weight (and on children’s future

wages). This goal could be accomplished quite cheaply by promoting immunization for

influenza among women of child bearing age.

       Hoynes, Miller, and Simon (2015), Almond, Hoynes, and Schazenbach (2011), and

Rossin-Slater (2013) find that small increases in annual income (or equivalent in-kind transfers)

have relatively large impacts on the incidence of low birth weight, which suggests that some sort

of pregnancy bonus or mother’s allowance might have positive effects at a modest cost

                                                                                                   57
!
!
(compositional effects aside). Another policy which could accomplish the same thing though

perhaps at higher cost is paid maternity leave, which would be particularly valuable if it covered

some of the prenatal period (Rossin-Slater, 2011).

       Conversely, uncertainty about income seems to be extremely harmful (Carlson, 2015). It

isn’t clear at this point how much this problem could be mitigated by expanding unemployment

insurance, or at what cost. For example, we don’t know how many pregnant women or their

partners now qualify for unemployment insurance (UI) or how much they typically receive in

benefits. Lindo (2011) finds extremely negative effects of paternal unemployment, though

again, it is not clear what policy response could best prevent or address this. This result does

point to the importance of fathers, a topic that has generally been neglected in the literature.

       Currie and Walker (2011) and Currie et al. (2013) show that exposure to pollution during

pregnancy has particularly negative effects on the developing fetus. The cost of pollution control

varies greatly depending on exactly how it is done. One option that has not been explored a

great deal to date is the potential role of zoning to keep residences, schools, and child care

centers away from sources of pollution such as busy highways. Over time, zoning changes

might accomplish a lot in terms of health protection at a relatively modest cost. Improvements in

filtration by daycare and school HVAC systems are probably cheaper still.

       The second panel of Table 6 briefly summarizes shocks that have been shown to affect

future test scores. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the same things that have an impact on low birth

weight often have significant impacts on test scores. Black et al. (2014), Milligan and Stabile

(2011), Dahl and Lochner (2012) all show that small increases in annual income in childhood has

measurable effects on children’s test scores. Sanders (2012), Bharadwaj et al. (2016), and Black,

                                                                                                   58
!
!
Butikofer, Devereux, and Salvanes (2014) further explore the effects of pollution, while Aizer,

Stroud, and Buka (2016) highlight negative effects of maternal stress during pregnancy on test

scores.

          Almond, Mazumder, and Van Ewikjk (2015) and Greve, Shultz-Nielsen, and Tekin

(2015) focus particularly on mild nutritional deprivation during pregnancy and find large

negative effects on test scores. It would be particularly interesting to tie this literature on mild

nutritional deprivation together with the literature on nutritional supplementation (e.g., analyses

of the U.S. WIC program) to draw inferences about the potential effects of small variations in

nutrition during pregnancy.

          Turning to shocks in early childhood that have been shown to impact the wages of young

adults, panel C of Table 6 points once again to some of the same suspects. Policies to improve

immunization for influenza (Schwandt, 2016), reduce alcohol consumption in pregnant women

(Nilsson, 2015), and reduce exposure to pollution (Isen et al., 2015) hold considerable promise.

Maternity leave in very early childhood (Carneiro et al., 2015), child care subsidies (Havnes and

Mogstad, 2011), and health insurance coverage for young children (Brown et al., 2015) all

appear to have payoffs down the road. The Gertler et al. (2014) study of psychosocial

stimulation applies to very disadvantaged children in a developing country. Yet there may be

parallels to nurse home visiting programs that target disadvantaged parents in the U.S. and many

developed countries.

          Clearly, we cannot pin down specific cost-benefit ratios without a lot more information.

But arguably we have still learned quite a bit about the types of interventions that could be

expected to make children healthier, smarter, and more productive as adults.

                                                                                                       59
!
!
       That said, there remains a great deal of room for future research. More progress could

be achieved if some of the measurement problems could be addressed. Some of our most widely

used measures, such as low birth weight, are at best only proxies for a whole range of subtle

damages that a developing fetus may have suffered. Without sensitive and specific “real time”

measures of how someone has been harmed, and how interventions are affecting them, all we

can do is wait and see what the eventual outcome will be. In addition to specific measures of

harms, knowing more about how intermediate outcomes are affected could help us to identify

individuals in need of assistance more quickly, and to target interventions more effectively.

       Similarly, being able to identify sensitive or critical periods when particular shocks have

their greatest impact, would be extremely helpful. To date, we have learned that the in utero

period is itself an especially critical and sensitive period of an individual’s life. But breaking this

period down further and learning more about critical periods in early childhood would also be

extremely useful. If the early stages of pregnancy matter most, does starting WIC a few weeks

earlier have a high return? Does fostering earlier recognition of pregnancies help?

       Another area that could benefit from more precise measurement concerns the

development of non-cognitive skills. A few of the studies discussed above focus on non-

cognitive skills, and there is growing evidence that such “soft” skills matter a great deal in terms

of producing “hard” outcomes such as educational attainment and employment. Yet these skills

are typically represented by a hodge-podge of different measures that happen to be available to

researchers and there is no consensus as yet on which measures are best or how to get a

comprehensive overview of an individual’s non-cognitive skills.




                                                                                                    60
!
!
        We have emphasized that there is often considerable heterogeneity in the effects of a

given shock. Most often, more disadvantaged people suffer greater harms, though not always. It

is perfectly reasonable that there should be heterogeneous effects given differences in

endowments, budget constraints, and available production technologies. Yet in many cases

effective interventions may depend on knowing the source of the heterogeneity, something we

can largely only speculate about now. Moreover, as we have discussed, families may act either

to magnify or mitigate the effects of initial shocks. Hence, a greater understanding of the way

that shocks and disadvantage interact, and of the role of parents in responding to them, is highly

desirable.

         To date, most of the literature focuses on the role of mothers, largely because we have

had much better information about mothers than about fathers in many data sets. As large

administrative data sets have become increasingly available, it has become possible to explore

the role of fathers, but this exploration is only just beginning.

         Similarly, improvements in the availability of data are making it possible to explore

intergenerational effects. Given evidence from animal models, it is highly likely that changes in

the fetus or young child could be passed on to the next generation. This type of mechanism

could offer an additional reason for the intergenerational persistence of poverty, and for the

existence of poverty traps in some disadvantaged areas.




References

Adhvaryu, A., Bednar, S., Molina, T., Nguyen, Q., and Nyshadham, A. (2016) When It Rains It
Pours: The Long-run Economic Impacts of Salt Iodization in the United States. Working paper.

                                                                                                   61
!
!
Adhvaryu, A., Fenske, J., and Nyshadham, A. (2016) Early Life Circumstance and Adult Mental
Health. Journal of Political Economy, R&R.
Adhvaryu, A. and Nyshadham, A. (2016) Endowments at Birth and Parents’ Investments in
Children. The Economic Journal, 126(593): 781-820.

Adhvaryu, A., Molina, T., Nyshadham, A., and Tamayo, J. (2015) Helping Children Catch Up:
Early Life Shocks and the Progresa Experiment. Working paper.

Agüero, J.M. (2014) Long-Term Effect of Climate Change on Health: Evidence from Heat
Waves in Mexico. IDB Working Paper, 481.
Aguilar, A. and Vicarelli, M. (2015) El Nino and Mexican Children: Medium-term effects of
early-life weather shocks on cognitive and health outcomes. Working paper.

Aizer, A. (2011) Poverty, Violence and Health: The Impact of Domestic Violence during
Pregnancy on Newborn Health. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3): 518-538.

Aizer, A. and Cunha, F. (2014) Child Endowments, Parental Investments and the Production of
Human Capital. Journal of Political Economy, R&R.

Aizer, A. and Currie, J. (2014) The Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality: Maternal
Disadvantage and Health at Birth. Science, 344 (Issue 6186): 856:861.

Aizer, A., Currie, J., Simon, P., and Vivier, P. (2016) Do Low Levels of Blood Lead Reduce
Children's Future Test Scores? NBER Working paper, 22558.

Aizer, A., Eli, S., Ferrie, J., Lleras-Muney, A. (2016) The Long Term Effects of Means Tested
Cash Transfers During Childhood. American Economic Review, 106(4): 935–971.

Aizer, A., Stroud, L., and Buka, S. (2016) Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes: Evidence from
Siblings. Journal of Human Resources, 51(3): 523-555.

Akee, R., Simeonova, E., Costello, E.J., Copeland, W., and Angold, A. (2015) How Does
Household Income Affect Child Personality Traits and Behaviors? NBER Working paper, 21562.

Almond, D. (2006) Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the post-1940 US Population. Journal of Political Economy, 114(4): 672–
712.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011a) Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 25(3): 153-172.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011b) Human Capital before Age Five. In the Handbook of Labor
Economics, edited by Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. Vol. 4 (Chapter 15): 1315-1486.


                                                                                                62
!
!
Almond, D., Currie, J., and Hermann, M. (2011) From Infant to Mother: Early Disease
Environment and Future Maternal Health. Labour Economics, 19(4): 475-483.

Almond, D., Doyle, J., Kowalski, A., and Williams, H. (2010) Estimating Marginal Returns to
Medical Care: Evidence from At-risk Newborns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125 (2):
591-634.

Almond, D., Edlund, L., Joffe, M., and Palme, M. (2016) An Adaptive Significance of Morning
Sickness? Trivers-Willard and Hyperemesis Gravidarum. Economics and Human Biology, 21:
167–171.

Almond, D., Edlund, L., and Palme, M (2009) Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal
Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 124 (4): 1729-1772.

Almond, D., Hoynes, H., and Whitmore Schanzenbach, D. (2011) Inside the War on Poverty:
The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics, XCIII (2):
387-402.

Almond, D. and Mazumder, B. (2011) Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect
of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
3(4): 56-85.

Almond, D., Mazumder, B., and Van Ewijk, R. (2015) Fasting During Pregnancy and Children's
Academic Performance. The Economic Journal, 125(589): 1501–1533.

Angrist, J. and Pischke, J.S. (2010) The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How
Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 24(2): 3-30.

Anttila-Hughes, J.K. and Hsiang, S. (2013) Destruction, Disinvestment, and Death: Economic
and Human Losses Following Environmental Disaster. GSPP Working paper.

Arceo-Gomez, E., Hanna, R., and Oliva, P. (2012) Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant
Mortality Differ Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City.
The Economic Journal, 126(591): 257-280.
Attanasio, O., Di Maro, V., and Vera-Hernandez, M. (2013) Community Nurseries and the
Nutritional Status of Poor Children. Evidence from Colombia. The Economic Journal, 123(9):
1025-1058.

Attanasio, O., Fitzsimons, E., Grantham-McGregor, S., Meghir, C., and Rubio-Codina, M.
(2014) Using the Infrastructure of a Conditional Cash Transfer Program to Deliver a Scalable
Integrated Early Child Development Program in Colombia: A Cluster Randomized Controlled
Trial. BMJ, 349: g5785.

                                                                                               63
!
!
Baird, S., Hamory Hicks, J., Kremer, M., and Miguel, E. (2016) Worms at Work: Long-run
Impacts of Child Health Gains. Forthcoming at the Quarterly Journal of Economics. doi:
10.1093/qje/qjw022.

Baker, M., Gruber, J., and Milligan, K. (2015) Non-Cognitive Deficits and Young Adult
Outcomes: The Long-Run Impacts of a Universal Child Care Program. NBER Working paper,
21571.

Baker, M. and Milligan, K. (2016) Boy-Girl Differences in Parental Time Investments: Evidence
from Three Countries. Forthcoming at the Journal of Human Capital.

Baker, M. and Milligan, K. (2015) Maternity Leave and Children’s Cognitive and Behavioral
Development. Journal of Population Economics, 28(2): 373-391.

Barham, T., Macours, K., and Maluccio, J. (2013) Boys’ Cognitive Skill Formation and Physical
Growth: Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood Interventions.
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 103(3): 467–471.

Barker, D.J.P. (1998) In Utero Programming of Chronic Disease. Clinical Science, 95(2): 115–
28.

Barreca, A. and Page, M. (2015) A Pint for a Pound? Minimum Drinking Age Laws and Birth
Outcomes. Health Economics, 24(4): 400-418.

Beach, B., Ferrie, J., Saavedra, M., and Troesken, W. (2016) Typhoid Fever, Water Quality, and
Human Capital Formation. The Journal of Economic History, 76(1): 41-75.

Bhalotra, S. and Venkataramani, A. (2015) Shadows of the Captain of the Men of Death: Early
Life Health Interventions, Human Capital Investments, and Institutions. Journal of Political
Economy, R&R.

Bhalotra, S. and Venkataramani, A. (2013) Cognitive Development and Infectious Disease:
Gender Differences in Investments and Outcomes. Working paper.

Bharadwaj, P., Lundborg, P., and Rooth, D. (2014) The Effects of Birth Weight over the Life
Course. Working paper.

Bharadwaj, P., Eberhard, J., and Neilson, C. (2013) Health at Birth, Parental Investments, and
Academic Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, R&R.

Bharadwaj, P., Gibson, M., Graff-Zivin, J., and Nielsen, C. (2016). Grey Matters: Fetal Pollution
Exposure and Human Capital Formation. Forthcoming at the Journal of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists.



                                                                                                 64
!
!
Bharadwaj, P., Johnsen, J.V., and Løken, K.V. (2014) Smoking Bans, Maternal Smoking, and
Birth Outcomes. Journal of Public Economics, 115: 72-93.

Bharadwaj, P., Løken, K.V., and Neilson, C. (2013) Early Life Health Interventions and
Academic Achievement. American Economic Review, 103(5): 1862-1891.

Bharadwaj, P. and Lakdawala, L (2013) Discrimination Begins in the Womb: Evidence of Sex
Selective Prenatal Investments. Journal of Human Resources, 48(1): 71-113.

Billings, S. and Schnepel, K. (2015) Life Unleaded: Effects of Early Interventions for Children
Exposed to Lead. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, R&R.

Black, S., Bütikofer, A., Devereux, P., and Salvanes, K. (2013) This Is Only a Test? Long-Run
Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Downfall. NBER Working paper, 18987.

Black, S., Devereux, P., Løken, K.V., and Salvanes, K. (2014) Care or Cash? The Effect of Child
Care Subsidies on Student Performance. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(5): 824-837.

Black, S., Devereux, P., and Salvanes, K. (2007) From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The
Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 409-
439.

Blackhouse, R.E. and Medema, S.G. (2009) Retrospectives: On the Definition of Economics.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1): 221-233.

Bleakley, H. (2007) Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73-117.

Bleakley H. (2010) Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood
Exposure. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 1–45.

Breining, N., Daysal, M., Simonsen, M., and Trandar, M. (2015) Spillover Effects of Early-Life
Medical Interventions. IZA Working paper, 9086.

Brown, D.W., Kowalski, A.E., and Lurie, I.Z. (2015) Medicaid as an Investment in Children:
What is the Long-term Impact on Tax Receipts? NBER Working paper, 20835.

Campbell, F., Conti, G., Heckman, J.J., Moon, S.H., Pinto, R., Pungello, E., and Pan, Y. (2014)
Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health. Science, 343(6178): 1478-1485.

Card, D. (1999) The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings. In the Handbook of Labor
Economics, edited by Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. Vol. 3 (Chapter 30): 1801-1863.

Card, D. (2009) Immigration and Inequality. American Economic Review 99 May.


                                                                                                  65
!
!
Carlson, K. (2015) Fear Itself: The Effects of Distressing Economic News on Birth Outcomes.
Journal of Health Economics, 41: 117–132.

Carneiro, P. and Ginja, R. (2014) Long Term Impacts of Compensatory Preschool on Health and
Behavior: Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 64(4):
135-173.

Carneiro, P., Løken, K.V., and Salvanes, K. (2015) A Flying Start? Long Term Consequences of
Time Investments in Children during their First Year of Life. Journal of Political Economy, 123:
365-412.

Carneiro, P., Meghir, C. and Parey, M. (2012) Maternal Education, Home Environments and the
Development of Children and Adolescents. Journal of the European Economic Association,
11(s1): 123-160.

Chetty, R. (2009) Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods. Annual Review of Economics, 1: 451–87.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Whitmore Schanzenbach, D., and Yagan, D.
(2011) How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project
STAR. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1593-1660.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., and Katz, L. (2016) The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic
Review, 106(4): 855-902.

Cohodes, S., Grossman, D., Kleiner, S.A., and Lovenheim, M., (2014) The Effect of Child
Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions. Journal of
Human Resources, 51(3): 727-759.

Conti, G., Heckman, J., and Pinto, R. (2015) The Effects of Two Influential Early Childhood
Interventions on Health and Healthy Behaviors. NBER Working paper, 21454 (forthcoming,
Economic Journal).

Costa, D.L. (2000) Understanding the Twentieth-Century Decline in Chronic Conditions among
Older Men. Demography, 37(1): 53-72.

Cunha, F., Elo, I., and Culhane, J. (2015) Eliciting Maternal Beliefs about the Technology of
Skill Formation. American Economic Review, R&R.

Cuhna, F. and Heckman, J.J. (2008) Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of
Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation. Journal of Human Resources,!43(4): 738-782.

Cuhna, F., Heckman, J.J., and Schennach, S.M. (2010) Estimating the Technology of Cognitive
and Noncognitive Skill Formation. Econometrica, 78(3): 883–931.
                                                                                                66
!
!
Currie J. (2009) Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
and Human Capital Development. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1): 87-122.
Currie J. (2011) Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences. American Economic
Review, 101(3): 1-22.

Currie, J., Graff -Zivin, J.S., Meckel, K., Neidell, M.J., and Schlenker, W. (2013) Something in
the Water: Contaminated Drinking Water and Infant Health. Canadian Journal of Economics,
Canadian Economics Association, 46(3):791-810.

Currie, J. and Hyson, R. (1999) Is the Impact of Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status?
The Case of Low Birth Weight. American Economic Review, 89(2): 245–250.

Currie, J. and Moretti, E. (2003) Mother's Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
VCXVIII (4): 1495-1532.

Currie, J. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2013) Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and Birth Outcomes.
Journal of Health Economics, 32(3): 487-503.

Currie, J. and Schwandt, H. (2013) A Within-Mother Analysis of Seasonal Patterns in Health at
Birth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(30): 12265-12270.

Currie, J. and Thomas, D. (1995) Does Head Start make a Difference? American Economic
Review, 85(3): 341–364.

Currie, J. and Walker, R. (2011) Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from E-ZPass.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1): 65–90.

Dahl, G. and Lochner, L. (2012) The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence
from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review, 102(5): 1927-1956.

Dahl, G., Løken, K.V., Mogstad, M., and Salvanes, K. (2016) What is the Case for Paid
Maternity Leave? Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(4): 655-670.

Danzer, N., and Lavy, V. (2016) Paid Parental Leave and Children’s Schooling Outcomes.
Forthcoming at The Economic Journal.

Daysal, N.M., Trandaﬁr, M., and van Ewijk, R. (2015) Saving Lives at Birth: The Impact of
Home Births on Infant Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3): 25-
50.

Del Boca, D., Flinn, C., and Wiswall, N. (2014) Household Choices and Child Development.
Review of Economic Studies, 81(1): 137-185.


                                                                                                 67
!
!
Del Bono, E., Ermisch, J., and Francesconi, M. (2012) Intrafamily Resource Allocations: A
Dynamic Model of Birth Weight. Journal of Labor Economics, 30(3): 657-706.

Dinardo, J. (2007) Interesting Questions in Freakonomics. Journal of Economic Literature,
45(4): 973-1000.

Dizon-Ross, R. (2015) Parents’ Perceptions and Children’s Education: Experimental Evidence
from Malawi. Working paper.

Evans, W. and Garthwaite, C. (2014) Giving Mom a Break: The Effect of Higher EITC
Payments on Maternal Health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 258-90.

Feyrer, J., Politi, D., and Weil, D.N. (2013) The Cognitive Effects of Micronutrient Deficiency:
Evidence from Salt Iodization in the United States. NBER Working paper, 19233.

Ferrie, J., Rolf, K., and Troesken, W. (2014) Lead Exposure and the Perpetuation of Low
Socioeconomic Status. Working paper.

Field, E., Robles, O., and Torero, M. (2009) Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment in
Tanzania. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 140-169.

Figlio, D., Guryan, J., Karbownik, K., and Roth, J. (2014) The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health
on Children's Cognitive Development. American Economic Review, 104(12): 3921-3955.

Fiszbein, A. and Schady, N. (2009) Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
Poverty. The World Bank, Washington D.C.

Fitzsimons, E. and Vera-Hernandez, M. (2014) Food for Thought? Breastfeeding and Child
Development. University of London Working paper, 14-04.

Fryer, R., Levitt, S. and List, J. (2015) Parental Incentives and Early Childhood Achievement: A
Field Experiment in Chicago Heights. NBER Working paper, 21477.

Garces, E., Currie, J., and Thomas, D. (2002) Longer Term Effects of Head Start. American
Economic Review, 92(4): 999-1012.

Gelber, A.M. and Isen, A. (2013) Children’s Schooling and Parents’ Investment in Children:
Evidence from the Head Start Impact Study. Journal of Public Economics, 101: 25-38.

Gertler, P., Heckman, J.J., Pinto, R., Zanolini, A., Vermeersch, C., Walker, S., Chang, S.M., and
Grantham-McGregor, S. (2014) Labor Market Returns to Early Childhood Stimulation: a 20-year
Followup to an Experimental Intervention in Jamaica. Science, 344(6187): 998-1001.

Greve, J., Schultz-Nielsen, M.L. and Tekin, E. (2015) Fetal Malnutrition and Academic Success:
Evidence from Muslim Immigrants in Denmark. NBER Working paper, 21545.

                                                                                                 68
!
!
Grossman, M. (1972) On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health. Journal of
Political Economy, 80(2): 223-55.

Golberstein, E., Gonzales, G., and Meara, E. (2016) Economic Conditions and Children's Mental
Health. NBER Working paper, 22459.

Gould, E., Lavy, V., and Paserman, D. (2011) Fifty-five Years after the Magic Carpet Ride: The
Long-Run Effect of the Early Childhood Environment on Social and Economic Outcomes.
Review of Economic Studies, 78(3): 938-973.

Gunnsteinsson, S., Adhvaryu, A., Christian, P., Labrique, A., Sugimoto, J., Shamin, A.A., and
West Jr., K.P. (2016) Resilience to Early Life Shocks - Evidence From the Interaction of a
Natural Experiment and a Randomized Control Trial. Working paper.

Gutierrez, F. (2014) Long-Term Consequences of Early Life Health Shocks: Evidence from the
1980s Peruvian Crisis. Working paper.

Havnes, T. and Mogstad, M. (2011) No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and Children’s
Long-Run Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2): 97-129.

Havnes, T. and Mogstad, M. (2015) Is Universal Child Care Leveling the Playing Field? Journal of
Public Economics, 127: 100-114.

Heckman, J.J. (2007) The Economics, Technology, and Neuroscience of Human Capability
Formation. PNAS, 104(33), 13250–13255.

Heckman, J.J. (2008) Schools, Skills and Synapses. Economic Inquiry, 46(3): 289-324.

Heckman, J. and Kautz, T. (2014) Fostering and Measuring Skills: Interventions that Improve
Character and Cognition. In The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of
Character in American Life, edited by Heckman, J., Humphries, J.E., and Kautz, T. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. pp. 341-430.

Heckman, J.J., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013) Understanding the Mechanisms through Which
an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes. American Economic Review,
103(6), 2052–2086.

Hoffman, A.B. (2014) Adverse In Utero Experiences and Distortions of the Sex Ratio: Evidence
from Prenatal Fasting. Working paper.

Hoynes, H, Miller, D., and Simon, D. (2015) Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant
Health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 172–211.

Hoynes, H., Whitmore Schanzenbach, D., and Almond, D. (2016) Long Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net. American Economic Review, 106(4): 903-934.

                                                                                                69
!
!
Hsin, A. (2012) Is biology destiny? Birth-weight and Differential Parental Treatment.
Demography, 49(4): 1385-405.

Isen, A., Rossin-Slater, M. and Walker, R. (2015) Every Breath You Take – Every Dollar You’ll
Make: The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of 1970. Forthcoming at the Journal
of Political Economy.

Jayachandran, S., Lleras-Muney, A., and Smith, K.V. (2010) Modern Medicine and the 20th
Century Declines in Mortality: New Evidence on the Impact Of Sulfa Drugs. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(2): 118-146.

Kline, P. and Walters, C. (2016) Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes: The Case of
Head Start. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, doi: 10.1093/qje/qjw027.

Knittel, R.C., Miller, L.D., and Nicholas, J.S. (2011) Caution, Drivers! Children Present: Traffic,
Pollution, and Infant Health. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(2): 350-366.

Kremer, M. and Miguel, E. (2004) Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the
Presence of Treatment Externalities. Econometrica, 72(1): 159–217.

Krutikova, S. and Lilleør, H.B. (2015) Fetal Origins of Personality: Effects of Early Life
Circumstances on Adult Personality Traits. Working paper.

Lavy, V., Schlosser, A., and Shany, A. (2016) Out of Africa: Human Capital Consequences of In
Utero Conditions. NBER Working paper, 21894.

Lindo, J.M. (2011) Parental Job Loss and Infant Health. Journal of Health Economics, 30: 869-
879.

Lee, C. (2014) Intergenerational Health Consequences of In Utero Exposure to Maternal Stress:
Evidence from the 1980 Kwangju Uprising. Social Science & Medicine, 119(C): 284-291.

Linnemayr, S. and Alderman, H. (2011) Almost Random: Evaluating a Large-scale Randomized
Nutrition Program in the Presence of Crossover. Journal of Development Economics, 96(1):
106–14.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2010). The needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the Military
to Estimate the Effect of Environmental Pollutants on Children's Health. Journal of Human
Resources, 35(3): 549-590.

Løken, K.V., Mogstad, M., and Wiswall, M. (2012) What Linear Estimators Miss: The Effects of
Family Income on Child Outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2): 1-35.

Ludwig, D.S., Rouse, H., and Currie, J. (2013) Pregnancy Weight Gain and Childhood Body
Weight: A Within-Family Comparison. PLOS Medicine, 10(10).

                                                                                                 70
!
!
Malamud, O., Pop-Eleches, C. and Urquiola, M. (2016). Interactions between Family and School
Environments: Evidence on Dynamic Complementarities? NBER Working paper, 22112.

Manski, C.F. (2011) Genes, Eyeglasses, and Social Policy. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
25(4): 83-94.

McCrary, J. and Royer, H. (2011) The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and Infant Health:
Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth. American Economic Review,
101(1): 158-195.

Meckel, K. (2015) Is the Cure Worse than the Disease? Unintended Consequences of Fraud
Reduction in Transfer Programs. American Economic Review, R&R.

Milligan, K. and Stabile, M. (2011) Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-Being of Children?
Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions. American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 3(3), 175-205.

Meyer, B. and Wherry, L. (2016) Saving Teens: Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate the
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility. Journal of Human Resources, 51(3): 556-588.

Miller, S. and Wherry, L. (2014) The Long-term Health Effects of Early Life Medicaid
Coverage. Working paper.

Nilsson, J.P. (2015) Alcohol Availability, Prenatal Conditions, and Long-Term Economic
Outcomes. Forthcoming at the Journal of Political Economy.

Oizer, O. (2014) Exploiting Externalities to Estimate the Long-Term Effects of Early Childhood
Deworming. World Bank Working paper.

Persson, P. and Rossin-Slater, M. (2016) Family Ruptures and Intergenerational Transmission of
Stress. Forthcoming at the American Economic Review.

Quintana-Domeque, C. and Rodenas-Serrano, P. (2016) The Hidden Costs of Terrorism: The
Effects on Human Capital at Birth. Journal of Human Resources, R&R.

Robinson, J.J. (2012) The Effects of Asymmetric and Symmetric Fetal Growth Restriction on
Human Capital Development. Working paper.

Rocha, R. and Soares, R. (2014) Water Scarcity and Birth Outcomes in the Brazilian Semiarid.
Journal of Development Economics, 112: 72–91.

Rosales, M.F. (2015) Impact of Early-Life Shocks on Human Capital Formation: Evidence from
El Nino Floods in Ecuador. Working paper.


                                                                                               71
!
!
Rossin-Slater, M. (2013) WIC in Your Neighborhood: New Evidence on the Impacts of
Geographic Access to Clinics. Journal of Public Economics, 102: 51-69.

Rossin-Slater, M. (2011) The Effects of Maternity Leave on Children's Birth and Infant Health
Outcomes in the United States. Journal of Health Economics, 30(2): 221-239.

Rossin-Slater, M. (2016) Signing Up New Fathers: Do Paternity Establishment Initiatives Increase
Marriage, Parental Investment, and Child Well-Being? Forthcoming at the American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics.

Rossin-Slater, M. and Wust, M. (2015) Are Different Early-life Investments Complements or
Substitutes? Long-Run and Intergenerational Evidence from Denmark. Working paper.

Royer, H. (2009) Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 49-85.

Sanders, N.J. (2012) What Doesn't Kill you Makes you Weaker Prenatal Pollution Exposure and
Educational Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, 47(3): 826-50.

Scholte, R., van den Berg, G.J., Lindeboom, M. (2015) Long-Run Effects of Gestation During
the Dutch Hunger Winter Famine on Labor Market and Hospitalization Outcomes. Journal of
Health Economics, 39: 17–30.

Schwandt, H. (2016) The Lasting Legacy of Seasonal Influenza: In-utero Exposure and Human
Capital Development. Working paper.

Shah, M. and Steinberg, B.M. (2016) Drought of Opportunities: Contemporaneous and Long
Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital. Forthcoming at the Journal of Political
Economy.

Simon, D. (2016) Does Early Life Exposure to Cigarette Smoke Permanently Harm Childhood
Health? Evidence from Cigarette Tax Hikes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
8(4): 128-159.

Sievertsen, H.H. and Wust, M. (2015) Discharge on the Day of Birth, Parental Response and
Health and Schooling Outcomes. Working paper.

Van den Berg, G.J., Lindeboom, M., and Portrait, F. (2006) Economic Conditions Early in Life
and Individual Mortality. American Economic Review, 96(1): 290-302.

Venkataramani, A.S. (2012) Early Life Exposure to Malaria and Cognition in Adulthood:
Evidence from Mexico. Journal of Health Economics, 31(5): 767-780.

von Hinke Kessler Scholder, S., Wehby, G.L., Lewis, S., and Zuccolo, L. (2014) Alcohol
Exposure in Utero and Child Academic Achievement. The Economic Journal, 124(576):
634-667.
                                                                                                72
!
!
Ward, C. and Phipps, S. (2014) Influenza, the In Utero Environment, and Developmental
Outcomes of Pre-school Children. Working paper.

Wernerfelt, N., Slusky, D., and Zeckhauser, R. (2016) Second Trimester Sunlight and Asthma:
Evidence from Two Independent Studies. Forthcoming at American Journal of Health
Economics.!

Wherry, L., Miller, S., Kaestner, R., and Meyer, B. (2015) Childhood Medicaid Coverage and
Later Life Health Care Utilization. NBER Working paper, 20929.

Yi, J., Heckman, J.J., Zhang, J., and Conti, G. (2015) Early Health Shocks, Intra-household
Resource Allocation, and Child Outcomes. Economic Journal 125 F347-F371.




                                                                                              73
!
!
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
                Study                                Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and                            Effects of the shock                            Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                specification                                                                                 mechanisms/effects
Panel A: Nutrition Shocks
Adhvaryu et al., (2016). Effects of       1) Census 1950-1980 that provide data DD: Compare cohorts exposed in-utero            Labor force participation: +1.35pp (2.2%=0.03 of a      Results are driven by impacts on
introduction of iodine fortification in   on educ, wages, N= 418,791 obs.       (1920-1927) to iodized salt with those          SD) (women: 1.63pp).                                    women: salt iodization accounts
the U.S. on age 25-55 education and       2) Data on the geographic distributionslightly older (& unexposed) (1928-1931),       Positive wage earning: +0.8pp (2.0% = 0.016 of a SD).   for 5% of the rise in female
labor market outcomes.                    of iodine deficiency prior to salt    across states with high vs. low iodine          No significant effects on education.                    participation btw 1950 & 1990.
                                          iodization comes from spatial         deficiency rates prior to the salt              Income quintiles: the likelihood of being in the 2nd    Effects on LFP were larger in the
                                          distribution of goiter in 1924.       fortification.                                  wage income quantile rose by 0.35 to 0.68pp more        1st & 2nd income quintiles: effect =
                                                                                Models include rich controls, region*birth      during and after the roll out of iodized salt in high   1pp.
                                                                                year dummies, & year of birth FE & region       goiter compared to in low goiter states.
                                                                                of birth FE using 9 Census Bureau divisions.
Almond and Mazumder (2011).             1) Census data for:                     Exploit the timing (month) of Ramadan as a      Exposure to Ramadan:                                    Most of the estimated effect of
Effects of exposure to Ramadan          Iraq 1997; N=250,000 (Muslims: 11%), natural experiment in diurnal fasting and          BW= -18gr for Arab-named pregnancies                    early pregnancy exposure is in the
fasting on birth outcomes and adult Ages 20-39                                  fetal health.                                   (-0.6%). Effects by trimester: -21, -26, 0 grams,       middle of the distribution.
disability, education, and mortality in Uganda 2002; N= 80,000 (Muslims:        DD model: compare Muslim outcomes               effects by month: -40 grams in first 2 months of        No gradient in BW by maternal
Michigan, Iraq, and Uganda.             11%), Ages 20-80.                       (treatment) to non-Muslim outcomes              pregnancy & in months 5th/7th significant effects. education, Medicaid use, or month
                                        2) Michigan Natality data, universe of (control).                                       Adult disability: +22% (eff. in 1st month only, driven prenatal care was initiated.
                                        births, 1989-2006, N~2.5M birth         Identifying assumption: pregnancies are         by mental or learning disabilities.)                    Effect sizes are similar in Uganda
                                        records.                                not timed relative to Ramadan along             Mortality: "due to aging" +0.37pp (~+70% wrt the        and Iraq.
                                                                                unobserved determinants of health.              mean).
                                                                                Models include controls for month of birth      Wealth: -2.6pp, -2.1pp less likely to own a home
                                                                                FE, geographic location FE, and rich            (males only).
                                                                                individual controls (estimates are ITT).        Education: no effects.
Almond, Mazumder, and Van Ewijk         1) England's Register data "Key Stage 1 DD strategy: authors take the effect on         Ramadan exposure in the 1st trimester:                  NA
(2015). Effect of exposure to           scores", students' academic             Muslims and use and non-Muslims to              Test scores (math, reading, & writing "Key Stage 1"): -
Ramadan fasting in utero on age 7       performance for those who attend        control for possible seasonal effects.          0.05 to -0.08 of a SD.
schooling attainment in England.        state schools, 1998-2007.               Design exploits the fact that Ramadan           By months of pregnancy:
                                        2) Pupil Level Annual School Census     moves through the calendar. Control             Math: -0.068, -0.059, -0.081 of a SD in 1st, 2nd, &
                                        (PLASC), covers all enrolled pupils in  group: Caribbean students.                      3rd months of pregnancy (no effects in other
                                        each year, includes demog &             Models include child's state of birth*child's   months).
                                        socioeconomic characteristics including YOB FE, cubic time trend of the N_days          Reading: -0.054, -0.067, -0.073 SD.
                                        ethnicity.                              between the DOB & January 1, 1960.              Writing: -0.052, -0.053, -0.055 SD.
                                        Authors link data on the Key Stage 1    Authors also fully interact each regressor      Effects rise monotonically over the course of the 1st
                                        scores to the PLASC for e/year using    (except for the geographic FE) w/a dummy        trim; largest effects in 3rd trim.
                                        unique student identifier from 2002     for Muslim.                                     Estimates are downward biased to the extent that
                                        onwards and a 2-step matching process                                                   Ramadan is not universally observed.
                                        prior to 2002. N=326,592 obs.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
                 Study                                 Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                             Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                      specification                                                                               mechanisms/effects
Panel A: Nutrition Shocks
Feyrer, Politi, and Weil (2013). Effect     1) Statistics from draft physicals for     Compare cohorts born just before & after        Individuals born in 1925 & 1926 (introduction of iod. NA
of introducting iodine fortification in     WWI, include info. on the incidence of     iodized salt introduced in 1924.Two             salt was in 1924):
the U.S. in 1924 on military skill levels   goiter prior to treatment for 151          sources of variation: i) pre-existing (<1924)   Prob(being assigned to Air Forces- indicator of high
(young adult males) and thyroid             regions.                                   iodine deficiency; ii) timing of the            skill): +0.3 to 0.6pp (full sample); +2.5-8.7pp
related deaths.                             2) Dataset of men who enlisted in the      intervention.                                   (individuals in initially high goiter areas).
                                            Army during WWII; indicates who was        Also exploit the fact that the Air Force was    Thyroid-related deaths: +10,000 in 1925-1942 (older
                                            drafted into the Air Force (highly         assigned draftees w/higher test scores          groups more affected because they were iodine
                                            skilled) vs Ground Forces (less skilled)   than Ground Forces. This non-random             deficient for a longer period). Note: In 1926 death
                                            based on an Army General Classif. Test     assignment is key for identification            rates were >6 times as high for women as for men
                                            (AGCT), source: National Archives &        strategy.                                       though sample is male.
                                            Records Administration
                                            N=2 million records in 1938 - 1946.  Linear Prob (& Logit) Models include
                                                                                 interaction of goiter in 1924 in region of
                                                                                 birth * YOB dummies, YOB dummies *
                                                                                 enlistment year dummies, enlistment
                                                                                 month dummies.
Fitzsimons and Vera-Hernandez           UK Millenium Cohort Study; 9 months Instrumental variables: Exploit timing in                  Breastfeeding has large effects                   NA
(2013). Effect of breast-feeding in the (2000/2001), 3 years (2004/05), 5 years day of the week children are born (children            on cognitive development, but NOT on noncognitive
U.K. on cognition and health at age 7. (2006), 7 years (2008). Data includes     born on weekend or just before, are less              skills or physical health.
                                        hour of child's birth.                   likely to receive breast feeding support              Breastfeeding:
                                        N= 18,500 babies born (sample excludes services).                                              Cognitive dev index: +0.6 of a SD.
                                        C-section deliveries).                   IV: instrumental variable is being born on a
                                        Authors corroborate data w/Maternity weekend.
                                        Users Survey a postal survey conducted
                                        on 26,000 mothers, 3 months after
                                        birth.
Greve, Schultz-Nielsen, and Tekin       1) Danish administrative records on      DD: exploit the overlap between time in               Child is Muslim*Child was exposed to Ramadan:        Estimates are larger for girls and
(2015). Examine the effect of           Danish, English, Math, & Science test    utero of children born in Denmark with the            No overall effects on Danish, English, Math or       for children of lower
Ramadan fasting on student              scores in 9th grade.                     month of Ramadan.                                     Science test scores. Authors estimate models by      socioeconomics status mothers.
outcomes in Denmark.                    2) Danish birth registry, which includes Treatment group: children born to                     gender & by gender-SES.                              Danish test scores: -1.08 SD
                                        exact info on gestation length and birth immigrant parents from predominantly                                                                       (females and low SES children).
                                        date                                     Muslim countries                                                                                           English test scores: -1.84 SD; -1.6
                                        N=11,291 children.                       Control group: children born to immigrant                                                                  SD (females and low SES children).
                                                                                 parents from predominantly NON-Muslim                                                                      Math test scores: -1.04 SD; -0.98
                                                                                 countries.                                                                                                 SD (males and low SES children).
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
                Study                              Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                            Effects of the shock                            Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                  specification                                                                                 mechanisms/effects
Panel A: Nutrition Shocks
Hoffman (2014). Effects of Ramadan      DHS data from 7 Muslim countries,           Exploit variation in the timing of Ramadan    Exposure to Ramadan during pregnancy:                   Effects somewhat larger in rural
Fasting in 7 Muslim countries on sex    1987 - 2013; N=275,627 births.              throughout the year, across countries.        Prob(child is a girl): +2.4% (+ 0.024 SD).              areas and in mothers without
ratios of 0-60 month olds.                                                          Treatment group: individuals exposed to       Exposure to Ramadan in the first 3 months of            primary education.
                                                                                    Ramadan (at least 1 month) during             pregnancy:                                              e.g., for less educated mothers:
                                                                                    gestation, controls not exposed.              Prob(miscarriage): +1% (0.004 SD).                      P(child is a girl): +3.4% (+0.035 SD)
                                                                                                                                  No effects on neonatal death or infant death.           P(misscarriage): +1.7% (+0.017 SD)
                                                                                    Models include month of birth, year of                                                                P(neonatal death): no effect
                                                                                    birth, & country FE, & country-specific                                                               P(infant death): 1.4% (0.014 SD)
                                                                                    time trends, mother's FE.                                                                             (driven by exposure to Ramadan in
                                                                                                                                                                                          the month of birth).

Linnemayr and Alderman (2011).          Baseline survey conducted in April 2004     1) DD comparing 111 treatment and 110         Weight-for-age:                                         By child's age: authors find
Effect of nutritional supplementation   in 212 villages, includes info on health    control villages.                             Using DD model: +0.1 SD                                 significant weight gain for younger
in Senegal on weight for age for        status of children, SES of the children's   2) IV: use planned treatment assignment       Using IV: +0.31 SD (effect only observed on children    children (these children were
children 0-3.                           household, nutrition, child care, etc.;     as an instrument for actual treatment.        <6 months).                                             impacted in utero).
                                        follow-up in 2006; N=200,000                3) Propensity score matching across           Using PSM: +0.27 SD                                     "Most malnutrition occurs by 18
                                        households.                                 treatment and control villages.                                                                       months w/limited catch-up after
                                                                                    Models include initial village-level                                                                  that."
                                                                                    characteristics (e.g., distance to the next
                                                                                    village), interactions of village
                                                                                    characteristics and planned treatment,
                                                                                    dummies for child age.
Ludwig, Rouse, and Currie (2013).    1) Vital Statistics Natality data: universe    1) Exclude pre & post terms, multiple         One additional Kg of pregnancy weight gain:         NA
Maternal weight gain during          of births in Arkansas 1989-2005,               gestational N, maternal diabetes, &           Childhood BMI: +0.022 (0.06% = 0.004 of a SD).
pregnancy and child BMI in Arkansas. N=42,133 women (91,045 offspring).             extremes in BW's.                             Childhood overweight/obesity: OR increased by
                                     2) State mandated data on childhood            2) incorporate measured confounders in        1.007.
                                     BMI from public schools (August 18,            models.                                       Variations in pregnancy weight gain accounted for a
                                     2003 to June 2, 2011).                         3) Sibling FE design.                         0.43 kg/m2 difference in childhood BMI.
                                                                                    Models include rich maternal controls,
                                                                                    month of child's age, & year of birth FE.
von Hinke Kessler Scholder et al,       1) Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents       Exploit genetic variation in the maternal     Exposure to an additional unit of alcohol               Estimates are slightly larger for
(2014). Examines short and long-run     and Children (ALSPAC); Panel follows        alcohol-metabolism gene ADH1B to              (instrumented by mother having the rare allele):        children of lower education and
effects of maternal alcohol             cohort born in Avon, England in ~1991-      instrument for fetal alcohol exposure.        1st stage: Mothers who carry the rare allele are -11    lower income mothers. No
consumption during pregnancy.           1992. N=4,088 children.                     Authors claim that at a population level,     to -15pp less likely to consume any alcohol during      difference by gender or partner's
                                        2) Children’s scores are obtained from      genetic variants are unrelated to             pregnancy (-53% w.r.t. the mean).                       social class at birth.
                                        the National Pupil Database, a census of    socioeconomic characteristics.                Key Stage examination test scores (at ages 7, 11, 14,
                                        all pupils and measured at 7, 11, 14, and   Instrument: dummy for whether an              16): -0.2 to –0.3 SD (no mean stats provided to
                                        16.                                         individual carries either one or two copies   compute % changes of the coefficient).
                                                                                    of the rare allele.
                                                                                    Models control for child’s genotype on the
                                                                                    same variant, and for the ancestry-
                                                                                    informative principal components.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
           Study                        Micro - Data, N                Identification strategy and specification                     Effects of the shock                  Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                          mechanisms/effects
Panel B: Stress
Aizer (2011). Impact of        Hospital admissions for assault        2 challenges: i) possible omitted variables bias,    As criminal sanctions increase,               NA
domestic violence on birth     during pregnancy in CA, 1991-2002      ii) non-random under-reporting of domestic           domestic violence declines.
outcomes in California.        matched with universe of births in     violence.                                            Using control func. method:
                               CA.                                    Author uses: i) IV: A control function where IV is   BW: -163gr due to hospitalization for an
                               N~500,000 pregnant women/yr.           the enforcement of laws against domestic             assault while pregnant (OLS models predict
                                                                      violence across jurisdictions, ii) Matching          a BW decline of -161gr).
                                                                      estimates on many covariates (n=1,542 women          Effects of violence on BW are larger in 1st
                                                                      matched).                                            half of pregnancy than in 3rd trim's (-166, -
                                                                      Models include rich indiv controls, county*year      118, & -97gr in e/trim respect.)
                                                                      dummies, a quadratic in year, county FE for the      Using matching: BW = -159gr
                                                                      5 largest counties in CA.
Aizer, Stroud, and Buka        National Collaborative Perinatal       Regression model w/indicator of cortisol             Being exposed to highly elevated cortisol in- Children born to mothers
(2016). Examine                Project (NCPP); mothers cortisol       exposure in pregnancy and rich individual            utero:                                        without a HS degree &
relationship between           levels were measured in 3rd trim       controls and sibling FE.                             Education: -0.39 to -1.1 yrs of schooling     exposed to highly elevated
measured cortisol levels       and their children were followed up                                                         (0.58 of a SD) (sibling FE)                   cortisol in-utero:
during 3rd trimester and       to age 7; years of birth: 1959 to                                                                                                         Education: -2 yrs of
education at age 7.            1965, sample used in study are 2                                                                                                          schooling (sibling FE). No
                               cities: Boston and Providence.                                                                                                            effect among children of
                               N= 1,093 pregnancies (368 siblings).                                                                                                      more educ moms.

Currie and Rossin-Slater       1) Vital statistics, 1996-2008,        Exploit the temporal & geographic variation in       Exposure to hurricanes:                  NA
(2013). Effect of stress due   includes info on mothers’ names,       the ocurrence of hurricanes in Texas. Mother FE      No effects on LBW or gestation.
to potential hurricane         DOB, & residential addresses (helps    (to account for mother's time invariant              Prob. of abnormal cond.: +60% (including
exposure during pregnancy      identify mothers who were in the       characteristics)                                     meconium aspiration syndrome or being on
on infant health outcomes      path of major tropical storms &        with IV to account for a mother's endog.             ventilator >30 min).
in Texas.                      hurricanes), child's exact DOB,        migration in response to a hurricane. Instrument     Prob. of having complications during
                               county of birth                        is a mother's county of residence in 1st             labor/delivery: +30%.
                               N= 1,270,441 births                    pregnancy.
                               2) Data on hurricanes come from
                               the Weather Underground
                               Hurricane Archive; publicly
                               available.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
           Study                          Micro - Data, N                Identification strategy and specification                  Effects of the shock                  Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                         mechanisms/effects
Panel B: Stress
Lee (2014).                     1) Korean vital statistics, 2000 &Natural experiment: Massacre of >500 civilians         Exposure to the KU shock by trimester of     NA
Intergenerational effect of     2002, N=1,124,848 births.         and wounding of 3000 in the Kwangju (KU),              pregnancy:
stress mother suffered                                            Korea in 1980.                                         BW: -37grams (-1.1%) (1st trim), -105
while in utero (due to                                            DD: Assume that individuals whose mother               grams (-3.2%) (2nd), no effect (3rd trim)
Kwangju uprising in Korea)                                        resided in Kwangju in May 1980 & who were              LBW: +1.7% (1st trim), +4.0% (2nd trim),
on her children's birth                                           born between June 1980 & February 1981 were            +1.3% (3rd trim)
outcomes 20 to 22 years                                           exposed to stress caused by the violence in            Preterm: no effect (1st trim), +4.6% (2nd
later.                                                            utero. Models include cubic time trends, and           trim), +1.5% (3rd trim).
                                                                  rich mother controls.
Persson and Rossin-Slater    1) Universe of children in Sweden in Exploit the quasi-random variation in the exact        In-utero exposure to the death of a           NA
(2016). Asks how death of a 1973, 1977, 1983, 1988, 1995, 1999, timing of bereavement relative to the child’s            relative:
family member during         2001, & 2005. Link child to          expected date of delivery at full-term.                Mental health outcomes
pregnancy affects            information on siblings, parents,    Models include year & month of conception FE,          Uses prescription drug: +6% (No standard
birthweight, mental and      grandparents, aunts and uncles and & municipality where a mother lived at                   deviations of ouctomes provided)
physical health,             maternal great-grandparents.         conception of child FE.                                Uses anti-anxiety drugs: 11%
hospitalizations, and income Review cause of death register for                                                          Uses anti-depression drugs: 9%
up to age 30.                all family members, combine with                                                            Daily dose of ADHD med.: 23%
                             information about child's exact                                                             BW: -18gr (-0.5% = -0.03 of a SD) (eff driven
                             DOB, birth outcomes and later                                                               by lower tail of distrib)
                             health outcomes as well as income                                                           LBW: +20%; VLBW: +30%; Preterm: +15%
                             and taxation register with labor                                                            No significant effects on physical health or
                             income up to age 30. N=63,756 obs.                                                          income.

Quintana-Domeque and            1) Vital stats; live births conceived   DD: exploit the variation in casualties accross    1 additional bomb casualty in               By gender: no differential
Rodenas-Serrano (2016).         btw 1980-2003; N=6.5 million live       provinces (50 geographical regions) & months- the 1st trimester of pregnancy:                  effect for both boys and
Effect of in utero stress due   births                                  years (more than 275 conception month-years) BW: -0.7grams (-0.02%) (no standard               girls (results not shown).
to terrorist attacks in Spain   2) The Victims of ETA Dataset:                                                             deviations provided in Table 1)
on birth outcomes.              provides the N of casualties            Models include mother's province of residence Prematurity: +0.9 per 1,000 live births (-
                                committed by ETA between January        FE, year & month of conception FE, a vector of 0.02%)
                                1980 & February 2003 in each day &      control variables (birth order, mother's age,      Normality: 0.6 per 1,000 live births.
                                region                                  marital status, etc.), size of the municipality of Results are driven by exposure to terrorism
                                Datasets merged at the trimester        residence categories, province-specific linear     in the 1st trimester.
                                and province levels.                    time trends.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                     Micro - Data, N                 Identification strategy and specification                       Effects of the shock                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                          mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Disease
Almond, Currie,       U.S. vital statistics natality &          Exploit the geographic & temporal variation       An additional postneonatal death per 1,000 in the    Larger impacts for blacks
and Hermann           mortality records: authors are able       in post-neonatal mortality rates (across racial   year after mother's YOB:                             than for whites.
(2011). Effect of     to link the post-neonatal mortality       groups) from 1960 to 1990 in 5 large states .     Health:                                              The mean PNMRt+1 for
disease               rates in the mother's state of birth      Aggregate data into cells by mother's state       Diabetes: 1.8% (0.009 of a SD); 1.4% = 0.007 of a    whites (4.0) and the mean
environment as        & provide info on outcomes of             and YOB, age, and race, and child's state and     SD (whites), 3.5% = 0.012 of a SD (blacks).          PNMRt+1 for blacks (8.4)
proxied by            mother & infant.                          YOB.                                              Hypertension: no effects                             suggest that the early life
postneonatal          1) Vital Statistics natality microdata,   Regression models (defined at the mother's        SES:                                                 disease environment
mortality rates       1989 –2006, N~3.5- 4 million              race, state of birth, in YOB & yr, state, age     Educ attainment: -0.1% (-0.012 of a SD)              increased the probability of
on the health of      births/yr                                 that mother gave birth) include mother            Married: -0.6% (-0.009 of a SD)                      diabetes during pregnancy
women                 2) Mortality microdata, 1960 –            characteristics, mother's state of birth FE,      Maternal behav: smoking +2% (-0.02 of a SD); high    by
observed in the       1991.                                     child's YOB *child's state FE, maternal single    weight gained 1.7% (0.01 of a SD).                   almost 30% for blacks
U.S. vital                                                      year age FE, mother's state of birth linear                                                            compared to 5.6% for
statistics natality                                             time trends, linear time trends in maternal                                                            whites.
data.                                                           age FE.
Baird, Hicks,         1) Longitudinal data from 75 rural        Reduced form model: includes dummy for            Health: Self-reported health is v. good: +4.1pp (+   No differences in labor
Kremer, and           schools treated 1998-2001.                treatment, N of treatm pupils in 6Km, & N of      0.085 of a SD); Prob of miscarriage: -2.7pp (-0.69   supply effects by gender or
Miguel (2016).        2) Kenya Life Panel Survey (KLPS)         treatm schools in 6Km & baseline indiv &          of a SD) (females only).                             by age or by initial infection
Effects of            2007-2009, tracked N=7,500                school characteristics.                           Education: yrs of schooling +0.3 (+0.10 of a SD),    rate. Externality effects: an
deworming on          respondents who had been enrolled         Estimate exposure to spillovers using the N       English vocab. tests +0.076 of a SD.                 increase of 1SD in local
test scores and       in grades 2-7 in the 75 treated           of pupils attending deworming treatment           Labor market outcomes: work hours: +1.76hrs =        density of treatment school
anthropometrics       schools at baseline in 1998.              schools within 6Km, conditional on total N of     12% (+0.12 of a SD); wages: +30.1 log points =       pupils (917 pupils= treating
of 8-15 year old                                                primary school pupils within 6Km.                 3.8% (0.36 of a SD).                                 20% of local primary school
children in                                                                                                       Shifts in employment towards full-time jobs with     pop), leads to: +3 hours
Kenya.                                                                                                            higher wages (i.e., manufacturing) (males) &         worked/wk
                                                                                                                  away from casual labor & domestic services
                                                                                                                  (females).



Beach, Ferrie,        1) Census data of 1900 & of 1940.         Exploit variation in typhoid fatality rates       1st stage: Lagged typhoid rates in the feeder city NA
Saavedra, and         2) City-year level typhoid fatality       during early life as a proxy for water quality.   are a strong predictor of typhoid rates in the
Troesken (2016).      rates for 75 cities (source: Whipple      Instrument typhoid fever using lagged city-       receiving city (F-stat>517.81). Educational
Typhoid rates in      (1908); 10th annual Census                level typhoid rates that lie upstream). "Cities   attainment: +1 month of schooling (OLS)
3-yr MA around        mortality statistics).                    that dump their sewage into a river will          (0.9%=0.026 of a SD) (no effect obtained from IV).
birth on adult        N=189,515 obs.                            increase future typhoid rates for cities          Earnings: +1% (OLS) (0.012 of a SD); +9% (IV) (0.10
education and                                                   downstream."                                      of a SD). No effect on home owning.
earnings.                                                       Models include controls for being black, city
                                                                & year of birth FE, birth order FE.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                  Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                 Effects of the shock                      Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                             mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Disease
Bhalotra and       1) Mexican Family Life Survey   Reduction in the risk of waterborne disease        A 1 SD reduction in childhood diarrhea mortality Effects are driven by low SES
Venkataramani      (MxFLS), N=8,500 HHs in 150     from a major water reform in Mexico in             rates:                                                girls.
(2013). Effects    communities in 16 states, waves:1991.                                              Test scores (Raven): +0.1 of a SD (0.6%) (girls only)
of diarrheal       2001-2002; includes month & yearReform introduced suddenly in reaction to          Reading: 0.04 of a SD (+0.7%) (girls only)
disease on test    of birth, birth state, indicators of
                                                   threat of cholera in neighboring countries.        Math: 0.05 of a SD (+0.8%) (girls only)
scores of          HH wealth, parental investment. Exploit state*yr variation in program
children in        2) PISA Test score data: waves  intensity.                                         A 1 SD decrease in diarrheal mortality rates in
Mexico at age 9-   2003, 2006 & 2009 for cohorts born
                                                   DD model: includes respiratory disease as a        childhood reduces gender gap by 80% (MX gender
15.                in 1987/1988, 1990, & 1993;     control disease un affected by the reform but      gap smaller than the OECD avg gap: 11 in 500
                                                   a leading cause of child morbidity &
                   includes school quality, parental                                                  points).
                   investments.                    mortality.
                   3) Census micro-data 1960-2000  ITT estimates identifying assumption:
                   from IPUMS (to study empl. &    test scores are uncorrelated w/the timing of
                   occup. trends by gender).       the water reform.
                                                   Models include indiv controls in pre-
                                                   1991*dummy Post, state & year of birth FE,
                                                   state time trends.
Bhalotra and     1) US Census micro data for 1980- Exploit state variation in 1937 in the             A 1 SD decline in pneumonia exposure in the birth    By levels of institutional-
Venkataramani 2000; authors focus on men only      introduction of sulfa antibiotics to prevent       state due to the introduction of antibiotics:        racial segregation: "Black
(2015). Examine who were born born between 1930- pneumonia. Treatment group: cohorts in               Years of schooling: +0.1 (no SD provided in paper)   men born in the least
the impacts of   1943; N=2,018,898 men (of which their infancy in 1937 or later. Control group:       HS completion: +1.5%                                 segregated states reaped
pneumonia in     less than 10% are Blacks).        cohorts in their infancy before 1937.              College completion: +1.2%                            substantial gains from infant
infancy on adult                                   Models include an interaction between: (the        Cognitive disability: -0.6%                          exposure to sulfa drugs,
(males)                                            pre-sulfa pneumonia mortality rate in the          Work-related disability: -0.6%                       while blacks born in the
education,                                         birth state in 1930-1936) * (Dummy for             Employment: +0.4%                                    more segregated states saw
employment,                                        cohorts who were in their infancy in 1937 or       Income: +1.5%                                        muted gains".
disability,                                        later)                                             Having income in the lowest quintile: -0.47%
income and                                         Models include indiv controls, birth state &       Having income in the highest quantile: +0.41%
income mobility.                                   birth year varying observables, state linear
                                                   time trends.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                    Micro - Data, N                 Identification strategy and specification                      Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Disease
Currie and          1) Vital Statistics Natality data in NJ   Analyze the seasonality of health at birth by    Conception from Jan. to May is associated with        The seasonal pattern in
Schwandt            (1997-2006), NYC (1994-2004), &           comparing siblings conceived by the same         significant reductions in gestation (-0.08 week)      health outcomes is observed
(2013). Shows       PA (2004 -2010).                          mother at different times using sibling FE.      and prematurity within families:                      across SES, child gender, &
that there is       N=647,050 pairs of siblings                                                                +1pp (13.2%). Birth weight falls by -4gr (increases   birth order groups.
seasonality in      (1,435,213 children).                     Compare impact of coming to term in early        by 8gr if conception occurs in June-August). More
health at birth     2) Info. on prevalence of Influenza       winter in high flu and low flu years.            severe flu seasons show stronger effects.
within mother       is obtained from the Center for                                                            In children coming to term in high flu season the
and that this       Disease Control (1997-onward).                                                             risk of negative birth outcomes is much higher,
may reflect                                                                                                    suggesting that exposure to flu late in pregnancy
seasonal flu                                                                                                   causes preterm delivery.
epidemics.
Oizer (2014).       Data on children were collected in        "Conditional on child's age & data collection    Community deworming before age 1:                     By gender: no differences.
Spillover effects   2009 and in 2010 at all of the            year, deworming exposure was randomized."        Raven's matrices: +0.22 of a SD                       By differential exposure
of the Kenya        deworming project schools in Samia        Treatment group: children born in 1998 in        PPVT: no effect                                       within the HH:
deworming           and Bunyala districts of Kenya’s          communities w/ the deworming program.            Verbal fluency: +0.19 SD.                             Having older siblings in an
program             Western Province; includes N=             Control group: children born in 1998 in a        No effects on height.                                 affected school: Raven's
measured at         20,000 children with info on              community w/out the deworming program            "That Raven’s Matrices are responsive to the          matrices +0.42 SD.
ages 8-15.          collected height, weight, and             (the program only started to operate in 2001     intervention suggesting that even mild disease        Having older female siblings
                    migration status; and 2,400               in control communities, i.e., when these         burdens early in childhood can alter cognitive        in an affected school:
                    children, cognitive measures were         cohorts were age 3).                             development."                                         Raven's matrices +0.84 SD
                    collected.                                                                                                                                       (females more likely to care
                                                                                                                                                                     for younger siblings).
Schwandt            1) Danish Birth Records, 1980-1993;       Exploit the variation in seasonal influenza in   Influenza admission during pregnancy (dummy):         By mother's educ: Children
(2016). Effect of   N= 700,000 births.                        the month of conception.                         BW: -77grams (-2.2% = -0.14 SD). LBW: +2.9pp          of mothers w/ low educ are
maternal            2) Income Register & Population           Models include individual controls & mother-     (+66%).                                               less likely to be in school (at
hospitalization     Register, 1980, 2012; ages 19-32.         FE.                                              Gestation (weeks): -0.3 (-0.8% = -0.17 SD).           ages 18-20) & have fewer
for influenza       3) National Patient register, 1980-       Author also uses an IV strategy: instrument      Preterm: +4pp (+88%).                                 yrs of educ compared to
during              2012, ages 18+; used to link births       for 3rd trimester influenza exposure to          Sex ratio: no effect.                                 children of other moms.
pregnancy on        to maternal hospitalizations during       correct for the potential bias that a shorter    LT outcomes: Earnings: -10% (0.09 SD).                Effects are driven by
earnings, welfare   pregnancy; this dataset helps             duration of pregnancy is correlated with a       Labor force participation: -7%.                       influenza admissions in the
dependance, etc.    identify influenza-like illness           shorter period in which a mother can be          Welfare dependance: +43%.                             3rd trimester.
at 19-32 in         infections in pregnant women.             infected by influenza.                           Labor mkt outcomes are driven by exposure in
Denmark.            Datasets are merged using personal                                                         2nd & 3rd trimesters.
                    identifiers.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                    Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                     Effects of the shock                     Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                  mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Disease
Venkataramani        1) 2002 Mexican Family Life Survey;    Exploit the nationwide introduction of          Birth year exposure to malaria eradication:         By gender: effects are only
(2012). Effects      N=1,649 men and 2,184 women.           malaria eradication efforts in Mexico:          Raven Progressive Matrices test                     observed for men.
of malaria           Data include test scores,              DD Strategy: compare the change in              scores: +0.11 to 0.22 SD (+25 to 51%).
exposure in          employment, HH & individual            outcomes btw cohorts born before & after        Household consumption expenditures: +6.5 to
Mexico on adult      income, expenditure, education,        the intervention in areas that benefited more   13.6%.
cognition.           anthropmetrics, morbidity, health      from the policy against the same change for     Total Schooling: no effect.
                     care utilization, migration.           cohorts born in less malarious regions.         Cohorts affected by the policy entered and exited
                     2) State-level data on the avg death   Models include state and year of birth FE       school earlier:
                     rate (per 100,000) from malaria        and birth state specific linear time trends,    Age at school entry: falls by -0.15 to -0.37 years.
                     1949-1953 (erradication began in       individual controls.                            Age @school exit: falls by -0.55 to -1.06 years.
                     1957).

Ward and Phipps      1) National Longitudinal Study of      Exploit the weekly variation in Influenza       An increase of 1 SD from the mean Influenza        NA
(2014). Exposure     Children and Youth (NLSCY), 1992-      surveillance rates across provinces to          surveillance rate (in the whole pregnancy) has no
to flu in utero on   (week 37) to 2011 (week 34),           estimate effects of exposure during gestation   statistically significant effect.
health and           N=11,888.                              on child cognition & health. Models include     The effect of each week of Influenza during the
cognition of 4-5     2) Rate of laboratory confirmed        the Influenza term & its square to capture      1st trimester (13 week-period):
year old children    influenza includes influenza           nonlinear effects. Also year, month, &          PPVT: -1.1pp (1.1% = 0.07 of a SD)
in Canada.           laboratory surveillance rates, from    province FE, seasonal factors & individual      Chronic condition: -2.8pp (-14.7% =-0.08 of a SD).
                     the Canadian Respiratory Virus         characteristics.
                     Detection/Isolation                    Conception date: N of gestational weeks
                     Surveillance System (RVDI).            before e/child’s DOB where gestational
                     3) Hospital counts from records of     length is based on the date of the mother’s
                     inpatient discharges, 1996-2006; &     last menstrual period.
                     Google Flu Trends data.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                     Identification strategy and                       Effects of the shock                      Heterogeneity in
                                                                             specification                                                                      mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Aizer, Currie,         1) Blood lead levels (BLL) from Rhode   IV to control for confounding and for         A 1-unit increase in mean blood lead:        By score distribution: "The effects
Simon, and Vivier      Island (RI) Department of Health:       measurement error in blood lead levels        Reading test score: -0.07 SD (-2%)           are larger at the lower end of the
(2016). Examine        includes age at test, test method       (instrument: introduction of a lead           Probability of substantially below           score distribution".
the effects of         (capillary or venous), census tract,    remediation program).                         proficient in reading: +25.7%.
Rhode Island’s         and BLL.                                Models control for individual covariates,
policies to reduce     2) Child’s test scores from the RI      Census tract FE, average test scores in the   The BLL levels declined by 2.23 milligrams
preschool blood        Department of Education: include        child’s school & grade, year and month of     per deciliter from 1997 to 2005.
lead levels on third   NECAP12 test scores in 3rd grade.       birth FE.
grade test scores.     3) Confidential birth certificates of   Key assumption: Growth in the N of lead
                       children born in RI: include child's    safe certificates in a neighborhood is
                       home address + individual and           uncorrelated with other factors
                       maternal characteristics.               increasing test scores.
                       N=71,000 children.                      Authors also estimate models using the
                                                               subset of children who have both venous
                                                               + capillary measures using the former as
                                                               instruments for the later.




Arceo-Gomez,           1) Mortality data from the Ministry     1) Reduced form model that includes         IV results: A 1% increase in CO:               Non-linearities in the effects of
Hanna, and Oliva       of Health; includes birth & death       municipalities FE, week FE, & municipality- Infant mortality: a 0.23% increase.            pollution: using estimates from
(2012). Asks how       certificates, & contains info on date   specific year trends.                       A 1% increase in PM10 over a year:             Currie & Neidell (2005) authors find
variations in air      of birth & municipality of residen.     2) IV approach: Exploit the                 Infant mortality: a 0.42% increase.            suggestive evidence of non-
pollution (CO and      N=not specified.                        meteorological phenomenon of thermal 1st stage results:                                    linearities only in the CO effect.
PM10) due to           2) Pollution: Automatic Network of      inversions; use the N of inversions in a    E/inversion leads to a 3.5% increase in
inversions in          Atmospheric Monitoring (RAMA)           given week to instrument for pollution      PM10 & a 5.4% increase in CO.
Mexico City affect     longitudinal data; includes PM10,       levels that week. IV Models include rich The overall decline in pollution from 1997
infant mortality.      SO2, CO, O3; years of data 1997-        controls, municipality & year FE, & week- to 2006 predicts a decline of 277 infant
                       2006 for 48 municipalities.             municipality trends.                        deaths per 100,000 births.
                       3) Thermal inversions data from
                       Ministry of Environment.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                       Identification strategy and                       Effects of the shock                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                               specification                                                                       mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Bharadwaj, Gibson,     1) Vital statistics: Universe of births   Sibling FE regressions control for child's    A 1 SD increase in CO exposure during the     By mother's educ:
Graff-Zivin, and       1992 -2002; N=627,530 births.             gender, & for seasonality, temperature,       3rd trimester of pregnancy:                   effects of CO exposure are larger for
Nielsen (2016).        2) Education data (SIMCE): test           precipitation, fog, wind, & month and         4th grade math test scores: -0.036 SD.        children of mothers w/out a high
Effect of fetal        scores (math, language) for               year FE.                                      4th grade language test scores: -0.042 SD.    school diploma.
exposure to carbon     e/student, 2002-2010.                     Models also include a measure of              No significant effects were observed in 1st   Language test scores: -0.096 SD in
monoxide on 4th        3) Data from pollution monitors (CO,      avoidance behavior based on air quality       or 2nd trim.                                  1st trim & -0.082 SD in 3rd trim
grade test scores in   PM10, O3), 1998-2001. Authors             alerts.                                       Sibling FE slightly larger than OLS           whereas for children more educ
Chile.                 construct an Air Quality Index (AQI).     As a robustness check, authors use PM10       estimates.                                    mothers effect is -0.029 sd in 3rd
                       4) Data on air quality alerts to help     instead of CO & include ozone pollution       Controlling for avoidance behavior, has a     trimester.
                       address concerns related to               level controls.                               modest impact on estimates.
                       avoidance behavior.
                       Data are merged using individual ids.




Billings and           1) Admin data from the "Lead              Children with 2 consecutive tests of 10       Children with high BLL who were assigned NA
Schnepel (2015).       Poisoning Prevention Program" in          micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood     to:
Effects of an Early    Charlotte NC, includes preschool          (µg/dL) receive an elevated Blood lead        Basic intervention: Antisocial behavior
Intervention for       blood lead level tests.                   level (BLL) intervention. DD: Compare         (Index based on absences & N of days
Children Exposed       2) Public school records: k-garten to     individuals in treatment group (2 tests       suspended, school reported crimes,
to Lead.               12th grade, 1998-1999 to 2010-2011.       with BLL>=10µg/dL) with control group         adolescent
                       3) Criminal arrest records 2006-2013.     (1st test with BLL>=10µg/dL & 2nd test of     criminal arrests, positive effect is good):
                       4) Birth certificate records from NC:     5µg/dL<=BLL<=10µg/dL).                        +0.179 SD.
                       1990-1997, provides parental info &       "Basic intervention": education for           Education (Index based on math & reading
                       child's BW.                               caregivers, optional home investigation,      test, grade retention): +0.128 SD.
                       5) County assessor’s data for all         referral to lead remediation services         Intensive intervention: Antisocial behavior:
                       parcels; match to lead test results       "Intensive intervention": services in basic   +0.382 SD. Education: +0.368 SD.
                       based on home address.                    + nutritional assessment + medical
                       N=312 children (treatment 119;            evaluation + WIC
                       control 193).
                       Authors match 54% to 86% of data.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                          Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity in
                                                                                specification                                                                           mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Black, Bütikofer,     1) Norwegian registry data covers the       Regional fallout was determined by wind,        A 1 SD increase in monthly exposure to          Little evidence for non-linearities
Devereux, and         population of Norwegians up to 2009         rainfall, & topography. Significant fallout     ground(air) radiation:                          (the estimates are monotonically
Salvanes (2014).      (education register, family register,       in 1957-1958 & in 1962 -1963.                   Male IQ scores: -0.04 (-0.06) of a SD (effect   increasing in magnitude w/quintile);
Ask how prenatal      tax and earnings register); N=37,000.       Authors compare individuals born within         size: -2% (-1%) of a SD) (exposure in           only for quintiles 3-5 of exposure
exposure to fallout   2) Norwegian military records,              the same municipality but born in diff.         months 3 & 4).                                  that there are any significant
from above ground     provides IQ scores for men only;            month/year of birth (and thus exposed to        Yrs of schooling: -0.08 (-1%) (men), -0.1 (-    negative impacts of radioactive
nuclear testing in    N=94,649.                                   different levels of radiation in utero).        1%) (women) (exposure in months 3 & 4).         fallout.
the 1950s and         3) Norwegian Defense Research               Models include individual/family                Earnings and adult height: negative             Effects are greater for individuals
1960s affected IQ,    Establishment : Total beta radiation        charact,municipality of birth FE & YOB*         although weak effects.                          born to more highly educated
earnings,             in the air expressed as Bq/m3, and          month of birth FE's, municipality linear        Intergenerational transmission of HK:           parents.
education at 18-35    (ii) total beta radiation on the            trends, interactions between municp*yr,         Exposure of parents in utero
years in Norway.      ground) expressed in Bq/m2.                 & munip*month sibling FE.                       leads to Son's IQ: -0.025 of a SD (no effect
                                                                                                                  for daughters).




Currie (2011).        1) Individual-Level                         DD model: Exploit timing in exposure to         Following cleanups, mothers in the              Whites and educated mothers are
Asks whether          Natality Data, 5 large states (FL, MI,      the pollution cleanups & the distance of        immediate vicinity of a Superfund site are      more likely to respond to
minority and less     NJ, PA, & TX), 1989 (N= 3,948,042           mother's residence to pollution sites.          more likely to be: “white college educated”     information or changes in pollution
educated mothers      singleton births) & 2006                    The treatment is "Close × (After                mothers: +10.1%.                                levels, which may partially explain
are more likely to    (N=4,121,898); data include a               Cleanup)" which represents the extent to        Also, white college educated mothers are        lower exposure levels.
be exposed to         mother's residential location.              which the area surrounding a Superfund          more likely to leave an area when new
toxic releases from   2) Data on pollution: Superfund sites       site became “Y” (e.g., "whiter") after a        information about toxic releases is
plants and/or         (see column J) & facilities listed in the   cleanup.                                        revealed -8.7%.
Superfund sites       EPA TRI.                                    Models include rich mother controls &
during pregnancy                                                  controls for county & yr of child's birth FE.
in 5 large U.S.                                                   Also examine effects of information
states.                                                           about toxic release inventory sites on
                                                                  migration.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                       Micro - Data, N                         Identification strategy and                       Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity in
                                                                                  specification                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Currie, Graff Zivin,   1) NJ vital statistics natality data - all   Sibling FE with IV (instrument for actual     Living in a water district with contaminated   LBW: + 14.6% (of a SD) for mothers
Meckel, et al.         births, 1997-2007, include mother's          contamination using the contamination         water during pregnancy:                        with HS educ or less;
(2013). Asks how       residence, siblings matched using            that would have been experienced had          using mother-FE + IV:                          Prob(preterm birth): +10.3% (of a
potential exposure     mother’s full maiden name, race &            gestation lasted exactly 39 weeks).           LBW: +6% due to any chemical cont. +14%        SD) for mothers with HS educ or
to contaminated        birth date, father’s information, &          Models control for temperature & other        due to any contamination.                      less.
drinking water         SSN; N=521,978.                              controls, & year*month of birth effects.      Prob(preterm): no effects (full sample).
affects birth          2) Records of drinking water                 Authors address the mechanical                Authors address the mechanical
outcomes in New        violations in NJ, 1997-2007.                 correlation btw gestation length, and         correlation btw gestation length &
Jersey.                3) Temperature & precipitation               exposures by using IV.                        exposures by using IV.
                       statistics.
                       4) Map of drinking water service
                       areas in New Jersey.

Currie and Walker      1) Vital Statistics Natality records         Exploit the introduction of electronic toll E-ZPass adoption reduced NO2 by 10.8%, African Americans only:
(2011). Estimate       from PA, 1997-2002.                          collection (E-ZPass).                       likely reduced CO by 40% near toll plazas. Prematurity: -22.4%
effects of E-ZPass     2) Vital Statistics Natality records         Diff-in-Diff: compare mothers within 2 km   E-ZPass adoption (comparing children of     LBW: -29.5%
(which reduced         from NJ, 1994-2003.                          of a toll plaza to mothers who are 2 to 10  mothers within 2 km of a toll plaza to
traffic congestion     3) Data on housing prices in NJ, 1989-       km from a toll plaza.                       those of mothers who are 2 to 10 km from
and vehicle            2009 to test if housing prices.                                                          a toll plaza):
emissions near         N= 412,884 observations.                     Models include month and year of birth Prematurity: -9.0 %; LBW: -11.3%.
highway toll           Authors know the exact addresses of          FE, toll plaza FE, distance to highway, and A 1-4% decline in pollution from cars leads
plazas) on birth       mothers.                                     maternal characteristics.                   to a 1% decline in LBW.
outcomes.



Ferrie, Rolf, and      1) 5% sample of the 1930 U.S. Pop            Authors use "enlistee’s state of birth" to    Intelligence (dummy for assignment to the      Living in a city with acidic water
Troesken (2014).       Census.                                      identify early-exposure to lead. Water        Army Air Corps):                               increases the probability that a
Asks how lead in       2) Data on assignment to the air             with high ph creates scale in lead pipes      The probability of assignment to air corps     recruit from a blue collar family was
the water supply in    corps among Army recruits during             which reduces lead in water.                  was significantly reduced when water pH        assigned to the air corps by 7%. No
the early 20th         WWII.                                        Models include year & state of birth FE, a    decreased (below 7.5) or increased (above      effect for recruits from white collar
century affected       N=44,040 enlistees in 293 cities.            dummy for SES and an interaction btw          7.5), and this U-shape relationship was        families.
the intelligence of    3) Data on pH level of water used by         SES and both pH and pH-squared.               particularly strong for enlistees from low     Similar contrasts observed
Army Air Corps         the public water company in the                                                            SES backgrounds.                               comparing children from
members in WWII.       enlistee’s city of residence & w/the                                                                                                      unemployed vs. employed fathers
                       enlistee’s air corps status.                                                                                                              and in HH's with low rent vs. high
                                                                                                                                                                 rent.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                       Identification strategy and                          Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity in
                                                                               specification                                                                              mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Isen, Rossin-Slater, Longitudinal Employer Household             Exploit sharp changes in ambient air            A 10 unit decrease in TSP in-utero:               By percentiles of the earnings
and Walker (2016). Dynamics (LEHD); 1998-2007,                   pollution due to the implementation of          Quarters employed: +0.7%                          distribution: most of the mean
Effects of           includes location & DOB. N=5.7M             the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments               Annual earnings: +1%                              earnings effect is being driven by
reductions in air    indiv.; universe of employed                (CAAA) to investigate effects of cleaner        Gains in lifetime income: +$4,300 (using a        the bottom tail of the distribution
pollution in non- workforce quarterly earnings                   air on adult earnings.                          5% annual discount rate) (2008 dollars).          (CAAA is associated with a decrease
attainment           records; authors collapse data to the       Compare cohorts born just before & just         Total wage bill attributable to improved          in the fraction of indiv. at the
counties due to      county*year (888 units in total).           after the CAAA. Three methods:                  early life air quality: $6.5Bill. /cohort (2008   bottom tail of the distrib. & an
the 1970 Clean Air Earnings records: UI-covered                  1) reduced form model of the LT effect of       dollars).                                         increase in the fractions in middle
Acts on              earnings by employer/ quarter.              TSP on earnings; these models include           1st stage:                                        parts of the distribution).
employment and Algorithm to match county of birth in             county FE, birth-                               CAAA reduced TSP concentrations by 8-12           Authors find little heterogeneity in
earnings at ages 29- LEHD to GNIS (95% of indiv.                 state*year FE, indiv. controls.                 g/m3 (10% reduction; mean 95.9 g/m3).             effects of TSP on labor market
31.                  matched).                                   2) two-step estimator: to construct group-                                                        outcomes across age groups (age
                     2) Authors match data to the REIS for       level adjusted earnings (p. 9).                                                                   28, 29, 30, & 31).
                     county characteristics.                     3) IV for air quality in county at birth. IV:                                                     Little heterogeneity across gender,
                     3) Authors match data to NCHS to            dummy for the 1970 CAAA introduction                                                              race (results not shown).
                     examine infant health & use                 at the county-year level.
                     maternal, paternal, child
                     characteristics.



Knittel, Miller, and   1) Vital statistics, 2002-2007, birth &   Exploit the relationship between traffic        A one-unit decrease in PM10:                      A one-unit decrease in PM10:
Sanders (2011).        death records.                            fluctuations, ambient weather conditions,       Infant mortality: -18 lives per 100,000 live      Blacks: no effect (but perhaps few
Ask how zip code       2) Freeway Performance                    & various pollutants (CO, PM10                  births (-6%).                                     blacks in CA).
level variations in    Measurement System (PeMS); traffic        micrometers, & ground-level ozone) at           Neither CO nor ozone have a statistically         Births covered by Medicaid: -23
air pollution due to   measures from freeways in                 the week & zip-code levels in CA.               significant impact on child mortality.            lives per 100,000 live births (~-8%).
traffic patterns       Sacramento Valley, the Bay Area, &        Instrument for week-to-week pollution           1st stage: local pollution instrumented by        Births to HS dropouts: -29 lives per
affect infant health   Los Angeles Basin.                        using zip-level traffic & zip-level traffic     car traffic & the interaction btw car traffic     100,000 live births (~-10%).
outcomes in            3) EPA data on ambient pollution          interacted w/linear & quadratic weather         & weather measures is strong; however,
California.            levels.                                   variables).                                     authors do not show results on 1st stage.
                       4) National Climatic Data Center info     Models include rich weather and
                       on ambient weather conditions.            individual-level controls, a flexible spline
                       Authors collapse the data into            in age in weeks, zip_code FE,
                       mother zip code by birth week by          zip*month*year FE.
                       total weeks survived cells; N=
                       1,436,739 obs.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
      Study                    Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and                      Effects of the shock                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                          specification                                                                      mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Pollution
Sanders (2012).      1) Texas Education Agency (TEA)         Counties with more manufacturing saw        A 1SD decrease in TSP in a student’s year    Results are significant only in the
Asks how variation   includes data on the Texas              greater decreases in pollution in the       of birth:                                    periods of the most drastic
pollution in the     Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS)    recession of 1981-1983.                     High school test scores: 0.06 of a SD .      pollution variation, suggesting a
county and year of   & on the Texas Learning Index (TLI),    Instrument pollution levels using county-   1st-stage: a 1pp increase in the ratio of    subtle relationship that may be
birth affects 10th   1994-2002, 10th graders; N=             level changes in relative manufacturing     relative manufacturing employment            difficult to separate from
grade math test      1,902,463 studentsin 416 schools        employment.                                 increases ambient TSP levels by 0.61         background trends.
scores in Texas.     across 30 countie .                     Instrument=TSPs as a function of all        μg/m3 (F-test~33).
                     2) EPA database of historical air       workers in a county employed                IV estimates are larger than OLS estimates
                     quality; includes readings              in the manufacturing industry (SIC code     (0.06 vesus 0.02 of a SD) which could be
                     from all pollution monitors within 20   400) /total county employment levels in     due to: measurement error & the fact that
                     miles of a county population            all other sectors in a given year.          IV identify local effects.
                     centroid.                               Estimates are LATE. Models include rich
                     3) Global Surface Summary of the        controls, school FE, year of test FE,
                     day: weather data.                      school*year pupil-to-teacher ratios from
                     4) REIS data on county                  the CCD. Data is collapsed by
                     characteristics.                        demographic group, school of
                                                             attendance, year of birth, and year of
                                                             test; regressions are weighted.
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                      Micro - Data, N                          Identification strategy and                            Effects of the shock                    Heterogeneity in
                                                                                specification                                                                          mechanisms/effects
Panel E: Weather
Aguero (2014).      ENSANUT: Mexico's health & nutrition         Exploit year-to-year variation in temperature        Hotter temperatures in infancy &            Author includes interaction
Examines the        survey; cross-section; includes e/person’s   across districts in Mexico.                          adolescence (two periods when human         terms with all the temperature
effect of high      age & location; nationally rep.              Author claims that the year-to-year variation        growth is fastest) are negatively           variables:
temperatures at     waves: 2000, 2006, 2012. N=65,000.           in weather is orthogonal to other                    associated with adult height.               By gender: no differences.
various ages in     2) Mexico’s National Weather Service:        unobserved determinants affecting health             Being exposed to hotter temperatures        By district poverty level:
childhood on        includes meteorological stations across      status. Models include controls to                   prior to birth & in childhood is NOT        negative effects of hot temp
adult heights in    the country.                                 approximate initial health endowment, FE's           associated w/future height.                 are stronger for individuals
Mexico.             3) District-level poverty index from         at the district, birth cohort, survey year,                                                      living in poorer districts.
                    CONAPO.                                      state time trends.                                                                               Hot temp help amplify health
                    Match HH data w/weather info using the       Author reports effects of temp by stages: i)                                                     differences by SES.
                    coordinates of each station & the district   in utero (exposure in the year before birth),
                    where each individual lives.                 ii) infancy (ages 1-4), iii) childhood (5-9), iv)
                                                                 adolescence (10-15).




Krutikova and       1) the Kagera Health and Development         Exploit the geographic and temporal                  A 10% increase in rainfall from the LR      By gender: little difference in
Lilleor (2015).     Survey (KHDS); Baseline 1991-1994 (915       variation in rainfall across villages in rural       avg:                                        the effects of rainfall.
Variations in       households in 51 villages), 1st follow-up    Tanzania.                                            "Core self-evaluation" (relative to
rainfall in rural   in 2004 (sample expanded to 2500 HHs);       Siblings FE models. The coefficient of               siblings): +0.08 SD. (Note: no descriptive
Tanzania in 10      2nd follow-up in 2010 (sample expanded       interest is the effect of rainfall in utero, in 0-   table with outcomes to convert the
years around        to 3300 HHs). The last waves include the     1, 1-2 years of life.                                coefficient).
birth on            outcome of interest. Final sample N=897                                                           Effect is significant ONLY in utero and not
outcomes at 17      individuals.                                                                                      in the first 2 years of life.
to 28.              2) Rainfall data at the monthly - village                                                         By trimester: the effect is similar across
                    level.                                                                                            all trimesters (beta= 0.08SD).
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                      Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                        Effects of the shock                    Heterogeneity in
                                                                              specification                                                                      mechanisms/effects
Panel E: Weather
Rocha and           1) Birth and mortality registration         Exploit variation in rainfall at the             A 1 SD increase in rainfall:                By child's gender: slightly
Soares (2014).      records used to create a municipality-by-   municipality & monthly levels.                   Infant mortality: -5% w.r.t. the sample     higher effects for girls,
Rainfall            month panel, 1996 -2010; N=188,640          Health outcomes (measured as the                 avg of 30 deaths/ 1000 births.              particularly for intestinal
fluctuations in     obs.                                        municipality avg for children born in            BW: +1.6 grams (+0.05% = +0.03 SD).         infections, malnutrition, &
semi-arid parts     2) Precipitation & temperature              municipality i, on year y, month t) are          Fraction of full-term pregnancies: +0.3pp   perinatal conditions; BW
of Brazil during    municipality-by-month weather data.         regressed on avgerage temperature in the         (+0.32% = +0.027 SD).                       effects are larger for girls than
gestational         3) Census of 2000 & 2010: provides          municipality over last 12-months,                Effects are stronger during the 2nd         for boys, while the coefficients
period and          municipality info on the % of households    municipality-by-month of birth FE, year of       trimester of gestation, for children born   for length of gestation are
effects on birth    w/access to piped water, sanitation.        birth FE, & municipality-level trends.           during the dry season, & for mortality      almost identical across
weight and                                                                                                       immediately after birth.                    genders.
infant mortality.                                                                                                Potential benefits from expanding the
                                                                                                                 piped water & sanitation systems exceed
                                                                                                                 the cost.




Rosales (2015).     1) Longitudinal HH survey on Ecuador’s      DD model:                                        Exposure to El Nino floods (avg exp 3       1) By maternal educ: effects on
Effects of          cash transfer program "Bono de              Compare regions that experienced El Nino         mths):                                      PPVT are smaller for children
exposure to El      Desarrollo Humano."                         vs. those that did not and during the years of   HAZ= -0.09 of 1SD (effects 3rd trim);       w/more educated mothers
Nino floods in      1st wave: 2003-2004; 2nd wave: 2005-        El Nino 1998/1999 versus previous years.         PPVT= -0.13 of 1SD (effects 1st trim)       (effects: - 0.02 SD).
utero and during    2006; N~8,000 children. Sample over-        Model includes individual controls, village of   LBW= +2.3pp (3rd trim) (14.6% = 0.06 of     2) By rural/urban: effects on
1st year on birth   represents poor families.                   residence FE, year of child's birth FE.          a SD).                                      PPVT are stronger for rural
weight, height,     2) Reproductive and Health Survey (RHS):                                                                                                 children (effects: -0.01 SD).
and test scores.    1994, 1999.                                                                                                                              3) By SES index (1-2 quintiles
                    3) Living Standards Measurement Survey                                                                                                   vs. 4-5): effects on LBW
                    (LSMS): 1995, 1998, 1999. Last two are                                                                                                   significant for children in low
                    nationally representative.                                                                                                               quintiles (effects: +3.2pp).
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
     Study                       Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                         Effects of the shock                     Heterogeneity in
                                                                               specification                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Panel E: Weather
Shah and Millett     1) Survey on educational achievement of     Rainfall varition: within district & across       Children exposed to drought this year or     By mother's education: effects
Steinberg (2016).    primary school children in rural India      districts within a year. Authors explore          last year:                                   are exclusively concentrated
Rainfall shocks in   conducted every year over 5 years from      different periods of exposure: i) current         Test scores: +0.09pp (+0.07 SD = +4.1%).     among children whose
rural India in       2005-2009; N=2 million children.            shocks; ii) exposure in utero up to age 4; iii)   Years education: +0.02.                      mother's had no schooling.
utero and            2) Monthly district rainfall data.          exposure in utero up to age 16.                   Children exposed to flood: Test scores: -    By districts w/more
current on           3) NSS (National Sample Survey)             Sibling FE models also include district FE, age   0.05pp (-0.037 SD = -2.3%).                  educational expenditure:
outcomes for         collected by the Government of India's in   FE, year of survey FE.                            Test scores (exposure@11-13 &                Investments in educ help
children and         2004-2008; includes information on                                                            outcome@16): 0.05pp.                         mitigate the negative effect of
young adults.        wages, labor, etc.                                                                            Drought in utero to age 4: Test scores: -    rainfall on test scores.
                                                                                                                   0.014 SD = -0.9%.
                                                                                                                   Never enrolled in school: +8% (+0.01SD).
                                                                                                                   Child not on track: +3pp (0.08 SD = 3.7%).
                                                                                                                   Test scores (exposure in utero &
                                                                                                                   outcome @age 16): -+0.05pp. Years
                                                                                                                   education: +0.02.
                                                                                                                   Children exposed to a flood in utero to
                                                                                                                   age 4: Test score: +0.03pp (0.02
                                                                                                                   SD=1.4%). Years education: -0.02.

Wernerfelt,          Two independent datasets:                   Exploit the exogenous                             Doubling the amount of sunshine in an NA
Slusky, and          1) NHIS: private individual-level data,     within-location variation in sunlight levels      individual’s location during the 2nd trim:
Zeckhauser           aggregated by state, month, & year of       across birth years in location of birth.          Dataset 1)
(2016). Effects      birth, 1914-1987, N=260,000.                Assumes sunlight variation correlates             Prob(report asthma diagnosed): -1.15pp
of in utero          NHIS data merged w/ historical weather      w/actual exposure, but not w/ other factors       (-10%) (no standard deviations provided).
exposure to          data from the NOAA.                         affecting asthma incidence. Regressions           Dataset 2)
sunlight (vitamin    2) Asthma hospital discharge data from      include state of birth * month of birth FE,       Rate of asthma emergency department
D) on childhood      NJ & AZ, from the Health Care Utilization   year of birth FE.                                 discharges: -2.21pp (-21.3%) (no
asthma up to         Project and birth records from Vital                                                          standard deviations provided).
age 10.              Statistics; data aggreggated at the                                                           No effects in 1st or 3rd trimester in
                     county, birth month, & year of birth,                                                         either data set.
                     1999-2009; N=2.1 million births (3,000
                     birth month by county cohorts).
Table 1: Effects of Mild Early Life Shocks on Future Outcomes
       Study                       Micro - Data, N                                  Identification strategy and specification                                                      Effects of the shock                                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             mechanisms/effects
Panel F: Alcohol and Tobacco Policy
Barreca and Page        1) Birth outcomes from the National        DDD approach: exploiting variation in MLDA laws that occurred across states           Children of mothers 18-20 years old exposed to the MLDA of 18 years         By race - A MLDA of 18 years:
(2015). Focus on        Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)        in 1970s-1980s. Comparing birth outcomes btw: Treatment: infants of                   experience:                                                                 Whites:
effects of changes in   natality                                   mother's 14–20 years old and Control group: infants born to mothers 21-24             LBW: -0.10pp (-1.2%) (Table 1 does not include SD!)                         LBW: small increase
minimum legal           files (1968–1989), N= 73,973.              years old.                                                                            Female child: +0.18pp (+0.4%)                                               Sex ratio: no effects
drinking age in state   2) Month-year MDLA data from                Models include state of birth, month, & yearof birth FE, & age-by-year FE &          No effects on Apgar, preterm birth, congential defects.                     Blacks' fetuses are positively selected:
and year of birth,      Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S.      state-by-age FE.                                                                                                                                                  Preterm: -0.3pp
1978-1988.              Datasets matched by mother’s                                                                                                                                                                                 Sex ratio: +0.462pp.
                        estimated age at conception, month of
                        conception, & mother’s state of
                        residence at delivery.


Bharadwaj,              1) Birth records for all Norwegian         Exploit a smoking ban in Norway as a natural experiment. Authors are able to          Mothers who benefited while pregnant: VLBW: -1.8pp (-0.6pp controlling      Effects of the reform: stronger for       N
Johnsen, and Løken      births, 1967 to 2010, includes unique      identify mothers who worked in restaurants & bars during the period of                for gestational age = -26% = -0.04 SD).                                     mothers who reported smoking at start
(2014). Effects of a    identifiers , & smoking behavior at the    interest. DD: by compares outcomes before & after the law change for                  Pre-term: -2.5pp (-39% = -0.10 of a SD).                                    of pregnancy.
smoking ban in          start and end of pregnancy.                people working in restaurants & bars to the same difference among people              Twin FE: children born after the reform have better health outcomes.        BW: +160 gr (mothers who smoked at
restaurants/stores      2) Longitudinal administrative records:    who work in a similar occupations. Also estimate twin FE models.                      BW: +175gr (most of the effects come from the lower tails of the BW         the start of preg; effect is concentrated
in Norway on health     1967-2010 (includes gender, DOB, city,                                                                                           distribution). VLBW: -5.8pp .                                               at the lower tails of the BW
at birth.               marital status, years of education, LFP,                                                                                         A 100 g increase in BW increases adult income at 28 by 1.7%, & income       distribution); no effect on non-smoking
                        earnings, occupation).                                                                                                           conditional on full time employment by 0.7%.                                mothers.
                        N=4,030.



Nilsson (2015).         1) LOUISE database covering all            Exploit an alcohol policy in Sweeden in the late 1960s that temporarily and           Children born to mothers under the age of 21 at delivery, in the            Effects of the policy: Earnings: -24%
The effect of alcohol   individuals of ages 16 to 65, living or    sharply increased access to strong beer in certain regions and among young            treatment regions, and conceived between July and October 1967:             (men only).
consumption during      working in Sweden 1990- 2004;              people. DDD: compare the cohort that was exposed to the policy change in-             Earnings: -24%                                                              Prob(no earnings): +74% (+8.3pp) (men
pregnancy on long-      includes year & month of birth, gender     utero to cohorts exposed at other moments in their life exploiting variation          Prob(no earnings): +56% (+7.2pp).                                           only).
term outcomes of        & region of birth, education, labor        in: i) year and month-of-birth, ii) region of birth, iii) age of the mother (below/   Prob(welfare recipient): +56% (+3.5pp).                                     Prob(welfare recipient): +79% (+4.5pp)
the first and second    market outcomes, welfare payments.         above age 21). Models include mother FE.                                              Prob(low cognitive ability): +27%.                                          (men); +40% (+2.7pp) (women).
generation.             Individuals linked to biological parents                                                                                         Prob(low non-cognitive ability): +16%.                                      _Years of schooling: -0.5 (-4.3%) (men);
                        using the “multi-generational” register.                                                                                         Years of schooling: -0.3 (-2.6%) .                                          -0.2 (-1.7%) (women).
                        N=4,104 obs.                                                                                                                     Effects on the next generation:                                             Males more likely to be premature or
                        2) Military enlistment data on cognitive                                                                                         Health at birth outcomes: no effects on prematurely born, LBW, sex ratio.   miscarried.
                        & non-cognitive outcomes for 18 year                                                                                                                                                                         Share of males: -7.3pp
                        old males.                                                                                                                                                                                                   Gestation length: -1 week (-0.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     months) (boys only).

Simon (2016).           1) NHIS - restricted-use geocoded data,    Exploit variation in cigarette taxes btw 1989-2007 at the state and municipal         A $1 dollar increase (in $2009) in state cigarette excise tax:              Effects are twice as big on less
Changes in maternal     1997-2010; N=118,271.                      levels. DD: identified off by variation in the timing & size of changes in taxes      Sick days from school: -10% (no SD available on outcomes).                  educated mothers. Effects are
smoking due to tax      2) Vital statistics, 1989–2004,            across states & over cohorts.                                                         2 or > doctor visits in past year: -4.5%.                                   significant for teen mothers but no
changes and health      N~2million.                                Models include state and year-month FE, demographic and state policy                  Hospitalizations: -19%.                                                     effects for children of older moms.
of U.S. 3-17 year                                                  controls, and linear time trends.                                                     Asthma attacks: -16%.
olds.
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                     Micro - Data, N                     Identification strategy and                        Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                            specification                                                                          mechanisms/effects
Adhvaryu and          DHS 1999; representative of women        Exploit the variation in in-utero exposure   A 1 SD increase in treatment exposure:          Vaccinations highly responsive to
Nyshadham (2016).     of reproductive age.                     to a large-scale iodine supplementation      Vaccination: +0.2 of a SD (polio 0.16pp,        parental observed benefits from the
Impact of iodine      N =456 children 0-5 (and their           program across districts. Linear Prob.       measles 4.5pp).                                 program… even when treated child is
supplementation in    mothers).                                Models include rich controls & district &    Breastfeeding >=6mths: +0.1 of a SD             younger/older, younger/older siblings
Tanzania on                                                    child's age FE.                              (3.5pp) (parents reinforce investments).        are more likely to receive additional
parental                                                       To test for resource allocation spillovers   Siblings of treated children were more          investments (i.e.vaccination.)
investments on                                                 across sibling, authors regress health       likely to be immunized (no effects on
children 0-5.                                                  investments on own and sibs’                 breastfeeding.)
                                                               accumulated treatment.

Baker and Milligan    1) Canada: National Longitudinal         Authors assume sex of 1st born child is      Controlling for parental time inputs in         Boys have lower reading and math
(2016). Ask how       Survey of Children and Youth             exogenous.                                   early life (ages 0-3) in baseline regressions   scores at school entry. Authors argue
differences in        (NLSCY); children born btw 1999-         Model regressions include demographic        reduces:                                        that this may be explained by
parental time         2004;                                    + SES controls and a dummy variable for      Gender gap (boy/girl) in reading scores:        parental time inputs.
investments are       2) US: Early Childhood Longitudinal      first born male child.                       -23% in US, -16% in UK, -33% in Canada.
related to gender     Survey-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B); children   The authors investigate how parental         Gender gap in Math scores:
gaps in reading and   born in 2001;                            investments change with child's age          -25% in US, -23% in U.K., and -33% in
math scores in        3) UK: Millennium Cohort Study           Twin FE: authors test the hypothesis that    Canada.
Canada, the U.S.,     (MCS); children born in 2000/2001;       parents treat opposite sex twins with
and the U.K. at       N=was not reported.                      greater similarity than parents generally
school entry.         4) US data from: i) American Time        treat sons and daughters (time inputs
                      Use Survey (ATUS); waves 2003-2011;      were asked separately for each twin in
                      ii) National Survey of Family Growth     the UK data).
                      (NSFG); waves: 2002 & 2006-08; and
                      Canadian data from the Maternity
                      Experiences Survey (MES).
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                      Identification strategy and                      Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                              specification                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Bharadwaj and          1) India: National Fertility and Health   Exploit the fact that some mothers had      Mother pregnant with a boy:                Larger effects in northern India.
Lakdawala (2013).      Survey (NFHS), waves: 1998–1999,          ultrasounds (so could discriminate          Attended prenatal care at least twice per
Investigate gender     2005 –2006.                               prenatally) while others did not. If        week (India): +1.8pp (3%) (+4.6% in
differences in         2) Bangladesh: Demography & Health        mother did not have ultrasound can only     Northern India where sex discrimination is
prenatal care,         Survey (DHS), waves: 1996–1997,           discriminate post-natally. Also expect      higher)
neonatal and early     1999– 2000, 2004, 2007.                   larger effects in places where sex          Tenanus: +3% (only sign. for Northern
childhood mortality    3) China: Health and Nutrition Survey     discimination is more severe (e.g.          India).
among mothers          (CHNS), waves: 1991, 1993, 1997,          Northern India). Models (linear & logit)    Results are only significant in the sample
who had an             2000, 2004, 2006.                         include a dummy for gender of fetus,        of mothers who had an ultrasound.
ultrasound in India,   Authors also use DHS data for other       mother/child controls (that includes        No evidence of sex-selective prenatal care
Bangladesh, and        countries: Pakistan (2006 –2007),         birth order, fam size, etc.), state FE &    in countries with weak or no son
China.                 Ghana (1993, 1998, 2003, 2008), Sri       year of birth FE                            preference (i.e., Ghana, Sri Lanka).
                       Lanka (1987), & Thailand (1987).                                                      Tetanus shots can explain 2.6–7.2% of the
                       N=32,012.                                                                             excess female neonatal mortality.




Breining, Daysal,      1) Bith register data from Denmark        RD that exploits changes in medical         A child with a VLBW sibling (with 32 weeks     Heterogeneity in the spillover effects
Simonsen, and          since 1970.                               treatment around the VLBW threshold         or more gestational length) who received       on sibling academic achievement
Trandafir (2015).      2) Emergency room                         (as in Almond et al., 2010).                medical treatment due to this condition,       varies by sibship characteristics that
Spillover effects of   visits data (available between 1995       Treatment group: siblings of a child with   experiences:                                   are most closely tied to the quality of
medical treatments     and 2011), provides inpatient hospital    BW just below 1,500 grams & with 32 or      Math test score (@age 15): +0.36 SD            peer interactions (gender of sibling,
received               admissions & mortality.                   more weeks of gestation                     Language test score (@age 15): +0.31 SD        gender composition of the sibling
by VLBW children       3) Data on academic achievement           Control group: siblings of a child with     High school enrollment (@age 15): +9.5pp       pair, and birth order).
on their siblings.     including 9th grade test scores           BW just above 1,500 grams & with 32 or      (+30%)
                       (available from 2002), high school        more weeks of gestation.                    Mortality (28-day & 1-year mortality) (ages
                       enrollment by age 19.                                                                 0-15): no effect
                       Final sample = 3,677 obs.                                                             Diagnosis of intellectual disability <age 5:
                                                                                                             no effect.
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                    Micro - Data, N                   Identification strategy and                      Effects of the shock                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                         specification                                                                      mechanisms/effects
Del Bono, Ermisch,   Three large representative samples:    To address endogeneity of choice of         1) Maternal smoking during preg:              More educated women are less likely
Francescon (2012).   1) UK: British Household Panel         birth inputs, use method of moments         BW: -190 to -200 grams (-5.6% = -0.34 of a to smoke and more likely to stop
Ask how smoking      Survey, longitudinal, 1991–2005,       estimator (similar to an IV-FE that uses    SD) (BHPS & MCS datasets); -139 grams         working three months before birth
and maternal work    N=1,339 singletons                     prenatal inputs during earlier              (NSFG) (-4.2% = -0.24 of a SD).               during their first three pregnancies.
stoppage before      2) UK: Millennium Cohort Study,        pregnancies as instruments for              Fetal growth: -5.4% (-0.36 of a SD) (BHPS); -
birth affect         longitudinal, years of birth: 2000 &   differences in inputs between               4.1% (-0.26 of a SD) (NSFG).
outcomes in the      2001, N=17,483 singletons              pregnancies). Identification assumption     2) 3 month-work stoppage in late preg:
U.S. and U.K., and   3) US: National Survey of Family       is that prenatal inputs associated with a   BW: 5.2% (0.3 of a SD)(BHPS); 1.8% (0.10
whether parents      Growth, authors use the 5th cycle      specific pregnancy are uncorrelated         of a SD) (NSFG).
respond to           (1995), data is retrospective on       w/the idiosyncratic child endowments.       Fetal growth: 3.5% (0.23 of a SD) (BHPS);
idiosyncratic        children who were born in 1970-        Authors estimate the direct effect of       1.3% (0.08 of a SD) (NSFG).
changes in one       1995, N=12,166 singletons.             inputs on birth outcomes (structural        "Parents respond to idiosyncratic
child's                                                     parameters) & the reduced form              endowment heterogeneity
endowments by                                               parental responses to realized child        in a way that is easier to reconcile with
altering                                                    endowments when choosing the inputs         inequity aversion."
investments in a                                            in successive pregnancies.
later child.
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                     Micro - Data, N                      Identification strategy and                       Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                             specification                                                                         mechanisms/effects
Dizon-Ross (2014).    1) Author conducted a sibling census      Randomly assigned half of the                The information delivered to parents           Poorer, less-educated
Investigate the       during January - March of                 households to a treatment group that         about their children's academic abilities:     parents have less accurate
effect of providing   2012, based on information on             received information about their             (1) Parents’ perceptions of their children’s   perceptions about their children’s
parents with          children participating in 39 schools in   children’s recent achievement test           achievement diverges from children’s true      academic abilities than
information           two districts in central Malawi (the      results in school, and half to a control     achievement: the gap is 1 SD.                  richer, more-educated parents, and
about their           Machinga and                              group, which did not receive                 (2) Parents reallocate educational             update their beliefs more in response
children’s true       Balaka districts)                         information                                  investments: Willingness-to-pay for            to improved
achievement on        2) Test data were gathered for all                                                     remedial math and English textbooks:           information.
parental              periodic exams administered at                                                         +1.3pp in subjects in which children were
investments.          school                                                                                 doing worse than expected.
                      N=3,464 households with at least                                                       Free subject-specific workbooks (remedial,
                      2 children enrolled in grades 2-6                                                      average, advanced): parents shifted their
                                                                                                             choices towards workbooks that
                                                                                                             corresponded more closely to their
                                                                                                             children’s true achievement level.




Cunha, Elo, and       1) Children of the National               Formulate a model of early childhood         1) Mothers underestimate the elasticity of NA
Culhane (2015).       Longitudinal Survey of Youth/1979         development in which mothers have            child development w.r.t. investments:
What would            (CNLSY/79); authors employ the            subjective                                   Mothers' subjective expectation about the
happen to             Motor‐Social Development Scale;           expectations about the tech. of skill        elasticity of their child developm't w.r.t.
investments & child   N=335 African American mothers.           formation. Empirically, the identification   investments is btw 4-19%, but authors
development if a                                                of the model poses a problem:                estimate ndicates elasticities btw 21-36%.
policy that moved                                               preferences and beliefs are confounded.      2) A policy that moved expectations from
expectations                                                    To solve this problem, authors create a      the median to objective estimates would
from the median to                                              survey instrument to elicit maternal         increase investment by 4% to 24% and
objective estimates                                             expectations about the tech. of skill        stocks of cognitive skills 24 months would
from the CNLSY/79                                               formation. Mothers are asked: "what is       increase by 1% to 5%. The impacts of such
data was                                                        the youngest and oldest age at which         a policy would be even higher for mothers
implemented?                                                    your baby will learn how to do task X or     whose expectations were < the median.
                                                                Y?" (the tasks are taken from the
                                                                Motor‐Social Development Scale of the
                                                                CNLSY/79 and NHANES). Authors exploit
                                                                within‐family variation to estimate the
                                                                parameters of the technology of skill
                                                                formation.
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                     Micro - Data, N                      Identification strategy and                       Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                             specification                                                                         mechanisms/effects
Fryer, Levitt, and    Longitudinal data collected for the       Randomized field experiment. Families        Children of parents who participate in the     Positive effects only among whites
List (2015). Effect   study includes pre-test characteristics   were randomly assigned to 3 groups:          intervention:                                  and Hispanics (little impact on Black
of parental           of the sample of children & families      1: parents paid in cash or via direct        Cognitive (PPVT; Woodcock Johnson III          children).
incentives on early   (year of data collection is 2011),        deposits for attendance at early-            Test of Achievement scores): no effect.        Students who started below the
childhood cognitive   children’s test scores in the middle of   childhood sessions; N=74; Treatment 2:       Non-cognitive (Blair and Willoughby            median non-cognitive skills,
and non-cognitive     the treatment year (January 2012) &       parents paid for attendance in early-        Executive Function scores, Preschool Self-     experienced no benefits in cognitive
achievement.          at the end of treatment (May 2012)        childhood program attendance via             Regulation Assessment score): +0.23 SD.        or non-cognitive outcomes, while
                      N= 260 families.                          deposits into a trust which can only be                                                     those who started with above the
                                                                accessed when the child enrolls in                                                          median non-cognitive skills,
                                                                college; N=84; Control group: parents                                                       experienced increases on both
                                                                not paid & did not attend early-                                                            cognitive & non-cognitive skills.
                                                                childhood sessions; N=99.




Hsin (2012). Ask      1) Time diaries from the PSID-CDS;        Sibling FE stimates of the effect of birth   Overall effect of birth endowments on          By mother's educ: College educated
whether maternal      time diaries are child-specific, the      endowments on parental investments &         parental time investments & the                mothers compensate by investing
time investments      PSID collected time diaries & child       include interactions between child           interaction between BW*mother's                more in LBW children: children
from 0-12             info for up to two randomly selected      endowment & characteristics such as          characteristics:                               receive +0.65 SD (total time), +1 SD
compensate or         children within each family; time-        mother’s education or family income          Total hours per week: no effect                (educational time).
reinforce birth       diaries sample weekdays & weekends        Models include rich controls,                Hours devoted to activities that develop       Mothers with <=12 years of
weight differences    for 24 hours; N1,516 children, or 758     interactions between birth                   the child’s human capital (reading, playing,   education concentrate resources on
and whether           sibling pairs.                            endowments*SES, and splines to               doing hobbies, etc): no effect.                higher BW children: non-LBW
effects differ by                                               measure family SES.                                                                         children receiv +0.17 SD total time & -
SES.                                                                                                                                                        0.10SD educational time than LBW
                                                                                                                                                            siblings.
Table 2: Parental Investments
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and                     Effects of the shock                          Heterogeneity in
                                                                            specification                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Yi, Heckman,           Chinese Child Twins Survey (CCTS);      Early health shocks affect children both   When a twin child suffered from a serious       Rural areas: Increase in health
Zhang, and Conti       includes detailed info on family        biologically and by affecting parental     disease at ages 0-3:                            expenditures in favor of the sick twin
(2014). Asks how       health & educ investments for           responses. Assume that "the within-        Parental investments:                           is not accompanied by a decrease in
Chinese parents        e/child; conducted in 2002 to 2003 in   twin variation in early health shocks is   Health investments in the sick twin ($          educational expenditures.
alter investments in   the province of Kunming, China;         random and exogenous."                     spent on medical treatment, medicine,           Urban areas: the fall in educational
twins at ages 6-18     N=1,694 households with twins.          To estimate effects of health shocks on    health products): + RMB 305 (+$49 US)           expenditures on the sick child offsets
in response to the                                             child's outcomes and address the           (+35% = +0.39 SD).                              the cost of medical expenses.
serious illness of                                             possibility that family investments may    Educational investments in the sick twin        Compensating investments and
one twin at age 0-                                             be endogenous, authors use an IV based     (tuition + $ spent on books, stationery,        reinforcing educational investments
3.                                                             on within-twin variations in BW, gender    home tutors, tutoring class): RMD -182 (-       are more precisely determined
                                                               and HH level variables (rural indicator,   $30 US) (-20% = -0.15 SD).                      among high education mothers and in
                                                               maternal working sector, age, ethnicity,   Child outcome results suggest that              female twins. Wealthier households
                                                               and schooling).                            parental investments equalize health but        have more reinforcing educational
                                                                                                          increase disparities in education in favor of   investments.
                                                                                                          the healthier twin.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                       Micro - Data, N                     Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Adhvaryu, Fenske,     1) Cocoa prices time series.                  HH's in the cocoa-producing regions of Ghana         A 1 SD rise in the cocoa price in the year By gender: very mild differences across
and Nyshadham         2) EGC-ISSER Socioeconomic Panel;             experience changes in the real producer price of     of birth:                                   males and females.
(2016). Effects of    baseline data on cocoa production Nov.        cocoa as income shocks, while HH's in regions        Kessler Psychological Distress scale: -2pp By timing of exposure: Shocks in the
cocoa price shocks    2009 to April 2010; plots of land & type      that do not produce cocoa are unaffected by          (-0.08 SD; -1.0%).                          first 4 years of life have significant
in Ghana in year of   of crops, 10 regions; data also includes      these fluctuations.                                  Severe distress (Kessler scale>10): -3pp (- effects, though effects are largest in
birth on mental       Kessler Psychological Distress scale-10       Linear models include region r and year of birth t   0.13 SD; -4.5%).                            the YOB.
and physical adult    questions. N= 7,741 individuals.              FE and individual and HH controls; some              Physical health:
health.               3) Demographic and Health Survey;             specifications include region linear & quadratic     Height: +1.23cm (no avg. height
                      waves: 1988, 1993, 1998, 2003, 2008;          time trends, rainfall & temperature controls, as     provided in descriptive stats)
                      nationally representative cross-sections      well as household FE.                                BMI, savings, occupation: no effect.
                      women 15-49.




Almond, Hoynes,       Vital statistics - Natality & death records   Use the county-by-county rollout of the FSP.         Food stamps during pregnancy increase     Largest impacts at lower BWs. LBW: -
and Schazenbach       1959-1977; N~2M observations per year.        Model regressions include county level controls,     BW by:                                    7% for whites, -5% to -11% for blacks.
(2011). Effects of    SEER population data (to construct            county and year of birth FE, state*year FE,          Whites +2.04 gr (effect size= 0.06%)      Poor counties face +3.41g BW, no
introduction of the   fertility rates).                             interactions of pretreatment county                  Blacks +3.45gr (e.s. =0.08%).             effect in wealthier counties. Larger
U.S. Food Stamp                                                     characteristics with time trends.                    Estimate of TOT effect (after adjusting   effects in the South and in urban
Program on birth                                                    Event time study: Authors do not have                by participation rate) on BW:             counties.
weight and                                                          information about FS participation or data to        Whites: +15 to 20gr (effect size: 0.5-    Larger impacts for older mothers.
fertility.                                                          impute eligibility (e.g., income). So they use the   0.6%)                                     Black single mothers experienced larger
                                                                    1980 CPS to calculate FSP participation rates for    Blacks: +13 to 42 gr (0.4-1.4%).          impacts than all black women.
                                                                    women with a child <5.                               No statistically significant effects on
                                                                                                                         fertility or neonatal mortality.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                        Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and specification                    Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Aizer, Eli, Ferrie,    1) Individual-level administrative records   Compare children of mothers who applied to the        Effect of access to the Mother's Pension Effects are driven by the poorest
and Lleras-Muney       of applicants to the Mothers’ Pension        MP transfers & were given the receipt, to the         program:                                 families in the sample.
(2016). Examines       program:                                     children of mothers who applied for transfers         Longevity: +1.5 years (+2.1%) (no
the long run effects   N=16,000 children from 11 states who         but were denied. Rejected mothers were on             standard deviations provided in
of the US Mother's     were born 1900-1925.                         average slightly better-off based on observable       descriptives).
Pension Program        2) WWII enlistment records.                  characteristics. Hence, the effects of the            Prob(of survival past age 70): +10-20%.
on child survival by   3) 1940 census records.                      program are likely to understate the benefits of      Prob(of survival past age 80): 9-15%.
comparing              4) Social Security Death Master File         the program.
mothers who were       (DMF); name, date of birth, date of          Models include state-level, time-varying
accepted and those     death, SSN for 88 million deaths             characteristics (i.e., ratio of state manufacturing
who were rejected      reported from 1965-2012.                     earnings to national manufacturing earnings,
from the program.      Authors matched administrative data to       laws governing school attendance, expenditures
                       census, WWII, & death records. Able to       on social programs, education & charitable
                       match 48% of sample to a unique death        institutions, hospitals & prisons); county-level
                       record. Females could not be matched         characteristics in 1910, county & cohort FE.
                       due to name changes.




Akee, Simeonova,       The "Great Smoky Mountains Study of          A casino opened on the Eastern Cherokee               Child resides in a household that        Income transfer improved child
Costello, et al        Youth": longitudinal survey of 1,420         reservation and part of profits were distributed      receives the unearned income transfers   outcomes through better parent-child
(2015). The effect     children aged 9, 11, 13 years at the         per capita to all adult tribal members (Transfer=     due to the casino revenues:              relationsp and not necessarily through
of a permanent         survey intake, who were recruited from       $4,000 annually; amount comparable to TANF or         Behavioral disorders: -0.27 SD           more parental time investments
increase in            11 counties in western NC; follow-ups        SNAP).                                                Emotional disorders: -0.36 SD            "parents who receive the $ provide
unearned               occur annually until ages 16, 19, 21         DD: Compare outcomes for adolescents who              Personality traits:                      investments in their childrenwith lower
household income       N=6,050 children.                            resided in households with extra income               Conscientiousness: -0.43 SD              than avg. personality traits and lower
on children’s                                                       (youngest and middle age cohorts of American          Agreeableness: -0.31 SD                  than avg. amounts of behavioral and
emotional,                                                          Indian children) to adolescents who were not          Neuroticism: no effect                   emotional problems" (i.e.,
behavioral, health,                                                 exposed to the extra income by age 16 (the                                                     compensatory responses)
and personality                                                     oldest age cohort).
traits.                                                             Models include individual FE, age FE, age*race FE
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                      Micro - Data, N                  Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Barham, Macours,     1) Household data from the phase -in &     42 localities in 6 municipalities were randomized    Boys exposed to the program in utero up NA
and Maluccio         follow-up of the randomized CCT            into early-treatment (21) vs. late treatment (21);   to age 2 vs. ages 2-5:
(2013). Examine      experiment; years 2000 & 2010;             groups were stratified by their poverty level        Cognitive outcomes: +0.15 SD
the effect of        N= 171 boys in the "early treatment"       Treatment group - "early-treatment" boys were        Anthropometrics: no effect.
Conditional Cash     group + N= 197 boys in the "late           exposed to the program from in-utero to age 2.
Transfers received   treatment group" born up to 1 year after   Control group "late treament" boys were
in utero to age 2    CCT started (Oct, 2001).                   exposed from ages 2 to 5.
vs. ages 2-5 in                                                 Models include birth month FE, stratification
Nicaragua on                                                    dummies to account for the stratification in the
cognitive and                                                   randomization (i.e., poverty).
health outcomes.




Bharadwaj,           1) Swedish registry data on births: data   Compare cohorts who were born years before           A 10% increase in BW:                       One potential mechanism driving the
Lundborg, and        on all twins born in 1929-1956; N=5,000    the economic crisis (1985-1990) with cohorts         Receives unemployment insurance: -1%        effects is "occupational sorting in the
Rooth (2014).        twins.                                     born few years after the crisis (1993-1998);         (no SD available)                           pre- crisis years". Affected cohorts
Explore whether      2) UREG: data on individual years of       Include twin FE.                                     Years receiving UI: -0.4 years (-80%)       were less likely to be employed in the
low birth weight     schooling, 1990-2007.                      Assumptions:                                         "a 10% increase in BW (approx. 260          public sector and less likely to enter a
affects how one is   3) Income data: equivalent of W2           Post-birth investments within twin pairs are not     grams) results in a 0.008pp lower prob      white collar job.
affected during      records in the US, 1981-2005.              correlated to birth weight.                          of being on unemp insurance."
economic             4) Statistics Sweden: provides info on
downturns.           occupation for 1985 and 1990.


Black, Devereux,     1) Administ. data covering the entire      Exploit sharp discontinuities in the price of        Being eligible for lower CC prices at age   NA
Løken, and           population of Norway, cohorts: 1986-       childcare (CC) by income.                            5:
Salvanes (2014).     1992; authors link individuals to their    Compare outcomes of children whose HH                No change in use of child care, so
Effect of a 1 year   parents through unique identifiers.        income was just less than a cutoff to those of       subsidy only increased income.
childcare subsidy    N=367,836 obs.                             children whose HH income was just above a            GPA: +0.30 of a SD
at age 5 on          2) Municipality-level data on childcare    cutoff.                                              Oral exam grade: +0.30 of a SD
parental behavior    prices and family income cutoffs in the    Also estimate a parametric specification that        Main result: A 1% increase in family
and teen GPA.        1990s.                                     controls for indiv/HH charact & cohort by            income at age 5: would increase scores
                                                                municipality FE, as well as sibling FE.              by about 0.04 of a SD
                                                                                                                     Sibling FE: similar by less precise.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                        Micro - Data, N                   Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                            Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Chetty, Hendren,       1) Moving to Opportunity data includes Experiment: families were randomly assigned to            Effects on children <age 13:                  Gains from moving to lower-poverty
and Katz (2015).       demographic, SES, school data, criminal 3 groups.                                                1) Voucher (experimental) group               areas decline with child’s age at move.
Examine two            victimization, income, transfer receipt; 1) Experimental grp: was offered subsidized             Income: $1,624 (+14%).                        The extra federal income taxes that
hypotheses: 1)         There are 11,276 children in the MTO      housing voucher + requirement to move to a             Attends college: +2.5pp (+15%)                young children in the experimental
moving to a lower-     data, of whom 8,603 (76%) were born <= census tract w/poverty rate <10%.                         Prob(live in a poor neighborhood as an        group would obtain during their mid-
poverty                1991.                                     2) Section 8 voucher grp: was offered a standard       adult): -4%                                   twenties, would offset the incremental
neighborhood           ii) annual data on residential            subsidized housing voucher w/no additional             Prob(single parent): -15% (only for           cost of providing voucher treatment
improves LT outc.      neighborhood (census tract) using 1990 contingencies.                                            females)                                      relative to providing public housing
for children who       & 2000 Censuses; 2005-2009 American 3) Control grp: was not offered a voucher (but               2) Section 8 Income: no effect.
moved young?           Community Surveys.                        retained access to public housing).                    Attends college: no effect
2) the gains decline   2) Federal income tax returns data, 1996- *Authors replicate ITT models as in Kling et al.       Prob(live in a poor neighborhood as an
with child's age at    2012. *MTO records were linked to the (2007).                                                    adult): -7%
move?                  tax data by SSN (86% success).            Models also include interactions of age at RA *        Prob(single parent): no effect
                                                                 treatment indicators.                                  Effects on children >=age 13
                                                                                                                        Little (or sometimes negative) effects on
                                                                                                                        older children.

Dahl and Lochner       1) Child Supplements of the NLSY,           Identification comes primarily from the              A $1,000 increase in income:                  Test gains are larger for children from
(2012). Effects of     longitudinal data, N=4,500 children.        substantial expansion                                PIAT score (combined math & reading           disadvantaged families (minorities:
changes in U.S.        Includes PIAT scores for children 5+ from   of the EITC schedule between 1993 and 1995.          test scores): +0.06 SD.                       +0.08 SD, children in unmarried
Earned Income Tax      1988 to 2000 (biannually). (Children took   Child FE + IV (instrument for HH income:             Reading recognition: +0.04 SD.                families: +0.08 SD, children of mothers
Credit on child test   each individual test at most 5 times.)      predicted EITC income due to regulatory changes      Reading comprehension: +0.06 SD.              with HS or less educ: +0.05 SD), for
scores, mean           N= 4,412 children born to 2,401             & not due to changes in family structure).           Math: 0.06 SD.                                younger children (ages<12 the effect is:
age=11 at testing.     mothers.                                    Models include year FE, controls for other state-    1st stage coefficient: 1.270**                +0.08 SD), and for boys (+0.09 SD).
                                                                   level policies, a fifth-order polynomial in lagged   Overall effect: from 1987–1999, the
                                                                   pretax income & an indicator for positive lagged     median EITC payment for eligible two-
                                                                   pretax income as a baseline “control function",      child families increased by $1,670 (2000
                                                                   national trends.                                     dollars), implying a test score increase of
                                                                                                                        0.010 of a SD for this group.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                        Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Del Boca, Flinn,       1) Longitudinal data from Child            Authors estimate the parameters of a                   Estimates suggest that parental time       NA
and Wiswall            Development Supplement of the PSID; production function for child outputs using a                 inputs are more valuable than monetary
(2013). Asks how       first 2 waves (CDS-I & CD-II) 1997 & 2002- Cobb-Douglas production function & simulation          inputs in producing child quality. Time is
cash transfers         3, include child time diaries & rich       methods (using PSID-CDS data).                         relatively most valuable when children
affect parental        demographic and SES HH data, N= 3,500                                                             are young. Suggests that monetary
investments in         children residing in 2,400 HH (authors                                                            transfers may have small impacts on
children in the U.S.   also use the PSID waves 1997, 1999,                                                               child quality because a significant
                       2001, 2003).                                                                                      fraction of thetransfer is spent on other
                                                                                                                         HH consumption and the leisure of the
                                                                                                                         parents.



Hoynes, Miller, and    1) Vital Statistics micro data, 1984-1999,   Exploit tax-reform (1986, 1990, 1993) induced        2nd parity or higher births, relative to    LBW: larger effects (-10.8%) for infants
Simon (2012).          collapsed to cells defined by state,         variation in the federal EITC across time & family   1st births:                                 of single and less educated mothers.
Effects of changes     month-year, parity of birth, mother's        size.                                                LBW: -3.5% for the full sample (no SD       By race: African American infants
in U.S. Earned         education, marital status, race, age;        1) DD: Compare 2nd & higher order births             available) (effects are larger for 3rd or   largest reduction in LBW (-5.1% vs.
Income Tax Credit      N=47,687 cells.                              (treatment) to 1st births (control).                 higher order births than 2nd births).       whites -1.6%).
on incidence of low    2) March Current Population Survey           Models include effective tax year FE, state FE, &    An increase of $1000 treatment on the       Effects on Hispanics are small (-1.9%).
birth weight.          combined with the NBER TAXSIM model          rich demographic controls.                           treated (TOT): LBW: -6.7%.
                       to compute average EITC benefits.            2) Event study.
                                                                    3) Panel FE model to measure the generosity of
                                                                    the EITC using the maximum EITC credit.


Hoynes,                Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID);       DD model: Exploit variation in roll-out of FSP       Increasing the share from no FSP            Largest effects on males: 0.5 of a SD.
Schazenbach, and       3,000 HHs; use waves until 2009.             across counties & over birth cohorts in exposure     exposure to full exposure in utero to age   Economic self-sufficiency: +0.3 of a SD
Almond (2016).         The “Survey of Economic Opportunity          to the FSP.                                          5): Metabolic syndrome Z-score (obesity,    for women only.
Effect of exposure     subsample”; N=1,900 low-income &             DDD: use variation across subgroups w/varying        high blood pressure, diabetes, heart        Adult health impacts of FSP are
to the U.S. Food       minority HHs selected from an existing       propensities to use FSP.                             attack): -0.3 SD (TOT: -0.24 SD) (largest   minimal if child is exposed only after
Stamp Program          sample (adjust for nonrandom sample          Models include controls for county, year of birth,   effects on males 0.5 SD).                   age 5.
(FSP) from 0-5         using PSID weights).                         interview FE, state linear time trends, county-yr    Weak improvements in other health
years on adult                                                      of birth controls.                                   outcomes: diabetes, health status,
health (age 25                                                                                                           disability, smoking. Gains from FSP are
plus).                                                                                                                   large and increasing with exposure up to
                                                                                                                         age 5.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                       Micro - Data, N                    Identification strategy and specification                  Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Gould, Lavy, and      1) Authors conducted a survey in 2006 of     Authors exploit quasi-random variation in the       Running water, sanitation, and               By gender:
Paserman (2011).      the entire population of immigrants who      living conditions experienced by Yemenite           electricity in early childhood - Results     Effects are mainly for women which
Effects of material   were born in Yemen between 1945 and          children after being airlifted to Israel in 1949.   for girls and women only:                    could be due to: i) gender
resources such as     1950 and arrived in Israel during 1949       Models regress a person's outcome on the            HS matriculation: +9pp (+33%) (no SD         discrimination in the allocation of
running water,        and 1950.                                    conditions experienced in childhood and on          provided). Post-secondary: +6pp (4.7%).      scarce resources or ii) a stricter
electricity, and      N= 2,927 individuals who were sorted         family/indiv background.                            Years of schooling: +0.6 (5.3%). Age at      enforcement of traditional norms in
sanitation during     into 233 different locations.                                                                    1st marriage: +0.6pp (2.7%).                 rural areas.
childhood on          2) Census data for 1961.                                                                         Fertility (N_children): -0.2pp (-5%).        By age:
outcomes at age                                                                                                        Employed: +7.2pp (11.3%).                    Authors include an interaction between
56-61 of Yemenite                                                                                                      Self-reported health problems: -6.2pp (-     treatment variables and YOB & find
immigrants to                                                                                                          15.5%). No effect on disability.             that older women experience much
Isreal.                                                                                                                2nd generation effects in the full sample:   larger impacts (results not shown).
                                                                                                                       HS matriculation: 3.2pp;
                                                                                                                       College degree: 3.3pp (baseline means
                                                                                                                       not provided).



Lindo (2011).         1) PSID; waves: 1968– 1997 (author           Compare the outcomes of children born after a       Child was born after his/her father's job    Mother's with >HS have higher percent
Health effects of     stops in 1997 due to concerns in how job     displacement to the outcomes of those born          displacement:                                declines in family income, are more
parental job          displacement is measured).                   before.                                             Birth weight: -4.8% (approx. 5 ounces        likely to work, and to work for more
displacement on       Author uses the PSID’s Childbirth &          Mother FE.                                          decline).                                    hours.
child's birth         Adoption History Supp. (CAHS) to             Models also include education-group trends and                                                   Potential mechanisms: Husbands’
weight.               measure children’s outcomes i.e., birth      industry trends.                                                                                 earnings: -22%
                      weight in ounces is available for children                                                                                                    Family income: -13%. Men's work
                      born in 1985+; N= 1,607 births.                                                                                                               activity: no change. Mother's
                                                                                                                                                                    employment status: no change. Food
                                                                                                                                                                    spending: no change.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                       Micro - Data, N                   Identification strategy and specification                  Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Carlson (2015).       1) Dates of major job losses &              Exploit county-month variation in the occurrence Being exposed to anticipatory                Potential mechanisms: physiological
Examine the direct    information on the warnings given to the    of job losses through announced notices            dislocations during pregnancy:             stress responses or increased levels of
consequences of       local community using notices filed                                                            Birth weight: -15 to -20 grams (-0.4% to - unhealthful behavior.
job loss on birth     under the Worker Adjustment &               Models include county-specific quadratic time      0.06%).
outcomes, isolating   Retraining Notification (WARN) Act.         trends, county of birth, year of birth, & calendar Gestational age: -0.5 to -0.8 days (-0.2%
anticipatory          2) Natality data, 1999-2008.                month of birth FE.                                 to -0.3%).
effects.              *The author constructs a county–month                                                          LBW= +1pp (+16.4%)
                      panel data set including all 422 counties                                                      Strongest effects are associated with
                      in AL, NY, TX, & WA; N=7,113,083 births                                                        exposure to notices in 3rd
                      & 2,626 WARN notices.                                                                          trimester.


Golberstein,          1) National Health Interview Survey         Exploit the state and quarter variation in the      A 1SD increase in the UR:                  Parental unemployment, reduced
Gonzales, and         (NHIS), years 2001-2013; nat. The child's   unemployment rate (UR).                             SDQ score (index of mental health          family income & higher family stress
Meara (2016).         mental health questionnaire (SDQ score)     Models include state & quarter FE, individual and   severity; higher index, worse mental       are likely to influence child mental
Effects of            has 5 domains: emotional symptoms,          family covariates, & state linear time trends.      health): +2.3% in the "mental health       health. The impacts were stronger
economic              conduct pb's, hyperactivity-inattention,                                                        severity 1/10 scale" and +11% in the       among households where parents have
recessions            peer problems, prosocial behaviour.                                                             "likely psychological problem".            < college, are non-white, or are in the
(measured by UR       Mental health treatment & medication                                                            Emotional difficulty score: +4.8% in the   bottom income quintiles.
and HPI) on child     use are only available for 2005-2007.                                                           "mental health severity 1/10 scale" and    Authors also find little differences by
and adolescent        2) Economic variables are obtained from                                                         +10.4% in the "likely psychological        child's gender or by child's age
mental health.        the BLS & from the Freddie Mac Housing                                                          problem".                                  (comparing children vs. adolescents).
                      Price Index (HPI).                                                                              Use of special education services for
                                                                                                                      children’s emotional problems: +5.7%.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                        Micro - Data, N                   Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                            Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Gutierrez (2014).      1) National Household Survey (Encuesta      Estimate a two-sample instrumental variable         Exposure to the crisis and being born to      Mother's education: the increase in
Effect of birth        Nacional de Hogares, ENAHO), 8 waves:       model:                                              less educated mothers:                        infant mortality during the crisis was
during economic        2004-2011; data on educational & health     1) Regress child mortality in 1st year of life on   Prob(dying in the 1st year of life): 1% (no   particularly severe for children born to
crisis in Peru on      outcomes at later ages; N=39,846            dummy for YOB interacted by mom's education.        Table 1 available).                           less educated mothers.
infant mortality,      children.                                   2) Regress outcome @age 15 on dummy for YOB         Chronic illness: +2.36pp (no Table 1
education and          2) DHS data, 3 waves: 1991, 1996 &          interacted by mom's education.                      available).
employment at 15-      2000; data on mother's health & child's     3) Ratio of coefficients of interest in 1) & 2)     Complete primary education (ages 15-
18 years.              mortality; N=11,275 children.               shows the effect of early-life health shocks on     18): -1.7pp.
                                                                   future outcomes.                                    Employment (ages 15-18): no effects.
                                                                   Models include rich controls and some               Calculates upper and lower bounds on
                                                                   specifications include trends.                      the effects by assuming: i) there is no
                                                                                                                       selection; ii) there is no scarring effect.




Lavy, Schlosser,       1) High school administrative data linked   Exploit the timing of the immigration shock of      Exposure to Israel's better conditions        By gender:
and Shany (2016).      to demographic records for all Ethiopian    Ethiopian jews to Israel in the May 1991.           before week 8 of gestation:                   Effects are only significant among girls.
Children conceived     children born 1992-1992; data include       DD:                                                 Matriculation diploma: 12.2% (0.07 SD).
in Ethiopia and        student’s birth date, date of               3 groups by the gestational age at the time of      Quality of matriculation diploma (more        By parental education:
born in Isreal after   immigration, country of origin of           the immigration:                                    challenging study programs during high        Effects are stronger for children from
their parents          students & parents, student                 1) Children whose mothers arrived after             school): +33% (0.39 SD).                      families with higher parental
migrated. Effects      demographics (parental education and        conception but before week 8 of gestation.          Math credits: +39.6% (0.32 SD).               education. (Though most immigrants
of early childhood     number of siblings), current schooling      2) Children whose mothers arrived at 8-24 weeks     English credits: +33% (0.37 SD).              had low levels of education.)
conditions on          status; data collected in 2007-2011;        of gestation;                                       No effect on high school completion.
outcomes at 18-20.     N=1,951 students.                           3) Children whose mothers arrived after week 25     All efffects are driven by exposure in the
                                                                   of gestation but before birth.                      first 8 weeks of gestation (i.e., no effect
                                                                   Models include cohort & month of birth FE and       of exposure after week 8).
                                                                   rich controls.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                        Micro - Data, N                     Identification strategy and specification                  Effects of the shock                          Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Loken, Mogstad,        Administrative registers for the entire       1) Show that the linear FE estimator identifies a   A 1 SD increase in family income:          Effects are larger in the lower part of
and Wiswall            population, provide information on            weighted average of the marginal causal effects.    Years of Education -                       the income distribution.
(2012). Effects of     educational attainment, IQ, & family          2) Use a Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition to            Models without income squared:
Norwegian oil          income during childhood, 1967-2006;           measure the contribution of different weights to    No effects in IV or FE.
boom on family         control variables: sex, birth year, marital   the differences between linear OLS, FE, & IV        Models including income squared:
income and child       status, N of children, SES (years of          estimates.                                          IV: +0.74 (child in poor family), +0.05
outcomes at 29         education, IQ, income, etc), personal         IV: instrument for family income using the          (child in rich family).
plus.                  identifiers for one’s parents, family         regional & time variation in the economic boom      FE: +0.22 (child in poor family), +0.02
                       identifiers, geographic identifiers for       after the oil discovery.                            (child in rich family).
                       county of birth; N=202,000 children.          Also include sibling FE.



Meckel (2015).         1) Administrative data about                  Exploit the staggered county-level roll out of a    The anti-fraud reform:                     The largest declines in WIC
Examines the           WIC vendors in Texas.                         fraud reduction program in Texas through the        (1) Eliminated most pre-existing fraud     participation among stores and women
effects of anti-       2) Prices from Nielsen Homescan data:         introduction of the Electronic Benefit Transfer     among stores (violations declined 15%)     occur in high-poverty ZIP codes.
fraud efforts in the   representative panel of consumers             (EBT) that replaced paper vouchers.                 (2) Caused 10-26% of single outlets to     Only fraudulent stores select into the
WIC program            w/product level-data on all purchases;        DDD model: exploit variation in the exact timing    drop out of WIC (no change for chains)     program in high-poverty areas,
which resulted in      includes product type, date & location of     of EBT rollout across counties, years and months,   (3) Reduced WIC participation among        suggesting that fraud implicitly
the shotdown of        purchase, & on the purchaser;                 and WIC product and WIC store.                      eligible mothers by 3-5%                   subsidizes program access in these
some small             N=430,000 purchases (11,400 stores).                                                              (4) Reduced the likelihood that a mother   areas.
operators.             3) Individual birth records that provides     Assumption: the exact timing of EBT rollout is      has at least one WIC store in her ZIP
                       informatio on WIC participation of            uncorrelated with endogenous trends.                code (a fall of 10-25%)
                       pregnant women and on ZIP code of                                                                 (5) Increased the prices on WIC products
                       residence of the mother, 2005-09; N= 1                                                            within single outlet WIC stores by 9%
                       million mothers on WIC.                                                                           (6) Reduced welfare by 3-4% of the
                                                                                                                         value of benefits received




                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
      Study                       Micro - Data, N                     Identification strategy and specification                     Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Milligan and          1) National Longitudinal Survey of            Exploit the variation in child benefits across        An increase of $1,000 in child benefits:     Most significant effects are driven by
Stabile (2011).       Children and Youth (NLSCY), provides          province, year, and family-type (N of children in     Education: Repeating a school grade: no      boys, not girls. For girls, there is a
Effects of child      family income & demographics; 6               a household) due to changes in legislation.           effect; Math score: +0.069 SD (+1.6%);       significant effect on physical aggression
benefit payments      biannual cycles: 1994–95 to 2004–05;          Instrument: actual child benefit level in a given     PPVT: no effect                              (-.14 SD for boys; -.22 SD for girls).
in Canada on child    followed children aged 0–11 to age 10-        year, province,, family size is instrumented with     Prob (not been diagnosed with a
outcomes from 0-      21; N=108,000 children.                       a simulated tax benefit computed using a tax &        learning disability): +2.8pp (+1.0% = 0.16
10.                   2) Survey of Labour & Income Dynamics         benefit calculator.                                   SD)
                      (SLID) used to simulate the aggregate         Models include a set of individual/ family            Emotional/behavioral well-being:
                      benefits (instruments).                       characteristics, and control variables for time       Physical aggression: -0.106 SD (-14%)
                                                                    and province effects.



Scholte, van den      1) Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam         Ask how shocks in later life affect functional        N of functional limitations later in life: Effects of chronic disease and (Chronic
Berg, and             (LASA); 5 waves: 1992-1993, 1995-1996,        limitations in later life AND whether individuals     Chronic disease: +8.6%                     disease)*(early-life recessions) are only
Lindeboom (2015).     1998-1999, 2001-2002, 2005-2006,              exposed to recessions early in life respond           (Chronic disease)*(early-life recessions): positive & significant among males.
Influence of          (N=2869, 2001, 1571, 1132, 799                differently to later-life shocks than other adults.   +10.5%
economic              persons).                                     Strategy: IV + individual FE. Instrument: Business
conditions early in   Data includes info on: functional             cycle at birth (boom or recession).                   This result indicates that the effects of
life on the impact    limitations, heart disease, stroke, cancer,   Regressions include interactions btw: (indicator      chronic diseases on functional
of adverse life       respiratory diseases, peripheral artery       for a recession at birth) * (adverse later life       limitations are exacerbated by adverse
events and on         disease, diabetes and arthritis.              events).                                              early-life conditions
physical health
later in life.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
       Study                       Micro - Data, N                   Identification strategy and specification                    Effects of the shock                          Heterogeneity
Panel A: Policies to Increase Material Household Resources
Rossin-Slater          1) Texas Birth & admin. records             Exploit the within-ZIP-code variation in WIC clinic   The presence of a WIC clinic in a           Strongest effects for mothers with high
(2013a). Effect of     2005–2009; data includes mothers'           openings/closings. Compare births by mothers          mother's ZIP code of residence, during      school or less, who are most likely
closures of WIC        maiden name, DOB, counties of birth,        who did & did not have a WIC clinic in their ZIP      her pregnancy:                              eligible for WIC services (0.74% WIC
clinics in Texas on    ZIP codes of residence; allows linking of   code during pregnancy & control for mother-FE         Food benefit take-up: +6%                   take-up vs. 0.07% among other moms).
birth outcomes.        siblings & determining whether mothers      with IV (to account for migration, measurement        Pregnancy weight gain: too little weight    The increase in BW is concentrated in
                       had an operating WIC clinic in their ZIP    error, & the mechanical correlation between           (<7.3 kg): -2pp; too much weight (>18       the middle of the BW distribution.
                       code during pregnancy; N = 1,937,003        gestation & WIC participation (instrument:            kg): +3pp (among those with <=HS educ)
                       births (612,694 siblings).                  dummy for whether mother would have had an            Diabetes: +1.3pp (among those with
                       2) WIC clinic locations come from TX        open WIC clinic during her current pregnancy in       <=HS educ)
                       Dept. of State Health Services; includes    the ZIP code of her 1st pregnancy assuming 39         Gestational hypertension: +1.3pp
                       names, address/ZIP codes, & opening/        weeks gestation). Models include individual           (among those with <=HS educ)
                       closing dates in 2005 –2010 (N=578 ZIP      controls, YOB & MOB FE, ZIP code-FE, county           Birth weight: +27gr (+0.8%) (full sample)
                       codes; 114 experienced openings/            linear time trends.
                       closures).




Rossin-Slater          1) Paternity establishments in hospital,    Exploit variation in the timing of in hospital        Paternity establishment no effects on      No differences by mother's race.
(2013b). How did       N=601 state-year obs.                       paternity establishment across states.                time spent father & child.
changes in             2) CPS-CSS & March CPS, 1994-2008           Models regress a child outcome on the in              Child private health insurance: -2.65pp (-
paternity              child support supplements (CSS);            hospital paternity establishment dummy, rich          3.89%).
establishment laws     N=8,974 who respond to CSS);                individual controls, state & child birth year FE, &   Child physical health (asthma, ear
affect young           3) NHIS data 1997-2010 restricted           state-specific time trends.                           infection): no effects.
children's access to   sample of child files; provides info on     Author imputes birth year = survey year − child       Any well-visits: -1.99pp (-2.53%). Any
resources and          child mental & physical health.             age − 1 since interview year are in March.            doctor visits: -1.48pp (-1.78%). Child
health outcomes in     4) Fragile Families & Child Well-Being                                                            mental health: no effects.
the U.S.?              Study.                                                                                            Income, poverty status, or welfare
                                                                                                                         benefit receipt: no effects.
Table 3: Two-Shock Studies
     Study                   Micro - Data, N                 Identification strategy and specification                   Effects of the shock                 Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                             mechanisms/effects
Adhvaryu,            1) Baseline and follow-up surveys    Exploit two orthogonal sources of exogenous           Exposure to adverse rainfall in the YOB:   Effects of Progresa are
Molina,              of HHs in Progresa; 1997, follow-    variation: 1) Parents’ resources at the time of a     Years of educ: -0.57.                      larger for children with
Nyshadham, and       ups every 6 months for the first 3   child’s year of birth & state of residence (proxied   Mitigating impact of Progresa: +0.1 yrs    lower endowments (i.e.,
Tamayo (2015).       years of the program (1998 to        by local rainfall) & 2) The returns to investing in   for each year in the program. On           those who were affected
Examine the          2000).                               education during adolescence (via the RCT             average,                                   by the rainfall shock).
effect of a          2) ENCEL 2003; a HH survey of the    program Progresa).                                    Progresa mitigated 60-80% of the effect
conditional cash     506 localities that were part of     Model includes dummy for rainfall shock, Progresa     of the shock.
transfer program     the original evaluation.             exposure, the interaction btw rainfall shock and      Woodcock-Munoz tests (letter-word
on the impacts       3) Mexico's National                 Progresa, state FE, birth year FE, & rich controls.   identification, applied problems, &
of rainfall shocks   Meteorological Service provides                                                            dictation): -0.22 to -0.25 SD.
in Mexico.           rainfall data, 1975-2003.
Outcomes             Data were matched using GPS
measured at 12       coordinates, N=14,464.
to 21 years.




Aguilar and          1) 3 waves of longitudinal           1) DD model: Compare children in villages that        Exposure to El Nino: Height: -0.43 to -    1) Effects were more
Vicarelli (2015).    household data from Mexico's         experienced rainfall shocks vs. children in regions   0.71 inches (~-2% = -0.2 SD).              pronounced for children
Exposure to          Progresa conditional cash transfer   that did not.                                         Stunting: +13pp (0.3 SD). Weight: -0.84    affected in the 1st two
extreme              program: 1997, 2000, 2003;           Model includes individual controls + village and      pounds (-2.5%=-0.13 SD).                   years of life versus prior to
precipitation in     N=6,264 children. Data NOT           year of child's birth FE. 2) Mitigating impacts of    PPVT=-15% (-0.34 SD). Working              birth:
Mexico due to El     nationally representative.           Progresa: Use random selection of villages into       memory= -18% (-0.44 SD).                   Height: -0.71inches vs. -
Nino and                                                  Progresa to estimate the effect of early vs late (2   Visual-spatial thinking= -13% (-0.5 SD).   0.56 inches. PPVT=-21%
outcomes at age                                           yrs difference) allocation to treatment. Use the      Gross motor skills: no effects. Effects    vs. -15%. Working
2-6.                                                      administrative selection rule for Progresa            were not mitigated by Progresa.            memory= -19% vs. -15%.
                                                          recepients to estimate an RD.                                                                    Visual-spatial thinking= -
                                                                                                                                                           13% vs. -12%.
Table 3: Two-Shock Studies
     Study                  Micro - Data, N                Identification strategy and specification                  Effects of the shock                  Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                           mechanisms/effects
Gunnsteinsson,      1) RCT took place in 2001-2007,     Exploit data from an RCT of a nutritional            Tornado exposure in early pregnancy:        Those treated with vitamin
Adhvaryu,           N=18,767 infants, 41 sectors (20    supplementation program for newborns &               BW: -14pp (-0.6% =-0.03 of a SD).           A at birth through the RCT
Christian et al.    received supplements, 20            mothers. A tornado occured on March 20th, 2005.      Height: -0.54cm (-1.2%= -0.23 of a SD).     were effectively protected
(2016). Effect of   placebo).                           Authors exploit 3-sources of variation: 1) RCT of     Mid-upper arm circumference: -0.29cm       from the shock in terms of
nutritional         2) Survey on the effects of the     vitamin A suppl.; 2) spatial variation in tornado    (-0.31% = -0.35 of a SD.)                   antropometric outcomes at
supplements in      tornado 2005; collected data on     exposure; 3) variation in trimester of pregnancy     Head circumfernce (HC): -0.54cm (-1.7%      6 months. There was little
Bangladesh in       damages, deaths (the tornado        exposed to tornado.                                  = 0.33 of a SD).                            protective effect of
mitigating the      affected 17 of the 41 sectors).     DDD: compare babies born at different times          Chest circumference (CC): -0.34cm (-        maternal supplementation
effects of                                              (within & outside of a window around the             1.1% =-0.16 of a SD).                       during pregnancy.
tornados on                                             tornado), across sectors affected by & unaffected
infants.                                                by the tornado.



Rossin Slater and   1) Digital Atlas of the Danish      DD model: Exploit the municipality*year variation    LT impacts of the CC program:               Interaction effects on
Wust (2015).        Historical & Admin. Geography:      in CC center approvals & in the NHV program          Years of schooling: +2%                     education and on income
Explore main        includes individual & municipal-    rollout.                                             Only compulsory education: -11%             were mostly driven by
effects and         level data; source of outcomes                                                           Labor mkt: +1.6% wages (males)              males (even persistent on
interactions        data for 2nd generation.            Identifying assumptions: (1) the timing of approvals Mortality: -10% (females).                  the second generation),
between high        2) Historical data on state-        is uncorrelated w/other municipal time-varying       Intergenerational effects of CC:            while effects on mortality
quality preschool   regulated CC centers: address,      characteristics that also predict outcomes; (2) the Years of schooling (@age 25): +0.4%          were larger for females.
childcare and a     year established, number of         timing of approvals is uncorrelated with the NHV Only compulsory educ @age 25: -6%.
nurse home          children (collapsed to              program rollout.                                     But interactions of CC and NHV
visiting program.   municipality* year*gender cells)                                                         program and negative, suggesting
Examine effects     (N=3,600 cells).                                                                         substitution:
on children and     3) Nurse Home Visiting Program                                                           Most positive effects of child care
children's          (NHV): Date program approval for                                                         reduced by 80% suggesting that
children.           all minicipalities over 1937-1949                                                        subsidized child care much less effective
                    from the Danish National                                                                 when NHV is already in place.
                    Archives.
                    4) Inpatient records, 1994-2010.
                    N=869,273 observations.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
       Study                          Micro - Data, N                          Identification strategy and specification                           Effects of the shock                          Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                                                mechanisms/effects
Panel B: Maternity Leave Policy
Baker and Milligan       1) National Longitudinal Survey of Children    Exploit the variation in time at home post-birth induced by     A 1month increase in maternal care:            By child's gender: negative & significant
(2015). Expansion of     and Youth (NLSCY), 1994/5 to 2008/09.          the maternity leave reform extending maximum length of          Cognitive: PPVT: -5.7% of a SD; "Who am I?     effects only for boys.
paid maternity leave     N~10,000 obs.                                  paid leave from 25 to 50 weeks.                                 test": -5.1% of a SD                           By mother's educ (HS or less vs. >HS):
in Canada on             Authors sample multiple cohorts before and     IV (instrument for time at home: dummy for whether child        Behavioral outcomes (hyperactivity,            effects seem to be only negative &
children's outcomes      after the reform so that any age effects       was born after the law change (i.e., December 31, 2000).        anxiety, physical aggression, & indirect       significant for children of more
at age 4-5.              average out.                                   Models include time trends & rich individual controls.          aggression): no effect                         educated mothers.
                         2) Labour Force Survey (LFS) that includes
                         data on labor force status.

Carneiro, Loken, &       Norwegian Registry data: covering the          Two strategies:                                                 Children of mothers who benefited from         Children of less educated moms
Salvanes (2013).         population of Norwegians up to 2007 and a      1) RD: comparing children of eligible mothers born just         PAID maternity leave:                          experienced a higher decline in HS drop
Effect of an             providing month and year of birth,             before and just after July 1, 1977 when maternity leave         HS drop-out (refers to a 3 yr HS diploma): -   out: (-3.6pp vs. -1.8pp), more college
unexpected               education, labour market status, earnings,     expanded from 12 weeks unpaid to 4 months paid plus up          2pp (-7% = -0.04 SD).                          attendence (+3pp vs. no effect), BUT no
extension of paid        age, gender, data on families.                 to 12 months unpaid.                                            Ever started college (at age 30): +2pp (+5%    effect on earnings by age 30 (children of
maternity leave in       Authors are able to link data on individuals   2) DD: Treatment: Difference between mothers who had a          = 0.04 SD).                                    more educated moms had 5.7%
Norway on the            with parents. N~42,600 obs.                    child in June and those who had a child in July 1977.           Wages (at age 30): +5% to +6.2%.               increase in earnings).
education and wages                                                     Control: Difference between mothers who had a child in                                                         Effects of the reform are larger for
of children at age 30.                                                  June and those who had a child in July of 1975, 1977, and                                                      mothers who would have taken little
                                                                        1978.                                                                                                          unpaid leave.

Dahl, Loken,             1) Social security registers, 1992-onwards.    RD: exploit the discontinuity from the reform being             The expansion of the paid ML:                  NA
Mogstad, and             Multiple years merged using individual         contingent on the birthdate of the child. A series of reforms   1) Did not crowd out unpaid leave
Salvanes, (2013).        identifiers.                                   extended paid maternity leave from 18 weeks to 35 weeks.        2) Effects on individual outcomes:
Effect of an             Authors do not observe actual eligibility,     Authors exploit this type of variation from 6 different         No effects on test scores, school drop-out,
unexpected change        therefore, predict eligibility using labor     maternity leave reforms in Norway.                              parental earnings, mother's LFP after birth
in paid maternity        earnings the year before birth. N=21,838.      Since take-up is very high ITT ~ATE.                            (rate of returning to work two years after
leave in Norway on                                                      Models include time trends & rich individual controls; also     the birth), completed fertility, marriage or
parental earning,                                                       include quadratic trends on each side of the discontinuity.     divorce: no effects.
fertility, LFP and                                                                                                                      3) Cost-benefit analysis "Paid maternity
child test scores.                                                                                                                      leave is regressive."


Danzer and Lavy          1) OECD's PISA data, 2003 & 2006; includes     Exploit an amendment to parental leave legislation that     No effects on PISA test scores in the full         Mothers with post-secondary: +0.20 SD
(2016). Effect of an     student-reported background information        came in effect on July 1, 1990 which extended paid leave    sample.                                            (math), +0.22 SD (reading), +0.21 of a
Austrian maternity       (e.g., gender, birth year, month,              from 12 to 24 months.                                                                                          SD (science), Boys: +0.33 SD (reading),
leave reform             nationality, attitudes), parents (education,   Identification strategy uses:                                                                                  +.40 (science).
extending leave from     nationality, occupation), & school (e.g.,      1) RD                                                                                                          Mothers with less than post-secondary
12 to 24 months on       school programme, location, school size,       2) DD - RD                                                                                                     education: -0.14 SD (reading). Boys -.27
test scores at age 15.   resources); Not included: DOB, maternal        Treatment group: children born after July 1st 1990 and                                                         SD (reading), -.23 SD (science).
                         labour market participation at the time of     before December 31st 1990.                                                                                     Girls no effect.
                         birth, duration of leave taking of mothers.    Control group: children born in the 1st half of 1990 (& in
                         N=764.                                         1987).                                                                                                         Girls no effect.
                                                                        Models include rich mother controls & month of chld's birth
                                                                        FE. Estimates are ITT since actual leave taking is not
                                                                        observed.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
       Study                          Micro - Data, N                           Identification strategy and specification                            Effects of the shock                            Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                                                    mechanisms/effects
Panel B: Maternity Leave Policy
Rossin-Slater (2011).   1) Vital Statistics natality & mortality 1989-   Exploit variation in pre-FMLA maternity leave policies across   DDD results:                                       By mother's education & marital status:
Effects of extensions   1997 collapsed into birth-year/birth-            states & variation in which firms are covered by FMLA           BW: +6.5gr (+0.2%=+0.01 SD).                       Married college mothers VS. single
of unpaid maternity     month/county/ mother-education/mother-           provisions.                                                     Gestation length: +0.04% (0.008 SD).               mothers with out college:
leave on birth          race/mother-age/ mother marital-status           DD & DDD:                                                       LBW: -0.2% (0.01 SD).                              BW: +9.2gr (+0.3%=+0.02 SD) vs. 7.1gr
outcomes and            cells; N=5,806,669 cells.                        Compare the likely eligible & likely ineligible groups before   Prob(preterm): -3% (0.1 SD).                       (0.2%=0.016 SD).
fertility in the U.S.   2) County Business Patterns (CBP), 1989-         & after FMLA, & across states.                                  Infant mortality: -2.5% (-0.017 SD).               Gestation length: +0.06% (0.012 SD) vs.
                        1997, to estimate the likelihood that a          Likely eligible group: those employed by a firm with >= 50      Risk factors or complications at birth: no         no effect.
                        resident of a county is employed in a firm       employees.                                                      effects.                                           LBW: -0.2% (0.01 SD) vs. -0.3% (0.012
                        with 50 or > employees/year.                     Models control for rich county-level & mother controls,         Overall fertility: no effects.                     SD).
                        3) Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) to       month-of-birth, year-of-birth, state FE, state specific time    Parity at birth: increase in first-parity births   Prob(preterm): -2.7% (0.1 SD) vs. no
                        check the firm-size procedure.                   trend.                                                          and a decrease in later parity births. Laws        effect.
                        4) 1990 Census by county of birth to             Estimates are ITT given that author does not observe leave-     encouraged some previously childless               Infant mortality: -10% vs. no effect.
                        construct county-level controls.                 taking.                                                         women to give birth.                               Changes in parity at birth driven by
                        Link datasets by county & year (>98% of                                                                                                                             single, less than college mothers.
                        cases matched).
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                  Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                       Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                      mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Aizer and Cunha    National Collaborative Perinatal       Exploit the introduction of Head Start in 1966   The effect of HS* Bayley score at 8mths (Sibling-FE):   The impact of HS is largest for
(2014). Head       Project (NCPP); children & parents     in a model with sibling FE.                      Child IQ (age 4): 16.5% SD.                             those w/higher early
Start effects on   were followed before birth up to       Older siblings had no acces to HS.               Cogn. Achievement age 7 (ONLY signi. for those          cognitive development at age
outcomes           age 7; waves: 8 mths, 1, 4, 7 years    Focus on the ability of initial endowments to    w/high initial HK):                                     8 mths.
measured at age    after birth; years of birth: 1959-     predict parental investments at age 8 months     IQ: 10.4% SD. Reading: no effect. Math score: 16.0%     By age 7, the effect of HS on
7.                 1965, 12 cities. N=10,157 obs.         & at age 7.                                      SD.                                                     IQ & achievement have faded
                   Sample includes 8-mth Bayley           Regression models include an interaction         Parents invest more in highly endowed children.         except for those with the
                   score; authors argue that the Bayley   between HS_enrollment*Investments_8mths          Preschool invest. & early HK are complements in         highest endowments.
                   is more predictive of later human      and controls for HS_enrollment, investments      the prod. of late HK.
                   capital than birth weight.             at 8mths, individual covariates, & family-FE.    Degree of reinforcement increases w/family size.




Attanasio, Di       1) Survey of Familias en Accion       To address the endogeneity of HC                 Exposure to HC:                                         The impact of the programme
Maro, and Vera- (conditional cash transfer program        participation authors instrument using:          Height-for-age: +0.88 SD (FeA sample); +1.23 SD         is considerably higher for
Hernandez           in Colombia): representative of       i) distance from the residence to the nearest    (ENDS sample).                                          lower quantiles & almost zero
(2013). Impact poor individuals in rural areas; focus     nursery,                                         Atendance to HC:                                        for the top quantiles.
of a preschool      on 65 towns where preschool           ii) the median fee in the town,                  Height-for-age: +0.4 SD (FeA sample); +0.83 SD
program in          program was not implemented;          iii) the capacity of the HC programme in the     (ENDS sample).
Colombia            years 2002, 2003, & 2005-6;           town (filled + vacant HC slots / N of eligible
(Hogares            N=2,413 children.                     children in the town).                           "A 60-month-old child that has spent 24 months in
Comunitarios,       2) ENDS: a more complete version      Model covariates include the N of children       an HC would be 0.35 SD (FeA) or 0.49 SD (ENDS)
HC) on children's of the DHS 2005; basic household        aged 2-6 in the town, the distance to other      taller."
nutrition at age 2- demographics, children                amenities (school, health centre and town
6.                  anthropometrics & participation in    hall), mother & head’s ages & education
                    HC; urban areas, includes poor and    levels and mother’s height, as well as town-
                    less poor; N=6,179 children.          level variables.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                   Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                         Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                           mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Attanasio,          Baseline was collected in Feb-May      RCT in 96 towns in Colombia using a 2×2            Psychological stimulation:                            NA
Fernandez,          2010 & follow-up in Sept-Dec 2011;     factorial design                                   Cognitive scores (Bayley-III): +0.26 SD (3.7%)
Fitzsimons et al.   duration of the program was 18         There were 4 interventions:                        Receptive language: +0.22 SD (5.4%)
(2014). Effects     months. Data collection includes       i) psychosocial stimulation alone (n=318),         No effects on expressive language, fine motor skills,
of a psychosocial   rich measures of child cognitive       ii) micronutrient supp. alone (n=308), iii) both   height, weight, hemoglobin.
and nutritional     tests & physical health, HH            combined (n=319), iv) control (n=318).             Micronutrient supplementation had no effect on
intervention in     characteristics, at ages 1-2.          Models include tester effects (two for each        any outcomes.
Colombia on         N=1,420 children in 96                 region), baseline level of the outcomes, sex,      Interactions between psychosocial & nutritional
outcomes at 12-     muncipalities (out of the 1,100 in     and a second order polynomial in age.              interventions had no effects on any outcomes.
24 months.          Colombia).
                    Sample sizes: Control (n=318)
                    Stimulation (n=318)
                    Supplementation (n=308) Both
                    interventions (n=319).

Baker, Gruber,      1) Canadian National Longitudinal      In 1997, Quebec introduced a very low cost         Children enrolled in child care at ages 0-4 in            By gender: "effects on
and Milligan        Study of Children and Youth;           universal child care program for children          Quebec:                                                   criminal behavior, aggression,
(2015). What are    biannual btw 1994-951 & 2008-09;       aged 0-4. This program increased maternal          Self-reported (worse) health: +0.07 SD (+3.4%) (a         and hyperactivity are
the long-run        focus on children 0-9; N~2,000 obs.    labor supply and use of CC in Quebec (Baker,       positive effect means worse health).                      concentrated in boys, who
impacts of          2) Test Scores: School Achievement     Gruber, and Milligan, 2008).                       Life satisfaction: +0.30 SD (+14.0%) (a positive effect   also see the largest
interventions       Indicators Program (SAIP); Pan         DD: compare the pre and post program               means worse).                                             deterioration in non-cognitive
that foster a       Canadian Assessment Program            outcomes of children/ teenagers in Quebec,         Quality of life: +0.35 SD (+14.6%) (a positive effect     skills".
deterioration in    (PCAP); PISA scores; 1993-2012.        to the corresponding outcomes of                   means worse).
non-cognitive       3) Health and Well-Being data:         child/teenagers in the rest of Canada.             Criminal behavior:
skills?             Canadian Community Health Survey                                                          rates of accusations: +3.7%
                    (CCHS) and Canadian Health             Models include province dummies, year              rates of convictions: +4.6%
                    Measures Survey (CHMS); 2001-          dummies, as well as individual controls.           Test scores: no effects/opposing effects across
                    2013.                                                                                     math/science
                    4) Criminal Behavior: Stats Canada’s                                                      "There is no strong evidence that the Quebec
                    Uniform Crime Reporting Survey                                                            Family Plan had a lasting impact on children’s
                    (UCRS); years: 2006-2013.                                                                 cognitive development".
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                   Micro - Data, N                Identification strategy and specification                        Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                         mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Campbell, Conti,    Surveys of children, parents,           Randomization of children into control &   Disadvantaged children randomly assigned to                   Larger impacts on overweight,
Heckman et al.      teachers include data on cognition,     treatment groups.                          treatment at 0-5 have:                                        obesity & hypertension,
(2014). Effect of   personality, health, achievement,&                                                 1) Fewer risk factors for cardiovascular & metabolic          healthcare utilization for
Carolina            behavior;                               Due to VERY small samples (N=111), authors diseases in their mid-30s (stronger effects on                males.
Abecedarian         participants followed at ages 12, 15,   use estimation methods that involve exact  males): systolic blood press.: -17mm Hg; metabolic
Project on health   21, 30, mid-30s.                        (small-sample) block permutation tests +   syndrome (males): -25%; prehypertensive
outcomes at age     Collected biomedical data (e.g.,        boostrapping of standard errors.           (females): -0.24; obesity & hypertension: difference
30.                 blood samples).                                                                    of 38.9% btw treatments & controls.
                    N=111 children (57 treat , 54                                                      2) More health care utilization at age 30 (males):
                    control).                                                                          +22.8%.
                                                                                                       3) Lower risk of overweight in early-life (males): -
                                                                                                       40%. Those who are obese at age 30s were already
                                                                                                       obese at ages 0-5.


Carneiro and        Children of the National                RD: exploit selection criteria on HH income       Effects only estimated for boys (1st stage regression No first stage for girls.
Ginja (2014).       Longitudinal Survey of Youth            (& on family size)                                only signif. for boys)
Effect of U.S.      (CNLSY); annual survey from 1979        Main regressions include Head Start
Head Start          until 1994 and biannual since then;     participation, HH income (measured at age         Participation in HS (IV results):
program on          authors use until 2008. Nationally      4), & a parametric but flexible function of yr,   Overweight: -29% (0.74 SD)
outcomes            representative.                         state, family size, family struct., HH income     Needs special health equipment: -29% (1.29 SD)
observed in         N=5,433 children 3-5.                   (measured at age 4)                               Behavioral problems: -0.6 of a SD (not given as a %)
teens and young                                             Discontinuity in the prob(take-up of HS)          Engagement in criminal act.: -22% (young adults)
adults.                                                     around income eligibility threshold is not        (0.56 SD)
                                                            sharp so authors instrument using
                                                            determinants of eligibility.
                                                            1st stage only signif. for males (F-stat=17).
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                   Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                      Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                     mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Conti, Heckman,     1) PPP longitudinal data: follow-ups   Treatment randomization with long-term          Participating in an early-childhood program:           Both programs improved the
and Pinto (2015).   collected annually from age 3 until    follow-up:                                      1) PPP (outcome observed at ages 27 and 40):           health outcomes and healthy
The impacts of      4th grade; includes measures of        The paper accounts for small sample sizes,      Prob(having a healthy diet): +15pp (males) (no SD      behaviors of males only.
two early-life US   intelligence, academic aptitude,       multiple hypothesis testing, and non-random     available).                                            Externalizing behavior in early-
programs (Perry     achievement tests, assessments of      panel attrition.                                Prob(engaging in regular physical activity): +33pp     life is a key mediator of the
Preschool           socio-emotional development,           Effects are estimated by gender due to both     (females).                                             effect of PPP on smoking
Project (PPP) &     school records starting at             biological and behavioral considerations.       Prob(of being a daily smoker): -20pp (males)           among males, while
Carolina            kindergarten through secondary                                                         Avg. N of cigarettes/day: falls from 8.7 @age 27 to    enhancements in cognitive
Abecedarian         education.                                                                             6.5 at @40 (males).                                    skills are a key mediator of
Project (ABC)) on   2) ABC longitudinal data: follow-ups                                                   2) ABC (outcome observed at age 34):                   PPP on physical activity.
LT health and       collected at ages 12, 15, 21, 30.                                                      Obesity: no effects                                    Task orientation and child's
health behaviors.   N=7,400.                                                                               Overweight: no effects                                 BMI are important mediators
                                                                                                           Prob(Diastolic blood pressure): -15% (males)           for high blood pressure and
                                                                                                           Prob(Systolic blood pressure): -12% (males)            hypertension in later-life
                                                                                                           Hypertension I: -76% (males)                           (males) in ABC.
                                                                                                           Hypertension II: -62% (males)
                                                                                                           Prob(ever been hospitalized): +35pp (males).




Gelber and Isen     The Head Start Impact Study was an     Exploit the random selection of 1st-time        While enrolled in HS: Parental involvement w/child     Across HS programs,
(2013). Effects     experiment in which some children      applicants (ages 3 & 4) to HS for the fall of   (includes all activities): +0.15 SD.                   programs that raised
of Head Start on    were treated with Head Start while     2002.                                           Reading & writing: +0.19 SD. Math: +0.19 SD.           children’s cognitive test
parental            the controls were not. Many                                                            Qualitative parenting: +0.07 SD.                       scores more also raised
investments in      controls were in other preschools.     HS experiment: children on waiting lists for    Rules & routines: 0.12 SD. Tracking child learning:    parents’ involvement
children.           Outcomes were measured in the fall     84 nationally representative HS programs        0.23 SD.                                               w/children.
                    of 2002 (after their enrollment in     (353 HS centers) were selected into:            After child was enrolled in HS: Parental investment    No evidence of differential
                    HS) & in the Spring of 2003, 2004,     Treatment: group enrolled in HS (N=2,479        in children: +0.06 SD. Reading & writing: no effect.   impacts across: i) father
                    2005, 2006 (N=4,061 children).         children)                                       Math: +0.10 SD.                                        present; ii) gender; iii) Fall
                                                           Control: group that was not granted access      Qualitative parenting: +0.07 SD.                       2002 income of the parents;
                                                           to HS (N=1,582 children).                       Rules & routines: +0.09 SD.                            iv) number of siblings; v)
                                                                                                           No effect on father involvement or parent-school       whether child entered HS at
                                                                                                           involvement in either condition.                       age 3 or 4.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                    Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                       Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Gertler,             The Jaimaican Study: Longitudinal      Randomized intervention: Treated/control         Psychological stimulation treatment:                    Treated males are more likely
Heckman, Pinto,      data that follows (N=129; 64           groups were all stunted, lived in same           Earnings: +42% (effect sizes: na)                       to be enrolled in school & to
et al. (2014).       treatment + 65 control) poor &         neighborhoods, had same age/sex. The two         Employment or LFP: no effect.                           be enrolled full-time. Have a
Effect of            stunted children and a comparison      groups differ in terms of: mother's education    Compared w/the NON-stunted group, treated               higher cognitive factor & are
psychosocial         group (N=84) of non-stunted.           & weight-for-height (treated group was more      children catch-up in earnings, while the control        more likely to be expelled
stimulation and      Urban representative data were         disadvantaged) & mother's employment             group (stunted children w/o intervention) lag           from school.
nutrition in         used to compare samples: i) the        (treated group higher than control). The         behind in earnings.                                     Females are more likely to
Jamaica on child     1992 Jamaican Survey of Living         comparison NON-stunted group is a more           Nutrition supplementation treatment:                    increase their years of
outcomes at age      Conditions; ii) the 2008 Jamaica       advantaged group of children (although not       NO effects on ANY of the outcomes.                      schooling, have any college
20-22.               Labor Force.                           as advantaged as the average population in                                                               education, have higher exam
                                                            urban Jamaica).                                                                                          grades, & better externalizing
                                                                                                                                                                     & internalizing behaviors.


Havnes and           1) Longitudinal database that covers   Exploit temporal & spatial variation in child    The child care reform:                                  Results show substantial
Mogstad (2011).      every resident from 1967 to 2009,      care availability induced by the staged          Earnings (age 30): +9,000 NOK peaks at the 11th         heterogeneity in child care
Effect of being      includes rich data on all HH           expansion.                                       percentile (+2.5%= +0.06of a SD) ; +5,000 NOK bwt       effects by family income.
born after a child   members; N=341,170 children.           Compare adult outcomes for 3 to 6 year olds      the 15t-60th percentile (+1.4%= 0.03 of a SD); &        Children from high income
care reform in       2) administrative register that        before/after the reform, from municipalities     then fade out.                                          households suffer a mean loss
Norway on            covers all child care institutions     where CC expanded a lot & municipalities         Gini coefficient: declined from .306 to .296            of 8000 NOK while children
outcomes at age      eligible for public subsidies from     little increase.                                  "universal child care has a small but non-negligible   from low income households
30.                  from 1972 to 2009.                     Non-linear DD methods to estimate quantile       equalizing effect."                                     experience a gain of 9000
                     Datasets are merged using unique       treatment effects & local linear regression      Intergenerational income elasticity: -2.5pp.            NOK. No differences by
                     identifiers for each individual.       estimates of the program effects by family                                                               gender.
                                                            income. Order the municipalities by the pp
                                                            increase in CC coverage rates from 1976 to
                                                            1997, divide sample at the median, the upper
                                                            half are treatment municipalities & lower half
                                                            are the controls.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                   Micro - Data, N               Identification strategy and specification                        Effects of the shock                         Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                        mechanisms/effects
Panel C: Child Care
Heckman, Pinto,     1) Data on the Perry preeschool        1 ) Exploit the randomized controlled trial      1) Program effects on cognition and personality          By gender: there are
and Savelyev        randomized experiment: N= 123          design of the program to identify the causal     skills (kernel density graphs):                          significant differences.
(2013). Effect of   children (51 females (25 treatment     effect of the treatment on measured skills       Cognition (Stanford-Binet Intelligence Test):
Perry Preschool     & 26 control) & 72 males (33           and on adult outcomes.                           increases only in the right tail of the distrib (and for
on outcomes up      treatment & 39 control)); follow-      2) Use an econometric model that estimates       females).
to age 40.          ups: ages 3–15, 19, 27, and 40.        the relationship btw outcomes &                  Externalizing behavior: strong reductions for males
                                                           experimentally induced changes in measured       (at all levels of the distrib) and females (left tail).
                                                           skills.                                          Academic motivation: increases at all levels of the
                                                           Three stage procedure: 1) estimate the           distrib except at right tail (and for females only).
                                                           measurement system; 2) from the theoretical      2) Effect of cognition and personality skills on
                                                           equations in 1), estimate the skills for each    outcomes:
                                                           participant; 3) estimate the relationship btw    Cognition: increases achievement tests and certain
                                                           participant skills and lifetime outcomes.        labor market outcomes.
                                                                                                            Externalizing behavior: affects crime, labor market,
                                                                                                            and health behaviors.
                                                                                                            Academic motivation: boosts education and
                                                                                                            reduces LT unemployment.



Kline and           The Head Start Impact Study was an     Conduct a calibration exercise that accounts     Head Start is about as cost effective as other          The children who are most
Walters (2016).     experiment in which some children      for the fact that ~1/3 of Head Start children    publicly funded preschools, and under reasonable        likely to benefit from Head
Re-examine the      were treated with Head Start while     were drawn from another public preschool         assumptions, has positive rates of return. Ignoring     Start are least likely to
Head Start          the controls were not. Many            setting. Thus, the cost of providing preschool   the fact that Head Start draws from other               participate. Hence, an
Impact Study.       controls were in other preschools.     to these children is over-estimated if we        preschools substantially overstates its cost.           expansion that brought these
Account for         Outcomes were measured in the fall     ignore this. Also assumes that the short-run                                                             chidlren into the program
participation of    of 2002 (after their enrollment in     impacts of Head Start on test scores are the                                                             would have even higher
controls in other   HS) and in the Spring of 2003, 2004,   best predictors of future outcomes, in line                                                              payoffs.
preschool           2005, 2006 (N=4,061 children).         with previous studies which have shown
programs.                                                  initial "fade out" followed by long-term
                                                           effects.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                     Micro - Data, N                         Identification strategy and                          Effects of the shock                        Heterogeneity in
                                                                              specification                                                                            mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Medical Care and Insurance
Bharadwaj,         Chile:                                       RD:                                             Being VLBW compared to children just above NA
Loken, and         1) Health: Vital statistics and death        Exploit variation in birth weight around the    1,500gr:
Nielson (2013).    records 1992-2007. N= 6,109 births in the    cutoff of VLBW (1500gr) or less than 32         Infant mortality: -4.4pp (Chile; avg infant
Examine the        bandwith of VLBW.                            weeks gestation to identify effect of           mortality =10.9%),.
effect of          2) Education records: 2002-2010 Universe     neonatal health care on                         -3.1pp (Norway; avg infant mortality =4%).
additional         of students 1st-8th grades.                  mortality/education.                            Test scores: +0.15 of a SD (Chile; math score);
medical care for   95% cases matched.                           Compare children just under and over 1,500      0.22 of a SD (Norway; national exam) .
infants over       Norway:                                      grams to examine difference in outcomes as      Introduction of surfactant therapy helped
1500g on infant    3) Health: Medical Birth Registry,           a result of extra medical treatments.           improve educational outcomes for VLBW.
mortality and      1967–1993; universe, twins.
test scores in     4) Education: Norwegian Registry Data,                                                       Predicted effects on wages: +2.7% (0.15 SD)
Norway and         covers population, ages 16–74 in                                                             (Chile); 1.8% (Norway).
Chile.             1986–2008. Includes basic SES data (educ,
                   age, labor mkt, family info, etc.).
                   N=2,477 births in window. Test scores
                   measures at age 6-8.
                   72% cases are matched.


Daysal, Meltem,    1) Perinatal Registry of the Netherlands,    Use the variation in distance from a          Giving birth in a hospital vs. at home (IV      By income: baseline results are driven
Trandaﬁr, and      2000–2008, annual dataset that links 3       mother’s residence to the closest hospital    results):                                       entirely by births to mothers residing in
Van Ewijk          datasets of individual birth records         with an obstetric ward (exogeneity?) as an IV A 10.81pp increase in the share of hospital     postal codes with less than the median of
(2015). Effects    collected by midwifes (LVR-1),               for a hospital delivery.                      births reduced 7-day (28-day) mortality by      the avgerage monthly HH income in the
of home delivery   obstetricians (LVR-2), & pediatricians                                                     49% (46%) btw 1980-2009).                       postal code (1,929 euros). 2SLS estimates
on newborn         (LNR), covers 99% of the primary care &      Models include year, month, & day of the      5-minute Apgar score: no effects                are similar when the sample is split by
deaths in the      100% of the secondary care provided          week of the birth FE, rich maternal controls, 1st stage: distance is a strong predictor of    maternal ethnicity, median age (29
Netherlands.       during pregnancy & delivery in the           and avg HH income in the postal code of       whether she gives birth in a hospital or at     years), median gestational age (280 days)
                   Netherlands, N=356,412 births.               residence of the mother.                      home (F-stat ~28): 7.5pp (11% at the mean).     or median birth weight (3,410 grams).
                   2) Statistics Netherlands data on income &
                   educ. at the postal code level.
                   3) 2005 Dutch National Atlas of Public
                   Health for exact address and the
                   availability of obstetric wards for each
                   hospital.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                       Micro - Data, N                           Identification strategy and                          Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity in
                                                                                  specification                                                                               mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Medical Care and Insurance
Sievertsen and      1) Danish National Birth Cohort (hospital       Exploit county-by-county introduction of        Same-day discharged newborns:                    Long term effects are strongest for at-risk
Wust (2015).        admissions), 1985-2006, N=714,562 births.       mandatory same-day discharge on the day         Prob(1st-month hospital readmission): +75%       children: "Children of at-risk mothers
Effects of longer   2) Survey data: Danish National Birth           of birth in a difference-in-differences         (+0.15 SD).                                      (defined by their age, education, income)
post partum         Cohort, 1997-2003; pregnant women were          framework.                                      Readmission after 1st month: no change           appear to drive the negative effect of
hospitalizations    invited to participate in 2 pre-birth & up to                                                   N of contacts mother & child with general        same-day discharge on schooling
on mother and       4 post-birth surveys (at 6 & 18 months, 7       Models include county and year FE, as well      practitioner in 1st month of child: +0.48        outcomes at age 15."
child               years & 11 yrs); includes maternal health       as county-specific quadratic trends in birth    (+126% = 0.54 SD).                               GPA: declines by -0.19 SD in the at risk
readmission and     behaviors, investments in children's health     year.                                           N of contacts mother & child with general        group.
children's          & development, & mother-reported child                                                          practitioner up to age 3: no effect.
schooling           health; N=100,000 births.                                                                       Children's 9th grade GPA: -0.1 SD.
achievement at      3) Data on the 9th-grade GPA are available                                                      Test score in Danish: -0.12 SD.
age 7 in            for cohorts who completed 9th-grade in
Denmark.            2002-2012 (cohorts born 1987-1997).




Meyer and           1) Admin data: mortality records from the       RD: exploit the discontinuity induced by        Children born after September 30, 1983:          By race: Medicaid expansions had a
Wherry (2016)       National Vital Statistics System (NVSS)         Medicaid expansions that extended               Internal-cause mortality rate: Ages 4-7, 8-14,   sizeable decrease in the internal
examine the         Multiple Cause of Death files for the years     eligibility only to children born after Sept.   19-23: no effect.                                mortality rate of older black teens.
effect of the       1979 to 2011                                    30, 1983.                                       Outcome at ages 15-18: -19% (blacks only).
Medicaid            2) March Supplements to the Current             Poor children gained 5 additional years of      External-cause mortality rate:
expansions on       Population Survey (CPS): use a random           eligibility if they were born in October 1983   Outcome at ages 4-7: no effect.
mortality in        sample of 500 children of ages 0-17 from        rather than just one month before.              Outcome at ages 8-14: -13% (blacks only).
affected cohorts.   each year of the 1981-1988 CPS and              Control group: cohorts of children born just    Outcome at ages 15-18: +8% (whites only).
                    estimate the childhood eligibility for this     before the birthdate cutoff.                    Outcome at ages 19-23: -10% (blacks only).
                    pooled sample for each birth month
                    N= 864 children (ages 4-23)
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                       Micro - Data, N                            Identification strategy and                            Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity in
                                                                                   specification                                                                                 mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Medical Care and Insurance
Miller and          1) National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),     Exploit variation in the timing & generosity A ten percentage point increase in eligibility          Larger effectsof coverage in utero.
Wherry (2014).      years 1998 to 2012                              of Medicaid and SCHIP eligibility for              during the prenatal period (or during
Effects of          N= 95,855 individuals .                         pregnant women & children across states.           childhood):
Medicaid            2) Administrative data on hospitalizations      Construct a simulated eligibility measure of Obesity: -1.4pp (-7%) (no SD) (in utero).
expansions to       from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample            the generosity of state eligibility rules to       BMI: -1.5 kg/m2 (-7% = -0.25 SD) (in utero).
older children on   (NIS) provided by the Healthcare Cost &         instrument for the fraction of individuals         Adult hospitalizations (excluding pregnancy): -
health status in    Utilization Project, includes data on 46        eligible for Medicaid coverage.                    2.7% (no SD) (ages 1-4).
young               states, N=3 million hospital visits             Authors construct Medicaid coverage                Preventable hospitalizations: -7% (in utero).
adulthood.          (excluding pregnancy).                          measures by age groups: prenatal period,           Hospitalizations related to endocrine,
                                                                    ages 1-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-18.                       nutritional, metabolic & immunity disorders: -
                                                                    Model: outcome regressed on Medicaid               8% (in utero).
                                                                    eligibility in prenatal period, ages 1-4, 5-9, 10- No effects on health status, on any health
                                                                    14, 15-18, & on individual & state-level           limitation, or on psychological distress (Kessler
                                                                    control variables, state of residence, year of scale).
                                                                    birth (age), & survey year dummies.




Wherry, Miller,     Uses data from the Healthcare Cost and          RD: exploit the discontinuity induced by           Children born after September 30, 1983:         Effects were concentrated among Blacks:
Kaestner, Meyer     Utlization Project (individual level hospital   several early Medicaid expansions that             At age 15:                                      Hospital visits: -7% to -15% (Blacks only).
(2015). Effects     discharge and Emergency Department              extended eligibility only to children born         Hospital visits: no effect.                     Emergency department visits: -2 to -5%
of Medicaid         records from participating states) to           after September 30, 1983.                          Emergency department visits: no effect.         (Blacks only).
expansions to       examine exposure to Medicaid expansions         Treatment group: children in families with         At age 25:                                      No effects were observed on non-Blacks.
older children on   given state and year of birth on number of      incomes at or just below the poverty line          Hospital visits: no effect (for non-blacks)
health status in    visits as adults. N~58,000.                     gained 5 additional years of eligibility if they   Emergency department visits: no effect (for
young                                                               were born in October 1983 rather than just         non-blacks)
adulthood.                                                          one month before.
                                                                    Control group: cohorts of children born just
                                                                    before the birthdate cutoff.
Table 4: Social and Parental Investments
     Study                       Micro - Data, N                         Identification strategy and                           Effects of the shock                           Heterogeneity in
                                                                                specification                                                                                mechanisms/effects
Panel D: Medical Care and Insurance
Brown, Kowalski, 1) IRS-Compliance Data                           Exploit the variation in public insurance        For each additional year of simulated            By gender: "Females earned more in
and Lurie (2015). Warehouse (CDW), 1996 -2012; allows             eligibility by cohort & state due to the         Medicaid eligibility:                            cumulative wages by age 28."
Expansions of     individuals + parents to be followed;           Medicaid & SCHIP expansions in the 1980's &      Cumulative income and payroll tax payments
Medicaid          N=4,911,040 females and 5,129,194 males.        90's.                                            (@age 31): +$1,561 (of a base of $35,268)
coverage to       Authors link children to parents in 1997, &     Authors exploit variation in total years of      (+4.4%) (no dstandard deviations provided).
older children    follow the parents in all other years.          eligibility during childhood. Variation is at    Income: +$186 (on a base year of 20,623)
and effects on    2) Medicaid Statistical                         the state, month, and age group level.           (+0.9%).
labor force       Information System (MSIS).                      Models include FE for each birth month           Years of education: +0.9 years (no avg. years
participation and 3) Social Security Administration data on       cohort, & each state at age 15, plus             of schooling provided).
income at age 28- mortality.                                      individual/HH controls.
31.                                                               IV (instrument: simulated eligibility based on
                                                                  the fraction of the sample eligible for
                                                                  Medicaid at state & cohort year, at each age
                                                                  from ages 0 to 18).


Cahodes,             1) American Community                        Exploit the state-level expansions of            A 10pp increase in avg Medicaid eligibility      By race:
Kleiner,             Survey (ACS) 2005-2012, provides             Medicaid and the State Children’s Health         between the ages of 0-17:                        An interaction between Medicaid Xa d
Lovenheim, and       educational variables; allows matching       Insurance Program that took place in the         IV results                                       nonwhite shows that: "Medicaid
Grossman             each repondent to the state of birth.        1980s & 1990s.                                   High school drop-out: -0.5pp (-5%) (-0.10 of a   expansions helped to reduce the racial
(2016). Effects of   2) March Current Population Survey (CPS),    IV (instrument for actual eligibility using      SD).                                             gap in HS completion..."
Medicaid             used to calculate Medicaid eligibility by    Medicaid eligibility of a fixed population in    College attendance: +0.7 to 1.0pp (1 to 1.5%)    By age:
expansions to        age,                                         each age, state, year, & race).                  (0.08 of a SD).                                  Authors show results of health insurance
older children on    state, year, & race.                         Identification assumption: Medicaid rules        College completion: 0.9 to 1.0pp (3.3 to 3.7%)   access by age: ages 0-1 vs. ages 2-17. Find
high school and      3) Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System   are not changing due to unobserved cross-        (0.08 of a SD).                                  larger effects on older children.
college              (YRBSS) to explore mechanisms (i.e. teen     cohort trends that also affect educational
education of 22-     health behaviors).                           attainment.
29 year olds.        N=5,494 obs.                                 Models include rich aggregate-level controls,
                                                                  state-of-birth FE & calendar year FE.
Table 4: Policies that Affect Household Resources
     Study                    Micro - Data, N                Identification strategy and specification                       Effects of the shock                     Heterogeneity in
                                                                                                                                                                     mechanisms/effects
Panel E: Policies to Increase Maternal Education
Carneiro, Costas,   National Longitudinal Survey of         IV approach: instrument for materal education         A year of mother education (IV estimates):     The effect of maternal
and Parey           Youth 1979 (NLSY79), women and          is variation in schooling costs during the mom's      Whites: Cognition (PIAT): +9.4% of 1 SD        education persists into
(2012). Effect of   their children only; annual survey      adolescence (IVs: local tuition fees, distance to     (math), +5.5% (reading) (ages 7-8); +6.0% of   adolescence.
changes in          from 1979 to 1994 and biannual          college, local labor market variables).               1 SD (math), +5.2% (reading) (ages 12-14).     Heterogeneity across races.
maternal            since. Authors use data until 2008.     Since IVs may be weak, authors also use a             Behavioral problems index: -6.6% (ages 7-
education on        N=7,555 children from 3,191             limited information maximum likelihood.               8), -7.7% (ages 12-14). Grade repetition: -
health and test     mothers.                                Models include county & cohort FE, &                  1.5% (ages 7-8), -2.1% (ages 12-14).
scores at ages 7-                                           aggregate trends as well rich controls for            Health (overweight/obesity): no effect.
8 and 12-14 in                                              mother’s ability.                                     Blacks: Cognition (PIAT): +10.3% of 1 SD
the U.S.                                                                                                          (math), +7.3% (reading) (ages 7-8); +8.3% of
                                                                                                                  1 SD (math), +7.2% (reading) (ages 12-14).
                                                                                                                  Behavioral problems index: -6.8% (ages 7-
                                                                                                                  8), -4.9% (ages 12-14). Grade repetition: -
                                                                                                                  1.7% (ages 12-14).
                                                                                                                  Health (overweight/obesity): weak effects.




McCrary and         1) Administrative (confidential)        Exploit age-at-school-entry policies to identify      Mother was born after the school entry         By race/ethnicity:
Royer (2011).       dataset on all births in CA & TX with   the effect of female education on fertility &         date:                                          "For black women, the effect on
Effect of           data on mother’s date of birth,         infant health (i.e., exploit the fact that the year   Education at motherhood: -0.14 years (-        LBW is consistent with
mother's high       education, infant health, pregnancy     in which a person starts school is a                  1.3%) in CA and -0.24 years (-2.1%) in TX      education improving well-being,
school education    behaviors (e.g., smoking, drink),       discontinuous function of exact date of birth         (no standard deviations provided).             while for white women is of the
on fertility and    paternal characteristics; N=800,000     and determines when they can legally drop             No effects on Infant health (LBW, gestation,   opposite sign."
infant health in    births per year.                        out).                                                 infant mortality).
California and      2) Public-use Natality Detail Files,    Compare women born just before & after the            Risky maternal behaviors:
Texas.              1969–1988, (only years for which        school entry date.                                    Maternal smoking: +13% (no SD).
                    daily birth counts by state are         Authors claim that school entry policies do not       Drinking: -20% (no SD).
                    available).                             affect fertility.                                     Mother has STDs: no effect.
Table 5: The "Missing Middle" and Latent Effects
     Study                     Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                         Effects of the shock                       Heterogeneity in
                                                                              specification                                                                         mechanisms/effects
Bharadwaj,          1) Chile's birth records, 1992-2002.        Over time, depending on parental                 A 10% increase in BW:                       By mother's educ: The relationship
Eberhard, and       Twins/siblings are identified by using a    preferences (compensatory or                     Math & language scores: +0.04 to 0.06       btw BW & test scores for children
Neilson (2013).     mother ID; N=15,740 twin pairs.             reinforcing), test score diff's within sibling   of a SD. Relationship is stable from 1st    (twins) of mothers with & w/o a HS
Examines effects    2) Education data comes from the RECH       or twin pairs will converge or diverge.          grade through HS.                           degree is statistically identical (0.04
of BW on test       (National student registry) database, the   Parents may find it harder to invest             Being VLBW:                                 of a SD due to a 10% increase in
scores from 1st     SIMCE (Math, Science, & Language Arts),     differentially in twins. Compare OLS,            Math & language scores: -0.1 to -0.2 of     BW) - a possible explanation for this
to 12th grade in    and the PSU dataset (college entrance       sibling, and twin FE estimates.                  a SD.                                       result is that inequality aversion
Chile.              exam on math & language), that consists                                                      OLS & twins estimators are similar in       does not vary by mom's education.
                    of administrative data on the grades/test                                                    1st grade(~0.04 of a SD) but OLS            By SES: similar relationships in low
                    scores of every student in the country ,                                                     estimates decline over time (e.g., in 8th   and high SES schools/families.
                    2002-2008; database provided by the                                                          grade the OLS estimate is 0.2 of a SD &     Results show a non-linear
                    Ministry of Educ. of Chile. Approximately                                                    the twins estimate is 0.5 of a SD).         relationship btw BW & academic
                    4 million students observed ~4 times.                                                        Authors claim this is explained by          outcomes.
                                                                                                                 parental investment.




Figlio, Guryan,     Universe of births in Florida from 1992-    Authors estimate Twin FE models (to              A 10% increase in BW:                       Authors estimate models by: same
Karbownik, and      2002 matched to subsequent universe of      account for potential unobservable               Cognitive test (Florida Comprehensive       sex twins (vs opposite sex), gender,
Roth (2013).        Public school system records (includes      determinants of cognitive ability that           Assessment Test, FCAT): +0.045 SD           same sex composition (GG vs BB),
Examines effects    children in 3rd to 8th grade) based on      could be correlated w/BW); neonatal              (OLS: +0.031 of a SD).                      mother's race, ethnicity,
of LBW on test      first & last name, DOB, SS#.                health is measured using ln(BW); controld        Math test: +0.050 of a SD.                  immigration status, education (<12,
scores in 3-8th     Nearly all potentially matchable children   for a gender dummy, and a dummy for              Reading: +0.039 of a SD.                    12-15, >15), zip code median
grade in Florida.   are matched.                                within-twin-pair birth order.                    Predicted effects on wages are: 3/4 of      income (bottom, middle, top),
                    Sample is conditioned on: those             Authors hold gestation length constant.          those in Black, Devereux, and Salvanes      marital status, age at birth (<=21, 22-
                    remaining in the state of FL & attending    Estimates are identified by variation in         (2007).                                     29, 30-35, >=36) and find: that a
                    public school.                              fetal growth rates.                              Effects on cognition are 60%-88% of         10% increase in BW is associated
                    Authors select twins (sample of twins is                                                     those found in Black, Devereux, and         with a 0.04 SD increase in cognitive
                    followed from birth through middle                                                           Salvanes (2007).                            tests for all.
                    school).                                                                                     These effects do not change between         Slightly larger effect for more
                    N=14,000 pairs of twins.                                                                     ages 9-14.                                  advantaged children.
Table 5: The "Missing Middle" and Latent Effects
    Study                     Micro - Data, N                        Identification strategy and                     Effects of the shock                  Heterogeneity in
                                                                             specification                                                                mechanisms/effects
Robinson (2012).   1) Collaborative Perinatal Project,         Decompose LBW infants into: i) those          Find no cognitive effects of LBW in     NA
Hypothesises       longitudinal survey of newborns in one      whose head circumfrance is proportionate      group with brain sparing. In group with
that LBW infants   of 12 major U.S. cities, 1959 -1974,        to their weight; ii) those with evidence of   effects on brain size:
with evidence of   waves: ages 4, 8, & 12 months of age,       brain sparing.                                Welsher IQ scores (ages 4 & 7): -3 to -
slower brain       and at 4, 7, and 8 years of age; N=47,019   Hypothesis: "Human capital should be          4pp (-4.2% = 0.27 of a SD).
growth will have   individuals.                                affected through decreased cognitive          Congenital malformations: 1.6 times
worse outcomes     2) A 50% sample of all US births from       function caused by brain growth               higher. Prob(vision, hearing, & speech
at age 4-7 than    1968, reported by Hoffman et al. (1974);    restriction in utero -- a potential           abnorm.): +1.5 to 2.3 times higher
LBW infants with   provides ability to get percentile data     mechanism for the fetal origins               Even with brain sparing:
a brain sparing    broken down by both gender/race;            hypothesis."                                  Congenital malformations: 1.3 times
pattern of                                                     Models regress child outcome on               higher. Prob(vision, hearing, and
slower growth.                                                 indicators for whether a child was AGR &      speech abnorm.): +1.2 to 1.5 times
                                                               SGR, and on rich individual controls and      higher.
                                                               sibling FE.
Table 6: Summarizing the Effects of Shocks on Birth Weight, Test Scores, and Wages
Shock          Study                   Elasticity
Panel A: Outcome= Birth Weight
Alcohol            Barreca and Page (2015)     A 1-month increase in the minimun legal drinking age leads to a 0.03% decline
                                               in LBW (or a statistically non-significant 1.2% decline on BW).

Disease            Schwandt (2016)             A 10% increase in maternal influenza hospitalizations in pregnancy leads to a
                                               0.2% decline in BW (or a 7.2% increase in LBW).

Income             Almond, Hoynes, and         A 10% increase in annual income leads to a 0.5% increase in BW (or a 6.0%
                   Schazenbach (2011)          decline in LBW).
Income             Hoynes, Miller, and Simon   A 10% increase in annual income leads to a 1.0% increase in BW (or a 11.0%
                   (2015)                      decline in LBW).
Income             Rocha and Soares (2015)     A 10% increase in rainfall shocks during pregnancy leads to a 1.8% decline in
                                               BW (no LBW estimates are provided).
Income & Stress    Lindo (2011)                Father's (own) unemployment leads to 4.8% decline in BW (or a statistically
                                               non-significant 2.5% increase on LBW).
Maternity leave    Rossin-Slater (2011)        A 1-month increase in maternity leave during pregnancy leads to a 0.16%
                                               increase in BW (or a -0.16% decline in LBW).
Nutrition          Almond and Mazumder         A 1-month increase in fetal nutritional disruption, leads to a 0.6% decline in BW
                   (2011)                      (no LBW estimates are provided).
Nutrition          Rossin-Slater (2013)        A 10% increase in the availability of WIC clinics leads to a 0.4% increase in BW
                                               (or a 1.7% decline in LBW only for mothers with HS or less).

Pollution          Currie, Graff Zivin,       A 10% increase in pollution (the N of districts with water contamination) leads
                   Meckel, Neidell, Schlenker to a 7.5% increase in LBW (no BW estimates are provided).
                   (2013)
Pollution          Currie and Walker (2011) A 10% increase decline in NO2 from cars (along with associated decreases in
                                              other pollutants leads to a 10% decline in LBW.
Smoking            Bharadwaj,                 A 10% decrease in smoking (the proportion of women smoking) during
                   Johnsen, and Løken         pregnancy leads to a 1.3% decline in BW.
                   (2014)
Stress             Carlson (2015)             A 10% increase in anticipated job losses in pregnancy leads to a 0.2% decline in
                                              BW (or a 16.0% increase in LBW).
Stress             Persson and Rossin-Slater Exposure to the death of a close relative during pregnancy reduces BW by 0.5%
                   (2016)                     (or a 20% increase in LBW).
Stress             Quintana-Domeque and A 10% increase in violence (terrorist attacks) during pregnancy leads to a 0.2%
                   Rodenas-Serrano (2016) decline in BW (no LBW estimates are provided).

Violence           Aizer (2011)                A 10% increase in violence (the probability of personal assault) during
                                               pregnancy leads to a 10.0% decline in BW (no LBW estimates are provided).

Panel B: Outcome=Test Scores
Alcohol            von Hinke Kessler           A 10% increase in the probability of consuming alcohol during pregnancy leads
                   Scholder, Wehby, Lewis,     to a 0.05 SD decline in test scores.
                   and Zuccolo (2014)

Disease            Bhalotra and                A 10% decrease in diarrhea mortality rates leads to a 0.14 SD increase in test
                   Venkataramani (2013)        scores.

Disease            Venkataramani (2012)        A 10% decline in the cases of malaria at the year of birth leads to a 0.2 SD
                                               increase in test scores.
Disease            Ward and Phipps (2014)      A 10 unit increase in the Influenza rate leads to a 0.3 SD decrease in test scores.

Education (mother) Carneiro, Meghir, and       1-year increase in mother's education leads to a 0.1 SD increase in test scores.
                   Parey (2012)
Table 6: Summarizing the Effects of Shocks on Birth Weight, Test Scores, and Wages
Shock          Study                   Elasticity
Panel A: Outcome= Birth Weight
Income               Black, Devereux, Løken,     A 10% increase in annual income at age 5 leads to a 0.4 SD increase in test
                     and Salvanes (2014)         scores.

Income               Dahl and Lochner (2012)    A 10% increase in annual income at ages 5-11 leads to a 0.15 SD increase in test
                                                scores.
Income                Milligan and Stabile      A 10% increase in annual income at ages 0-5 leads to a 0.14 SD increase in test
                      (2011)                    scores.
Maternity leave       Baker and Milligan (2016) A 1-month increase in paid maternity leave at ages 6-12 months leads to a -
                                                0.057% SD decline in test scores.
Nutrition             Almond, Mazumder, and A 1-month increase in fetal nutritional disruption (Ramadan exposure), reduces
                      Van Ewijk (2011)          test scores by 0.07 SD.
Nutrition             Fitzsimons and Vera-      A 1-month increase in breastfeeding leads to a 0.2 SD increase in test scores.
                      Hernandez (2014)
Nutrition             Greve, Schultz-Nielsen,   A 1-month increase in fetal nutritional disruption (Ramadan exposure), reduces
                      Tekin (2015)              female (ONLY) test scores by 0.26 SD.
Pollution (radiation) Black, Bütikofer,         A 10 unit increase in pollution (air/ground radiation) in utero leads to a 0.3 SD
                      Devereux, and Salvanes    decline in test scores.
                      (2014)
Pollution             Bharadwaj, Gibson, Graff- A 10 unit increase in pollution (CO) in utero leads to a 0.4 SD decrease in test
                      Zivin, and Nielsen (2016) scores.

Pollution            Sanders (2012)             A 10 unit decline in pollution (TSP) at the year of birth leads to a 0.1 SD increase
                                                in test scores.
Stress               Aizer, Stroud, and Buka    A 10% increase in cortisol during pregnancy leads to a 0.12 SD decrease in test
                     (2016)                     scores.
Weather              Shah and Millett Steinberg A 10% increase in the proportion of districts/year that experience a rainfall
                     (2016)                     shock leads to a 0.02 SD decline in test scores.

Weather           Aguilar and Vicarelli          A 10% increase in rainfall shocks leads to a 0.02 SD decline in test scores.
                  (2015)
Panel C: Outcome=Wages
Alcohol           Nilsson (2015)                 A 1-month increase in alcohol exposure during pregnancy leads to a 3.4%
                                                 decrease in wages.
Child care           Gertler, Heckman, et al     A 1-month increase in psychosocial stimulation in early-life leads to a 1.75%
                     (2014)                      increase in wages.
Child care           Havnes and Mogstad          A 10% increase in child care subsidies leads to a 1.4% increase in wages.
                     (2011)
Disease (worms)      Baird, Hicks, Kremer, and   A 1-month increase in deworming school-aged children (age ~12) leads to a
                     Miguel (2016)               0.15% decrease in wages.
Disease              Bhalotra and                A 10% decline in infant pneumonia death rates leads to a 7.0% increase in
                     Venkataramani (2015)        wages.

Disease              Beach, Ferrie, Saavedra,    A 10% decrease in typhoid mortality rate leads to a 5.0% increase in wages.
                     and Troesken (2016)

Disease              Schwandt (2016)             A 10% increase in maternal influenza hospitalizations in pregnancy leads to a
                                                 1.1% decline in wages.
Health care          Brown, Kowalski, and        A 1 year increase in Medicaid coverage eligibility at ages 0-18 leads to a 4.8%
                     Lurie (2015)                increase in wages.
Maternity leave      Carneiro, Løken, and        A 1-month increase in paid maternity leave leads to a 1.4% increase in wages.
                     Salvanes (2015)
Nutrition            Adhvaryu et al., (2016)     A 10% increase in (the availability of) iodized salt in utero leads to a 0.4%
                                                 increase in wages.
Table 6: Summarizing the Effects of Shocks on Birth Weight, Test Scores, and Wages
Shock          Study                   Elasticity
Panel A: Outcome= Birth Weight
Pollution       Isen, Rossin-Slater, and   A 10-unit decrease in pollution (TSP) in-utero leads to a 1.0% increase in wages.
                Walker (2015)
