                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF THE WEALTH DISTRIBUTION:
                  A QUANTITATIVE-THEORETIC INVESTIGATION

                                        Joachim Hubmer
                                           Per Krusell
                                      Anthony A. Smith, Jr.

                                       Working Paper 23011
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23011


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2016




For helpful comments the authors would like to thank Chris Carroll, Harald Uhlig, and seminar
participants at the 2015 SED Meetings, the 2015 HydraWorkshop on Dynamic Macroeconomics,
Johns Hopkins, Indiana, Penn State, SOFI, and Yale. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23011.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Joachim Hubmer, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Historical Evolution of the Wealth Distribution: A Quantitative-Theoretic Investigation
Joachim Hubmer, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 23011
December 2016
JEL No. D14,D31,D33,E21,E25,E62,H31

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper employs the benchmark heterogeneous-agent model used in macroeconomics to
examine drivers of the rise in wealth inequality in the U.S. over the last thirty years. Several
plausible candidates are formulated, calibrated to data, and examined through the lens of the
model. There is one main finding: by far the most important driver is the significant drop in tax
progressivity that started in the late 1970s, intensified during the Reagan years, and then
subsequently flattened out, with only a minor bounce back. The sharp observed increases in
earnings inequality, the falling labor share over the recent decades, and potential mechanisms
underlying changes in the gap between the interest rate and the growth rate (Piketty's r-g story) all
fall far short of accounting for the data.

Joachim Hubmer                                             Anthony A. Smith, Jr.
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
Yale University                                            Yale University
28 Hillhouse Avenue                                        P.O. Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520                                        New Haven, CT 06520
joachim.hubmer@yale.edu                                    and NBER
                                                           tony.smith@yale.edu
Per Krusell
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 STOCKHOLM
SWEDEN
and NBER
per.krusell@iies.su.se
                 The Historical Evolution of the Wealth Distribution: A
                                 Quantitative-Theoretic Investigation
                           Joachim Hubmer, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr.∗

                                                    December 21, 2016



                                                           Abstract

              This paper employs the benchmark heterogeneous-agent model used in macroeconomics to examine
          drivers of the rise in wealth inequality in the U.S. over the last thirty years. Several plausible candidates
          are formulated, calibrated to data, and examined through the lens of the model. There is one main
          finding: by far the most important driver is the significant drop in tax progressivity that started in
          the late 1970s, intensified during the Reagan years, and then subsequently flattened out, with only a
          minor bounce back. The sharp observed increases in earnings inequality, the falling labor share over
          the recent decades, and potential mechanisms underlying changes in the gap between the interest rate
          and the growth rate (Piketty’s r − g story) all fall far short of accounting for the data.


1        Introduction
The distribution of wealth in most countries for which there is reliable data is strikingly uneven. There is
also recent work suggesting that the wealth distribution has undergone significant movements over time,
most recently with a large upward swing in dispersion in several Anglo-Saxon countries.1 For example,
according to the estimates in Saez & Zucman (2016) for the United States, the share of overall wealth
held by the top 1% has increased from around 25% in 1980 to over 40% today; for the top 0.1% it has
increased from less than 10% to over 20% over the same time period.
        The observed developments have generated strong reactions across the political spectrum. In his 2014
book, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Piketty is obviously motivated by the growing inequality
in itself, but he also suggests that further increases in wealth concentration may lead to both economic
and democratic instability. Conservatives in the U.S. have expressed worries as well: is the American
Dream really still alive, or might it be that a large fraction of the population simply will no longer be
able to productively contribute to society? Given, for example, that parental wealth and well-being are
important determinants behind children’s human capital accumulation, this appears to be a legitimate
    ∗
     The authors’ affiliations are, respectively, Yale University; Institute for International Economic Studies, NBER, and
CEPR; and Yale University and NBER. For helpful comments the authors would like to thank Chris Carroll, Harald Uhlig,
and seminar participants at the 2015 SED Meetings, the 2015 Hydra Workshop on Dynamic Macroeconomics, Johns Hopkins,
Indiana, Penn State, SOFI, and Yale.
   1
     See, e.g., Piketty (2014) and Saez & Zucman (2016).


                                                               1
concern regardless of one’s political views. As a result of these concerns, a number of policy changes have
been proposed and discussed. The primary aim of the present paper is to understand the determinants of
the observed movements in wealth inequality. This aim is basic but well-motivated: to compare different
policy actions, we need a framework for thinking about what causes inequality and for addressing how
inequality—and other variables—are influenced by any policy proposal at hand.
       In an effort to understand the movements in wealth inequality, Piketty (2014) and its online appendix
suggest specific mathematical theories and as part of the present study we examine those theories.2 Our
aim, however, is to depart instead from a more general, and by now rather standard, quantitatively
oriented theory used in the heterogeneous-agent literature within macroeconomics: the Bewley-Huggett-
Aiyagari model. This is a very natural setting for the study of inequality. This model incorporates rich
detail on the household level along the lines of the applied work in the consumption literature, allowing
several sources of heterogeneity among consumers. It is based on incomplete markets and, hence, does not
feature the “infinite elasticity of capital supply” of dynastic models with complete markets.3 This model
also involves equilibrium interaction: inequality is determined not only by the individual household’s
reactions to changes in the economic environment in which they operate but also by their interaction,
such as in the equilibrium formation of wages and interest rates, two key prices determining the returns to
labor and holding wealth, respectively. Our aim is to see to what extent a reasonably calibrated model can
account for the movements in wealth inequality from the mid-1960s and on as a function of a number of
drivers, the importance of each of which we then evaluate in separate counterfactuals.4 In this endeavor,
we proceed as follows.
       We build on the model studied in Aiyagari (1994), i.e., we use the core setting of the recent literature
on heterogenous agents in macroeconomics.5 This kind of theoretical model is quantitative in nature: it
is constructed as an aggregate version of the applied work on consumption. Moreover, in it, inequality
plays a central role. We calibrate some key parameters of this model to match the wealth and income
distributions in the United States in the mid-1960s and treat these distributions as representing a long-run
steady state. In the 1960s, too, the dispersion of wealth was striking, and it is not immediate how to make
the basic model match the data in this respect. Building on the formulation in Krusell & Smith (1998), we
use preference heterogeneity—in particular, stochastic discount rates that vary across the population at
a point in time—to generate individual behavior among the very richest characterized by propensities to
save that are stochastic but (almost completely) independent of wealth. We also incorporate idiosyncratic
random asset returns, for which recent work by Fagereng et al. (2015) and Bach et al. (2015) uncovers
evidence in panel data from Norway and Sweden. Hence, our setting can be viewed as a microfoundation
for the kind of models entertained in Piketty & Zucman (2015) (who assume linear laws of motion for
wealth accumulation and either random saving propensities or random returns). These models generate a
   2
      The appendix is available here: http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/capital21c/en/Piketty2014TechnicalAppendix.pdf. See
also Piketty (1995) and Piketty (1997) which develop theories of the dynamics of the wealth distribution.
    3
      This elasticity refers to the long-run response of a household’s savings to a change in the interest rate: in particular, with
infinitely-lived consumers and complete markets the equilibrium interest rate is pinned down by the rate of time preference.
    4
      We do not specifically study Piketty’s “Second Fundamental Law”, which is not a theory about inequality per se but
about the aggregate capital-output ratio and which has also been extensively examined in Krusell & Smith (2015).
    5
      The first application in this literature was one to asset pricing (the risk-free rate): Huggett (1993). Aiyagari (1994)
addresses the long-run level of precautionary saving, whereas Krusell & Smith (1998) look at business cycles.


                                                                 2
wealth distribution whose right tail is Pareto-shaped, a feature shown to characterize the data; we discuss
this finding and the relation to a number of other papers building on the same kind of reduced form in
detail in the paper.
      With the resulting realistic starting wealth distribution, we then examine a number of potential
drivers of wealth inequality over the subsequent period. One is tax rates: beginning around 1980 tax
rates fell significantly for top incomes, so that tax progressivity in particular fell substantially. Thus,
higher returns to saving in the upper brackets since that time can potentially explain increased wealth
gaps between the rich and the poor. Another potential explanation for increased wealth inequality is
the rather striking increases in wage/earnings inequality witnessed since the mid-1970s. Since at least
Katz & Murphy (1992) it has been well-documented that the education skill premium has risen. Moreover,
numerous studies have since documented that the premia associated with other measures of skill have
also risen, as have measures of residual, or frictional, wage dispersion.6 In terms of the very highest
earners, Piketty & Saez (2003) document significant movements toward thicker tails in the upper parts
of the distribution. So to the extent that this increased income inequality has translated into savings and
wealth inequality, it could explain some of the changes we set out to analyze. Relatedly, the share of total
income paid to capital has increased recently, potentially contributing to increased wealth inequality (see,
e.g., Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014b)). We consider this factor as well in this study. Finally, we look at
the mechanism suggested in Piketty & Zucman (2015) whereby movements in r − g, i.e., the real interest
rate net of the growth rate of real GDP, would increase wealth inequality. The underlying idea here is
that capital owners become richer the higher is the return on their savings, r, whereas workers’ economic
strength increases with wage (or GDP) growth.
      Thus, the overall methodology we follow is to attempt to quantify the mechanisms just mentioned and
then to examine their individual (and joint) effects on the evolution of wealth inequality from the 1960s.
For the time period considered, we find that the benchmark model does account for a significant share
of the increase in wealth inequality. The model is more or less successful depending on what aspect of
wealth distribution is in focus. The shares of wealth held by the top 10% or top 1% exhibit net increases
that are very similar in the model and in the data, though for the top 0.1% and 0.01% the model does
not deliver enough of an increase, especially for the very top group. For the bottom 50%, the model’s
fit is also good. Furthermore, the model delivers a time path for the ratio of capital to net output that
is similar to the one in the data. As for the timing of the changes, the model delivers a rather smooth
increase in inequality, whereas the data shows faster swings, first down and then up.
   Turning to which specific features explain the largest fractions of the increase in wealth inequality, the
marked decrease in tax progressivity is by far the most powerful force for increasing wealth inequality.
First, other things equal, decreasing tax progressivity spreads out the distribution of after-tax resources
available for consumption and saving. Second, decreasing tax progressivity increases the returns to saving,
leading to higher wealth accumulation, especially among the rich for whom wages (earnings) play a smaller
role in their decision-making.
      Wage inequality, on the other hand, on net contributes negatively to wealth inequality: it increases
  6
      See, e.g., Acemoglu (2002), Hornstein et al. (2005), and Quadrini & Rios-Rull (2015).



                                                              3
by more in a model with changes in progressivity unaccompanied by increases in wage inequality than
in a model with both types of changes. We follow Heathcote et al. (2010) and Piketty & Saez (2003) in
modelling increased wage inequality as an increase in the riskiness of wage realizations around a mean.
In a standard additive permanent-plus-transitory model of wages, we use the estimated time series in
Heathcote et al. (2010) for the variances of the permanent and transitory shocks to wages. Both of
those variances have increased over time, leading to a reduction in wealth inequality for two reasons.
First, increasing wage risk dampens the tendency of heterogeneity in discount rates to drive apart the
distribution of wealth.7 In particular, as wage risk increases, poorer and less patient consumers—who are
less well-insured against this risk through their own savings—engage in additional precautionary saving,
compressing the distribution of wealth at the low end. Second, with more risk aggregate precautionary
savings increase, reducing the equilibrium interest rate and thereby discouraging wealth accumulation
amongst the rich for whom wage risk per se is not so important. In sum, the increasing riskiness of wages
compresses the wealth distribution at both ends.8
    In addition, we follow Piketty & Saez (2003) by adding a Pareto-shaped tail to the wage distribution
so as to match the concentration of earnings at the top of the earning distribution; the standard wage
process (as in Heathcote et al. (2010)) does not match this extreme right tail well. Moreover, the right
tail has thickened over this period, and accordingly we model this thickening as a gradually decreasing
Pareto coefficient, based on the estimates in Piketty & Saez (2003). This element of increased wage
inequality does generate more wealth inequality—because it occurs in a segment of the population where
most workers are already rather well-insured through their own savings—but it is not so potent as to
produce a net overall increase in wealth inequality from higher wage inequality.
    To allow for an increasing capital share over time we conduct an experiment using a CES production
function with a somewhat higher than unitary elasticity between capital and labor. The resulting paths
differ only marginally in this experiment than in the usual case with unitary elasticity. Finally, we conduct
a more stylized r − g experiment in which r increases exogenously by 50% for a decade before returning
to its initial steady-state values. This increase decreases inequality in wealth in the short run, because
the elasticity of saving to r − g turns out to be stronger for the poorer agents in our calibrated model. In
the very long run, an increase in r − g would translate into increased inequality but, as the recent paper
by Gabaix et al. (2016) points out, it takes a long time to fill a long right tail. Hence, even if there were
some mechanism driving an increase in r − g during the past half-century, it would not help to explain
the observed sharp upward movements in wealth inequality over this period.
    What are the implications of our dynamic model of wealth inequality for the future? Quite strikingly,
if the progressivity of taxes remains at today’s historically low level, then wealth inequality will continue
to climb and reach very high levels by, say, 2100: the top 10% will have an additional 10% of all of wealth,
as will (approximately) the top 1%. Thus, decreasing the progressivity of taxes is a rather powerful
mechanism for wealth concentration.
   7
     As Becker (1980) shows, if discount rates are permanently different and there is no wage risk at all, then in the long-run
steady state the most patient consumer owns all of the economy’s wealth.
   8
     Similar forces are at play in Krusell et al. (2009), but in the opposite direction: they find that reductions in wage risk
that accompany the elimination of business cycles lead to higher wealth inequality.



                                                              4
        Our paper begins in Section 2 with a brief literature review, the purpose of which is to put our
modeling in a historical perspective. We discuss the data on wealth inequality and its recent trends in
Section 3. We describe the basic model in Section 4 and the implied behavior of the very richest in Section
5. Section 6 discusses the calibration in detail and Section 7 the results. We conclude our paper in Section
8 with a brief discussion of potential other candidate explanations behind the increased wealth inequality
and, hence, of possible future avenues for research.


2        Connections to the recent macro-inequality literature
The study of inequality in wealth using structural macroeconomic modeling can be said to have started
with Bewley (undated), though in Bewley’s paper the focus was not on inequality per se.9 Bewley’s paper
was not completed—it stops abruptly in the middle—and the first papers to provide a complete analysis
of frameworks like his are Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994). A defining characteristic of these models
is that long-run household wealth responds smoothly to the interest rate, so long as the interest rate is
not too high (higher than the discount rate in the case without growth).
        In their early papers, neither Bewley nor Huggett nor Aiyagari focused on inequality per se but rather
on other phenomena related to inequality (asset pricing and aggregate precautionary saving in the latter
two cases, respectively). Soon after, however, the macroeconomic literature that arose from these analyses
began to address inequality directly. There were several reasons for this development. One was the
interest in building macroeconomic models with microeconomic foundations in which heterogeneity could
influence aggregates, i.e., cases that are in some sense far from aggregation and the typical permanent-
income behavior that characterize the complete-markets model.10 Another was an interest in wealth
inequality per se and the challenge it posed: the difficulty that these models have in generating significant
equilibrium wealth inequality. The difficulty is apparent in Aiyagari (1994), where the wage process is
calibrated to PSID data (as an AR(1) in logs): the resulting wealth distribution is slightly more skewed
than the wage distribution the model uses as an input, but not by much. The Gini index for wealth, in the
stationary distribution of Aiyagari’s model, is only around 0.4, whereas it is around 0.8 in the data. The
purpose here is not to go over the entire literature aiming at matching the wealth distribution but several
different extensions of the model have been proposed in order to match the data better. On some general
level, successful paths forward involve introducing “more heterogeneity”: typically in preferences (such
as discount factors, as in Krusell & Smith (1998)), in the wage/earnings process (as in Castañeda et al.
(2003)), or in occupation (as in Cagetti & De Nardi (2006) or Quadrini (2000)).
        More recently, a literature evolved that focuses on explaining the observed Pareto tail at the top of
the wealth distribution. Benhabib et al. (2011) show analytically that the stationary wealth distribution
in an overlapping-generations (OLG) economy with idiosyncratic capital return risk has a Pareto tail.
    9
     This model is of course not the first one with theoretical implications for inequality. An early example is Stiglitz
(1969) who, building on his 1966 Ph.D. dissertation, studies the dynamics of the distributions of income and wealth in a
neoclassical growth model with exogenous linear savings functions. A defining characteristic of the literature in focus here is
that consumers face problems much like those studied in the applied consumption literature: they are risk-averse and choose
optimal saving in the presence of earnings shocks for which there is not a full set of state-contingent markets.
  10
     See, e.g., Krusell & Smith (1998) and Guerrieri & Lorenzoni (2011) for this line of work.


                                                              5
Analogously, they provide analytical results for an infinite-horizon economy (Benhabib et al., 2015b).
In Benhabib et al. (2015a), they conduct a quantitative investigation of social mobility and the wealth
distribution in an OLG economy with idiosyncratic returns, which are fixed over a life-time. In a stylized
model, Gabaix et al. (2016) demonstrate that the random growth mechanism that can generate the Pareto
tail in the wealth distribution (either through idiosyncratic capital return risk or random discount factors)
implies very slow transitional dynamics. Furthermore, Nirei & Aoki (2016) consider a stationary Bewley
economy with investment risk. In that setting they find that decreasing top tax rates can explain the
increasing concentration of wealth at the top.
         Most of the literature on Bewley models has considered only the stationary (long-run) wealth distri-
bution. Two recent exceptions are Kaymak & Poschke (2016), who in line with our analysis here aim to
quantify the contribution of changes in taxes and transfers and in the earnings distribution to changes
in the U.S. wealth distribution, and Aoki & Nirei (forthcoming) who study how a one-time drop in tax
rates affects transitional dynamics in a setting with investment risk.
         Relative to these recent contributions, the present paper builds directly on Aiyagari (1994) and matches
the wealth distribution with the aid of stochastic, heterogeneous discount rates and idiosyncratic asset
returns. As we show below, the randomness in discount rates and rates of return generates capital
accumulation dynamics for the very richest that are similar to those in the recent theoretical studies on
Pareto tails just cited, including the very slow transitional dynamics. For earnings, we follow Aiyagari
(1994) but add a transitory shock to earnings as well as an exogenous Pareto-shaped tail in earnings.
Because we also consider transitional dynamics, it is important to investigate how our results might
depend on the extent to which agents can foresee the changes in taxes and other exogenous factors; here
we consider both perfect foresight and a “myopic” alternative. We do not incorporate assets like land,
housing, or stock-market equity but focus on physical capital only. This is potentially an important
omission insofar as the returns on these assets are random and have experienced a growing variance over
time, as discussed in our concluding remarks in Section 8.


3         Measuring wealth inequality over time
Over the last century, the distribution of wealth in the United States has undergone drastic changes and
we very briefly review data from some key studies here. Throughout the time period considered, wealth
was heavily concentrated at the top. Figure 1 shows the evolution of the share of total wealth held by
the top 1% and the top 0.1%, as measured using different estimation methods.11 Considering all three
methods jointly, top wealth inequality exhibits a U-shaped pattern in the twentieth century. Yet, the
magnitude of the increase in wealth concentration in the last thirty years differs substantially among
estimation methodologies. We will calibrate the initial steady state of our model to the wealth shares
estimated by Saez & Zucman (2016) and consequently compare the model transition to their estimates.
    11
    In Figure 1, the lines labelled “SCF” display findings from the Survey of Consumer Finances, as reported in
Saez & Zucman (2016). The lines labelled “Capitalization” display findings from Saez & Zucman (2016), who back out
the stock of wealth held by a tax unit from observed capital income tax data. Finally, the lines labelled “Estate tax
multiplier” display findings from Kopczuk & Saez (2004), who use observed estate tax data to make inferences about the
distribution of wealth. See Kopczuk (2015) for a detailed comparison of the different measurement methods.


                                                          6
                                   55
                                                                      Capitalization, Top 1%
                                   50                                 Capitalization, Top 0.1%
                                                                      SCF, Top 1%
                                   45                                 SCF, Top 0.1%
                                                                      Estate tax multiplier, Top 1%
                                   40                                 Estate tax multiplier, Top 0.1%
               Wealth Share in %



                                   35

                                   30

                                   25

                                   20

                                   15

                                   10

                                   5
                                        1920    1930   1940   1950   1960     1970     1980     1990    2000   2010

                                               Figure 1: Top wealth share measurements over time


Their estimates are especially useful for us as they allow for considering a group as small as the top
0.01%. Furthermore, they cover a long time period. While the capitalization method that they use to
back out wealth estimates does not suffer from the shortcomings of the SCF data (such as concerns about
response-rate bias and exclusion of the Forbes 400), it is an indirect way of measuring wealth and as such
has other drawbacks. For example, the tax data allows only for a coarse partitioning of capital income in
asset classes and within each class returns are effectively assumed to be homogeneous. Therefore, we will
in addition contrast our findings to estimates from the Survey of Consumer Finances.12
         Another takeaway from Figure 1 is that the wealth distribution was quite stable in the 1950s and
1960s. As, in addition, some of the time series estimates we feed into our model start in 1967, we take
this year as the initial steady state in our model.


4         Model framework
In this section, we describe the model economy. We depart from the framework studied by Aiyagari
(1994). To generate realistic income and wealth heterogeneity, the model features stochastic discount
rates and returns to capital as well as an earnings process centered around a persistent and a temporary
component.
    12
    Bricker et al. (2016) make adjustments to the SCF data, including incorporating the Forbes 400. For the top 0.1% wealth
shares these adjustments roughly cancel. For the top 1% shares these adjustments shift the corresponding line in Figure 1
down by approximately 2 to 3 percentage points.




                                                                      7
4.1      Consumers
Time is discrete and there is a continuum of infinitely lived, ex ante identical consumers (dynasties).
Preferences are defined over infinite streams of consumption with von Neumann-Morgenstern utility in
constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) form:

                                                                    c1−γ
                                                      u(c) =             .                                                      (1)
                                                                    1−γ

In period t, a consumer discounts the future with an idiosyncratic stochastic factor βt that is the realization
of a Markov process characterized by the conditional distribution Γβ (βt+1 |βt ), giving rise to the following
objective:

                                                                    ∞ t−1
                                                  (             "                     #)
                                                                    X Y
                                        max       u(c0 ) + E0                 βs u(ct )    .                                    (2)
                                       (ct )∞
                                            t=0                     t=1 s=0

       Labor supply is exogenous. Each period t, a consumer supplies a stochastic amount lt = lt (pt , νt ) of
efficiency units of labor to the market that depends on a persistent component pt ∼ Γp (pt |pt−1 ) and a
transitory component νt ∼ Γν (νt ). Taking as given a competitive wage rate wt , her earnings are wt lt .
       Asset markets are incomplete: consumers cannot fully insure against idiosyncratic shocks, but instead
have access only to a single asset that pays a gross return (1 + rt ηt ), where rt is the average market return
and ηt ∼ Γη (ηt ) is a transitory idiosyncratic shock.13
       The decision problem of the consumer can be stated parsimoniously in recursive form:



                      Vt (xt , pt , βt ) = max {u(xt − at+1 ) + βt E [Vt+1 (xt+1 , pt+1 , βt+1 )|pt , βt ]}                     (3)
                                       at+1 ≥a

                   subject to xt+1 = at+1 + yt+1 − τt+1 (yt+1 ) + Tt+1                                                          (4)
                               yt+1 = rt+1 ηt+1 at+1 + wt+1 lt+1 (pt+1 , νt+1 )                                                 (5)

       Given cash-on-hand xt (all resources available in period t), the optimal savings decision and the
resulting value function depend solely on the persistent component in the earnings process pt and the
current discount factor βt . Conditional on (pt , βt ), the expectation is taken over (pt+1 , βt+1 ) as well as
the transitory shocks to earnings νt+1 and the return on capital ηt+1 . Gross income yt is subject to an
income tax τt (·) and each consumer receives a uniform lump-sum transfer Tt .

4.2      Production, government, and equilibrium
Firms are perfectly competitive and can be described by an aggregate constant returns to scale production
                                                                                               ∂F (Kt ,L)
function F (Kt , L) that yields a wage rate per efficiency unit of labor wt =                     ∂L        as well as an (average)
  13
    Fagereng et al. (2015) and Bach et al. (2015) find not only heterogeneity but persistence in idiosyncratic asset returns
but a good portion of this persistence stems from richer consumers bearing more aggregate risk, which we do not model
here. Furthermore, given that we allow for persistence in discount factors, we find below that we can replicate the wealth
distribution in 1967, even in its remotest tails, quite accurately without persistence in idiosyncratic returns.


                                                                8
                                            ∂F (Kt ,L)
market return on capital rt =                  ∂K        − δ, where δ ∈ (0, 1) is the depreciation rate. Aggregate labor
supply L is normalized to one throughout.
       The government redistributes aggregate income by means of a uniform lump-sum payment, which
amounts to a constant fraction λ ∈ [0, 1] of aggregate tax revenues. The remainder is spent in a way such
that marginal utilities of agents are not affected.
       A steady-state equilibrium of this economy is characterized by a market clearing level of capital K ⋆
and a lump-sum transfer T ⋆ such that:
                                                                                                        ∂F (K ⋆ ,1)               ∂F (K ⋆ ,1)
  (i) factor prices are given by their respective marginal products w⋆ =                                   ∂L         and r ⋆ =      ∂K         − δ;

 (ii) given r ⋆ , w⋆ , and T ⋆ , consumers solve the stationary version of their decision problem, giving rise
         to an invariant distribution Γ(a, p, β, ν, η);

(iii) the government redistributes a fraction λ of total tax revenues, i.e.,
                                                         Z
                                             T⋆ = λ          τ (r ⋆ ηa + w⋆ l(p, ν))dΓ(a, p, β, ν, η);


(iv) and capital markets clear, i.e.,                               Z
                                                              ⋆
                                                             K =        adΓ(a, p, β, ν, η).

       In the benchmark perfect-foresight transition experiment, we start the economy in period t0 in some
initial steady state, described by a vector θ ⋆ that parametrizes the tax schedule and earnings process
and by the equilibrium objects (K ⋆ , T ⋆ ). Agents are fully surprised and learn about a new exogenous
environment (θt )tt=t
                   1
                     0 +1
                          that will prevail over some transition period t = t0 + 1, t0 + 2, ..., t1 . From t1
onwards, the exogenous environment will once again be constant and equal to θt1 . In a perfect-foresight
equilibrium, agents are fully informed about future equilibrium objects (Kt , Tt )∞
                                                                                  t=t0 +1 too and optimize
accordingly. Capital markets clear and the fraction of tax revenues λ that is redistributed is fixed.
       In an alternative myopic transition experiment, agents are surprised about the new exogenous envi-
ronment and equilibrium prices every period. That is, in period t = t0 , t0 +1, ..., t1 −1, given a distribution
Γt (xt , pt , βt ), they choose a savings decision rule, at+1 = gt (xt , pt , βt ), assuming that both θt and (rt , wt , Tt )
will prevail forever. In period t + 1, they are accordingly surprised that: one, the exogenous environment
has changed to θt+1 ; and, two, that equilibrium factor returns (rt+1 , wt+1 ) and transfers Tt+1 result from
capital-market clearing and government-budget balance in period t + 1.14 These two informational struc-
tures are, of course, extreme. We chose them because we expect them to bracket a range of informational
  14
       That is, (rt+1 , wt+1 ) are the marginal products of the net production function F (Kt+1 , 1) − δKt+1 , where
                                                     Z
                                             Kt+1 = gt (xt , pt , βt )dΓt (at , pt , βt , νt , ηt ),

and                                     Z
                             Tt+1 = λ       τt+1 (rt+1 ηat+1 + wt+1 lt+1 (pt+1 , νt+1 ))dΓt+1 (at , pt , βt , νt , ηt ),

where Γt+1 is the distribution in period t + 1 generated by the period-t distribution Γt and the decision rule gt .




                                                                         9
assumptions. Given that the results, as will be reported below, turn out to be very similar across the two
structures, we are confident that our findings are robust to other variations in this dimension.


5         The right tail of the wealth distribution: approximately Pareto
In this section, we briefly explain the main mechanism that leads to a “fat” Pareto-shaped right tail in
the wealth distribution. The same mechanism is at play in the much simpler stochastic-β model originally
proposed in Krusell & Smith (1998).
         Formally, we make use of a mathematical result on random growth by Kesten (1973): consider a
stochastic process

                                                         at = st at−1 + ǫt ,                                                       (6)

where st and ǫt are (for our purposes positive) i.i.d. random variables. If there exists some ζ > 0 such
that E[sζ ] = 1 as well as E[ǫζ ] < ∞, then at converges in probability to a random variable A that satisfies
lima→∞ P rob(A > a) ∝ a−ζ , i.e., the right tail of the stationary distribution has a Pareto shape.15
         In our setup, st is the asymptotic marginal propensity to save out of wealth, varying in β, and ǫt
represents labor income. Crucially, optimal savings decisions are asymptotically, with increasing wealth,
linear in economies with idiosyncratic risk and incomplete markets.16 Assuming a fixed discount rate,
Carroll & Kimball (1996) prove in a finite-horizon setting that the consumption function is concave under
hyperbolic absolute risk version, which comprises most commonly used utility functions (e.g., CRRA).
Hence, the savings rule is convex. However, as household wealth increases, the convexity in the savings
rule becomes weaker and weaker.17 Intuitively, as wealth grows large consumers can smooth consumption
more and more effectively. Moreover, with CRRA preferences decisions rules are exactly linear in the
absence of risk (or with complete markets against such risk). The slope is then larger (smaller) than one
as the discount rate is smaller (larger) than the interest rate. In the recent literature on the Pareto tail in
the wealth distribution, either saving rates or returns to capital (or both, as in this paper) are assumed
to vary randomly across consumers. Saving rules are then asymptotically linear with random coefficients:
Benhabib et al. (2015b) show analytically that in this case the unique ergodic wealth distribution has a
Pareto distribution in its right tail.
         Figure 2 shows the marginal propensity to save out of capital holdings (denoted k in the figure)
arising from the stochastic-β model under study in the present paper.18 As discussed above, the marginal
propensity to save increases in wealth, holding earnings constant, and asymptotes to a constant that
depends on the consumer’s discount factor. Figure 3 displays the tail behavior of the stationary wealth
distribution. In line with the theoretical results in Benhabib et al. (2015b), the logarithm of its counter
    15
      The exact conditions as well as a very accessible treatment can be found in Gabaix (2009).
    16
      In fact, the decision rules are almost linear for all but the very poorest agents, i.e., those close to the borrowing constraint.
For this reason, approximate aggregation as introduced in Krusell & Smith (1998) typically works very well.
   17
      A direct proof for a two-period problem can be found in Krusell & Smith (2006); Carroll (2012) proves the asymptotic
linearity of the savings rule in a finite-horizon problem as the horizon grows large.
   18
      The graphs in this section are derived from a simplified model with a flat tax, to focus on the main mechanism.



                                                                  10
cumulative distribution function becomes linear in the logarithm of assets as assets grow large, indicating
that the right tail of the distribution follows a Pareto distribution.




                                                      1

                      marginal propensity to save

                                                    0.95




                                                     0.9
                                                                                      high beta, high earnings
                                                                                      high beta, low earnings
                                                                                      low beta, high earnings
                                                    0.85                              low beta, low earnings


                                                           2    4     6      8        10       12      14        16
                                                                             log(k)

                                                       Figure 2: Asymptotic marginal propensity to save

    In light of this result, it is worth noting that the model in Castañeda et al. (2003)—which generates
substantial wealth inequality using an earnings process featuring a low-probability but transient very-
high-earnings state—does not deliver a Pareto tail in wealth. In this model, in which consumers have
a common discount rate, marginal propensities to save do not vary but instead converge to the same
constant, independently of the level of earnings and as a result the steady-state distribution of wealth
does not feature a Pareto tail. This model can deliver such a Pareto tail, however, if the earning process
itself has a Pareto tail. In the absence of randomness in either discount rates or returns, however,
the wealth distribution inherits not only the Pareto tail of the earnings distribution but also its Pareto
coefficient. Because earnings are considerably less concentrated than wealth, the resulting tail in wealth
is too thin to match the data in such an alternative model.


6    Calibration
In this section, we describe how we calibrate our model economy. As indicated in Figure 1, the U.S.
wealth distribution was roughly stable in the 1950s and 1960s. Since some of the time series estimates
we use start in 1967, we take this year as our initial steady state. We set the model period to a year to
conform to the tax system.




                                                                             11
                             0

                            -2

                            -4

                            -6

                            -8

                           -10

                           -12            log(Prob(K > k))
                           -14            Top 10%
                                          Top 1%
                           -16            Top 0.1%
                                          Top 0.01%
                           -18

                                  -5           0                5     10            15
                                                             log(k)

                                 Figure 3: Pareto tail of the wealth distribution


6.1   Basic parameters
We parameterize the production technology and utility function using standard functional forms and
parameters. The (gross) production function is given by F (K, L) = K α L1−α . The capital share is set
to α = 0.36 and depreciation to δ = 0.048 annually. In an extension (see Section 7.4), we check the
sensitivity of our results to using a constant-elasticity-of-substitution production function with (gross)
elasticity greater than one. The coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, is set to 1.5.

6.2   The earnings process
The earnings process is based on the traditional log-normal framework with lt (pt , νt ) = exp(pt + νt ).
That is, we assume that the persistent component pt of the earnings process follows a Gaussian AR(1)
process with parameters (ρP , σtP ). The autocorrelation coefficient, ρP , is fixed over time, while the
innovation standard deviation varies. Likewise, the transitory component νt is also assumed to be normally
distributed with standard deviation σtT . We use estimates by Heathcote et al. (2010) that span the period
1967–2000 and assume that the time-varying variances of the innovations are constant thereafter. The
left panel of Figure 4 displays the resulting cross-sectional dispersion. The estimates show a significant
increase in earnings risk for both components.
   As is well known, the resulting log-normal cross-sectional distribution of earnings understates the
concentration of top labor income quite severely. Because the observed increase in top labor income
shares is potentially an important explanation for the observed increase in wealth inequality at the top,
we augment the framework for the top 10% earners in such a way that we can directly match the fraction
of labor income going to the top 10%, top 1%, top 0.1% and top 0.01%. In concrete terms, we posit



                                                             12
                     Cross-sectional Standard Deviations                                  Pareto Tail Coefficient Earnings
               0.6                                                               3
                            persistent component
                            transitory component                               2.8
               0.5
                                                                               2.6

               0.4
                                                                               2.4

                                                                               2.2
               0.3

                                                                                 2
               0.2
                                                                               1.8

               0.1                                                             1.6
                     1970    1980      1990        2000      2010                     1970      1980    1990     2000        2010



                                           Figure 4: Earnings process ingredients


lt (pt , νt ) = ψt (pt ) exp(νt ), where
                                              
                                              exp(pt )                                   if Fpt (pt ) ≤ 0.9,
                                ψt (pt ) =                        
                                                                      Fpt (pt )−0.9
                                                                                                                                   (7)
                                              F −1                                       if Fpt (pt ) > 0.9.
                                                   P areto(κt )          1−0.9


Fpt (·) is the cdf of pt and FP−1                                                                          −1
                                areto(κt ) (·) the inverse cdf for a Pareto distribution with lower bound Fpt (0.9)
and shape coefficient κt . Effectively, we thus assume that top earnings are spread out according to
a (scaled) Pareto distribution, while earnings for the majority of workers are distributed according to
a log-normal distribution. The Pareto tail coefficient on labor income κt is then one additional free
parameter to calibrate in each year year. We use estimates on top wage shares from an updated series
by Piketty & Saez (2003) spanning 1967–2011 as calibration targets. The right panel of Figure 4 displays
the calibrated Pareto tail coefficient κt and Figure 5 displays the resulting top labor income shares. That
we can match top labor income shares very well using just a single parameter in each year (i.e., the
tail coefficient) simply reflects the fact that the Pareto distribution is a very good description of the
cross-sectional earnings distribution at the top.
    We do not explicitly model unemployment, nor voluntary non-employment or retirement. We do,
however, introduce a zero-earnings state, occurring with probability χ0 = 0.075 independently of (pt , νt )
and over time, reflecting both long-term unemployment and shocks that trigger temporary exit from the
labor force. This probability is calibrated, together with a borrowing constraint amounting to roughly
one yearly lump-sum transfer, so that the initial steady-state wealth distribution matches both the share
of wealth held by the bottom 50% and the fraction of the population with negative net wealth.

6.3     Tax system
The progressivity of the U.S. tax system has decreased substantially over the model period. To account
for these changes, we use estimates on federal effective tax rates by Piketty & Saez (2007) for the period


                                                                        13
                                  top 10% share                                   top 1% share
                                                                    14
                      35
                                                                    12

                      30                                            10

                                                                     8
                                                    model
                      25                            data             6

                           1970   1980    1990   2000   2010              1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                  top 0.1% share                                 top 0.01% share
                       5
                                                                     2
                       4
                                                                    1.5
                       3
                                                                     1
                       2
                                                                    0.5
                       1
                           1970   1980    1990   2000   2010              1970   1980   1990   2000   2010



                                         Figure 5: Top labor income shares in %


1967–2000, keeping them constant thereafter. These comprise the four major federal taxes: individual
income, corporate income, estate and gift, and payroll taxes.19 Piketty & Saez (2007) calculate effective
average tax rates for eleven income brackets, with a particularly detailed decomposition for top income
groups (up to the top 0.01%). We translate this data to our model by means of a step-wise tax function
τt (·) with eleven steps. For each bracket, the threshold is set to match its income share in the data and
the marginal tax rate such that the resulting average tax rate aligns with the data. Figure 6 shows that
the U.S. tax system has indeed become much less progressive over the model period.
       Note that in our model taxes τt (yt ) are a function of total income yt , consistent with the measurement.
A weakness of our calibration is that we do not have separate tax rates for different sources of income,
but a strength is that we use effective tax rates, thereby accounting for tax avoidance and changing
portfolio composition to the extent that these vary systematically with income. To account for government
transfers, we introduce a social safety net in the simplest possible way by assuming that each agent
receives an (untaxed) lump-sum transfer Tt every period, its size being a constant fraction λ = 0.6 of tax
  19
     Given that our model abstracts from the life cycle, it is appropriate to include the estate tax in the tax on total income,
thus effectively smoothing out the incidence of this tax over the life cycle. Ignoring the estate tax would mean omitting a
major source of decreasing tax progressivity. Piketty & Saez (2007) assume further that the corporate income tax burden
falls entirely (and uniformly) on capital income. They argue that this is a middle-ground assumption (regarding the resulting
tax progressivity) between assuming that the tax falls solely on shareholders at one extreme and assuming that it is effectively
born by labor income at the other extreme.




                                                               14
                             0.8


                             0.7                                       top rate
                                                                       5 * average income
                                                                       3 * average income
                             0.6                                       average income


                             0.5


                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1
                                    1970    1975    1980     1985      1990     1995        2000



                     Figure 6: Imputed marginal tax rates for selected total income levels


revenues.20
       Note that the income tax does not distort labor supply in our setting, since we assume the latter is
exogenous. This simplification is obviously not a good one for understanding the welfare consequences of
changes in tax rates, but because our current focus is on wealth accumulation and its distribution in the
population we do not think that it is a major shortcoming.

6.4      Idiosyncratic discount rates and returns to capital
Finally, we calibrate the process for the discount factor as well as the dispersion in the returns to capital
to match the right tail of the wealth distribution in the initial steady state. To discipline our exercise, we
posit that β follows a Gaussian AR(1) process:

                              βt = ρβ βt−1 + (1 − ρβ )µβ + σ β ǫβt ,          ǫβt ∼ N (0, 1).

Moreover, we assume that the idiosyncratic factor in the return to capital is normally distributed: ηt ∼i.i.d.
N (1, σ η ). Importantly, all these parameters are fixed over time (by varying them freely we could of course
track the evolution of the wealth distribution more or less exactly). The mean discount factor determines
the equilibrium capital-output ratio and we set it to µβ = 0.92 to match a ratio of capital to net output of
about 4 in the initial steady state. The calibrated stochastic-β parameters are ρβ = 0.992 and σ β = 0.0019,
implying that the standard deviation of the cross-sectional distribution of discount factors, which does
not vary over time, is 0.0148. The idiosyncratic noise in the return to capital is calibrated to σ η = 0.725,
  20
    About 60% of total federal outlays are mandatory spending, the bulk of it on Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and
income security programs (CBO, 2015). The remainder is spent on the Department of Defense and other government agencies
as well as on interest payments.


                                                           15
     Parameter              ρβ              σβ           ση                              a                 χ0
     Value                0.992          0.0019        0.725                          −0.24              0.075
     Target         Top 10% share        Top 1%      Top 0.1%      Top 0.01%      Bottom 50%        Fraction a < 0
     Data                70.8%            27.8%        9.4%           3.1%             4.0%               8.0%
     Model               70.6%            28.1%        9.5%           2.9%             3.1%               7.0%

                       Table 1: Matching the 1967 wealth distribution as a steady state


implying that the gross (pre-tax, net of depreciation) return on capital (1 + r ⋆ η) lies in the interval
[0.9874, 1.1437] for 90% of all agents in the initial steady state.21
    To summarize, Table 1 lists the values of the five parameters (persistence and standard deviation of
the discount rates; standard deviation of return shocks; the borrowing constraint; and the probability
of zero income) calibrated to match as closely as possible six features of the initial steady-state wealth
distribution: the shares held by the top 10%, the top 1%, the top 0.1%, the top 0.01%, and the bottom
50% as well as the fraction of the population with negative net wealth. The fit is excellent at both ends
of the distribution.22 To the extent that the right tail of the wealth distribution has a Pareto tail, we are
therefore also matching the Pareto coefficient governing its thickness, because this coefficient is pinned
down by the ratio of the top 0.01% share to the top 0.1% share, or the ratio of the top 0.1% share to the
top 1% share, both of which are roughly one-third, both in the model and in the data.
    Two comments are in order. First, when solving the model numerically we truncate the β and η
distributions to ensure that the consumer’s optimization problem is well-defined (with finite present-value
utility) and that a stationary distribution of wealth emerges. Unlike in a standard Aiyagari economy
without heterogeneity in preferences, in our model some agents temporarily have discount rates that are
smaller than the rate of return, a necessary condition for generating a Pareto tail in the wealth distribution
(see the discussion in Section 5). It follows that the support of the stationary wealth distribution is not
bounded from above. In practice, we use a large enough upper bound in our numerical implementation
so that the resulting truncation error is negligible.23
    Second, if our goal were solely to match the Pareto coefficient in the right tail of the wealth distribution,
it would be excessive to calibrate as many as five parameters to match features of the wealth distribution.
But the tail coefficient is not a sufficient statistic for wealth inequality unless the entire distribution is
(counterfactually) Pareto-shaped: even if, say, the top 1% of the wealth distribution can be described
exactly by a Pareto distribution, the tail coefficient determines only the distribution of wealth within these
top 1% but not the fraction of total wealth held by the top 1%. While stochastic discount factors are the
main force driving the shape of the upper tail in the initial steady-state wealth distribution, to achieve
  21
     The idiosyncratic variation of returns in our calibration turns out to be close to the amount found by Fagereng et al.
(2015) in Norwegian data; see, for example, Panel C of Table 1 in that paper. Bach et al. (2015) find roughly comparable
amounts of variation in Swedish data.
  22
     The data on top wealth shares in Table 1 is from Saez & Zucman (2016), who use a capitalization method to calculate
them. Because this method is unreliable for a breakdown of the bottom 90%, the other data moments are based on survey
data (SCF and precursors); see Kennickell (2011).
  23
     Appendix A describes in detail our numerical procedure.



                                                              16
our objective of replicating the distribution of wealth on its entire domain we found that introducing in
addition a reasonable amount of randomness in returns helped to improve the fit. Moreover, because
ownership of primary residences and poorly diversified private equity account for a sizable fraction of net
wealth, we view randomness in returns as a realistic feature of individual asset accumulation.24


7     Results
In Section 6, we showed that our model framework, when properly calibrated, can replicate wealth het-
erogeneity, including the Pareto-shaped right tail, as well as other macroeconomic moments in the initial
steady state. We proceed in this section to report on our main result: the evolution of the wealth distri-
bution in the our model economy contrasted with the data. Subsequently, we assess the robustness of our
findings to key assumptions about households’ foresight and about how the return to capital responds to
capital deepening. We conclude the section with an outlook into the 21st century through the lens of our
model.

7.1    Benchmark transition experiment
In the benchmark specification, we start the economy in its initial steady state in 1967 and compute the
model transition to a new steady steady under perfect foresight. In the new steady state, the tax system
is less progressive, earnings risk is higher, and top labor income inequality is higher too, as described in
Sections 6.2 and 6.3.
    Figure 7 displays the evolution of top wealth shares in the model (solid blue line) compared to the
data as measured by Saez & Zucman (2016) using the capitalization method (SZ). In addition, whenever
possible the graphs are augmented by survey estimates from the SCF (dashed yellow lines). These shares
display an overall upward trend in both the data and the model economy. The model economy matches
the magnitude of the changes in the top 10% and top 1% shares over the last half-century, though it fails
to capture the U-shaped pattern in the data: these shares drop somewhat between the 1960s and the
1980s before climbing rapidly. Further in the tail, the model economy continues to capture the trend,
but fails more and more to replicate the magnitude of the changes. The share of total wealth held by
the top 0.1%, for example, increases by more than ten percentage points in the data over the sample
period 1967–2012 (according to the SZ estimates) but by less than five in the model.25 Even further in
the tail, the share of wealth held by the top 0.01% increases from 2.9% to 4.2% over the sample period
(i.e., almost a fifty percent increase), while it more than triples, from 3.1% to 11.2%, in the data (again
according to the SZ estimates). As we discuss further in Section 7.6, the top wealth shares in the model
economy continue to increase slowly over a long transition period before reaching the new steady state.
This finding is consistent with Gabaix et al. (2016) who argue that the random growth mechanism that
   24
      See Moskowitz & Vissing-Jørgensen (2002), who document extreme concentration of private equity (its total value being
similar in magnitude to public equity): 75% of total private equity is held by households for whom it accounts for the
majority of their total net worth and entrepreneurs invest on average more than 70% of their private equity holdings in a
single company. See also the discussion in McKay (2013) regarding the distribution of returns on mutual funds.
   25
      In the SCF data, by contrast, the increase is the same as in the model



                                                            17
                         top 10% wealth share                                top 1% wealth share
             80
                         model                                  40
                         data (SZ)
             75          data (SCF)
                                                                35

             70
                                                                30


             65                                                 25


                  1970   1980         1990   2000   2010             1970   1980    1990     2000    2010


                         top 0.1% wealth share                              top 0.01% wealth share
                                                                12

             20                                                 10

                                                                8
             15
                                                                6

             10                                                 4

                                                                2

                  1970   1980         1990   2000   2010             1970   1980    1990     2000    2010


                                       Figure 7: Top wealth shares in %, 1967–2012


drives top wealth inequality tends to produce slow transitions (especially in the tails of the distribution).
      Figure 8 shows that the transition in the model economy is broadly consistent with the data along
two other key dimensions: first, the ratio of capital to net output shows a steady rise similar to the one in
the data (absent business-cycle fluctuations); second, the share of wealth held by the bottom half, already
quite small in 1967, drops by two percentage points in the model as compared to about three percentage
points in the data.26

7.2      Counterfactuals
Changes in three structural factors—earnings risk, top earnings inequality, and tax progressivity—drive
the transitional dynamics in the model economy. To assess which of these is the most important quanti-
tatively, we conducted three experiments in which only one of the three structural factors is allowed to
change, the other two being held constant instead at their 1967 values. Which of these changes is the
main driver of increases in wealth inequality, particularly in the upper reaches of the distribution?
      Figure 9 displays the transition paths for the top wealth shares for each of the three counterfactual
experiments over the time period 1967 to 2012. These graphs show clearly that the main driver of changes
in the right tail of the wealth distribution is changes in taxes. Increases in earnings risk, on the other
hand, reduce top wealth inequality, other things equal.
 26
      Aggregate wealth data is from Piketty & Zucman (2014).



                                                           18
               capital - net output ratio                                   bottom 50% share
 6                                                             4
               model (capital)
5.5            data (national wealth)                        3.5
               data (private wealth)
 5                                                             3

4.5                                                          2.5

 4                                                             2

3.5                                                          1.5           model
                                                                           data (SCF)

 3                                                             1
      1970      1980          1990       2000    2010              1970   1980      1990     2000   2010


         Figure 8: Capital-output ratio and bottom 50% share (in %), 1967–2012




                 top 10% wealth share                                      top 1% wealth share
                                                             40
             taxes
80           full model
             top earnings
             earnings risk
                                                             35
75


                                                             30
70



65                                                           25
      1970     1980          1990       2000    2010               1970   1980     1990     2000    2010



                 top 0.1% wealth share                                    top 0.01% wealth share
14
                                                              4
13

12
                                                             3.5
11

10                                                            3

 9
                                                             2.5
      1970     1980          1990       2000    2010               1970   1980     1990     2000    2010


                              Figure 9: Top wealth shares in %, 1967–2012




                                                        19
                           capital - net output ratio                                bottom 50% share
            4.3                                                        4
                         taxes
            4.2          full model                                  3.5
                         top earnings
            4.1          earnings risk
                                                                       3
             4
                                                                     2.5
            3.9
                                                                       2
            3.8

            3.7                                                      1.5


            3.6                                                        1
                  1970     1980          1990    2000   2010                1970   1980    1990      2000   2010


                    Figure 10: Capital-output ratio and bottom 50% share (in %), 1967–2012


    The right panel of Figure 10 displays the transition path for the bottom 50% share, where again
changes in taxes are the main driver. Finally, the left panel of Figure 10 displays the transition path for
the ratio of capital to net output. Here are all three changes contribute positively to its growth from 1967
to 2012, with the increase in earnings risk playing the largest role.
    Table 2 summarizes the results of the three experiments, quantifying how much each of the factors
contributes to the changes in the wealth shares over the time period 1967–2012.

                                                Earnings risk   Top earnings       Taxes   Combined
                         Top 10%                    −0.78            0.22          1.89       1.32
                         Top 1%                     −0.19            0.05          0.82       0.65
                         Top 0.1%                   −0.08            0.03          0.35       0.31
                         Top 0.01%                  −0.04            0.03          0.16       0.18
                         Bottom 50%                 −0.21            0.33          0.55       0.78

       Table 2: Fraction of change in wealth shares explained by model: decomposition by channel

    To understand the numbers in the table, focus on the share of total wealth held by the richest
percentile. Saez & Zucman (2016) measure an increase in this share from 27.8% to 41.8% from 1967
to 2012. Over the same time period, allowing for changes only in earnings risk and keeping all other
parameters fixed at their initial steady-state values, the model predicts a decrease from 28.0% to 25.2%.
Changes in earnings risk therefore explain a fraction 25.2−28.0
                                                           28.0 / 41.8−27.8
                                                                     27.8   = −0.20 of the actual change.27
Again, the observed increases in earnings risk reduce inequality, moving it in the opposite direction from
the observed changes! (Separate increases in either the persistent or transitory components of earnings
risk also reduce inequality.) Instead, as can be seen for all the different distributional statistics, the main
driver of the surge in wealth concentration is the changing U.S. tax system. The increase in top earnings
inequality (parametrized by changes over time in the the Pareto tail coefficient κt on labor income) has
worked in the same direction, although the effect of this channel is much smaller.
  27
     Note that the fractions generally do not add up to the fraction explained when feeding in all observed changes at the
same time, as in our benchmark experiment. The remainder is due to interaction effects in general equilibrium.



                                                                20
       Why does an increase in earnings risk reduce wealth inequality? As noted in Section 1, persistent
heterogeneity in discount rates is a powerful force driving the wealth distribution apart: with permanently
different discount rates and complete markets against earnings risk, the most patient would eventually
hold all the economy’s wealth.28 Earnings risk, then, is a friction, or glue, that keeps the distribution from
flying apart altogether as in Becker (1980)’s work cited in Section 1. This risk operates especially strongly
at the low end of the wealth distribution, where poorer consumers save to move away from borrowing
constraints when earnings risk is larger.
   In our model higher earnings risk also generates a thinner right tail in the wealth distribution because
the resulting increase in aggregate precautionary savings drives down the equilibrium interest rate. This
drop in the interest rate shifts the distribution of savings propensities to the left, particularly for the well-
insured wealthy consumers for whom wage risk is largely immaterial and who therefore have essentially
linear decision rules. As discussed in Section 5), the Pareto tail coefficient, ζ, is defined implicitly by the
equation E[sζ ] = 1, where s is the (asymptotic) marginal propensity to save out of wealth. As s falls for
all discount-factor types, ζ must increase to compensate, i.e., the Pareto tail becomes thinner.29
       Why have changes in the tax system induced such large changes in wealth inequality? Note first
that the average tax rate (i.e., total tax revenues as a fraction of net GDP) in our model increases from
0.23 to 0.27 over the period 1967–2012. An increase in average taxes tends to reduce effective earnings
risk (because the tax is multiplicative), increasing inequality for the same reason (but in the opposite
direction) that the observed increases in (pre-tax) earnings risk reduce inequality. This effect, however, is
a small one unless the average tax rate changes dramatically. Much more important quantitatively is the
dramatic decrease in tax progressivity, where even small changes have large effects on inequality, especially
at the high end of the wealth distribution. To see why, note that the marginal saving propensity for a well-
insured consumer is approximately β(1 + r(1 − τ ′ (y))), where β is the consumer’s current discount factor
and τ ′ (y) is the consumer’s current marginal tax rate. This tax rate varies with the consumer’s income,
y, but it is persistent over time because income is persistent. Tax progressivity, therefore, generates
persistent differences across consumers that act like persistent differences either in the consumers’ after-
tax rates-of-return, r(1 − τ ′ (y)), or, equivalently, in consumers’ discount factors. Consequently, decreases
in progressivity have the same effect as increasing the spread of discount factors, a powerful force for
generating differential savings behavior and as a result higher wealth inequality.
       In a representative-agent model the increase in average taxes would lead in equilibrium to a decrease
in the capital-to-output ratio, but it does not in our heterogeneous-agent model for three reasons. First,
the (smallish) increase in average taxes does not offset the even larger increase in the riskiness of pre-tax
earnings, leading to more precautionary savings in the aggregate. Second, decreases in tax progressivity
provide powerful incentives for the rich to save even more. Third, the increasingly “thick” right tail in
earnings provides the rich (who tend to be those with high earnings) with additional resources for saving.
These three forces combine to generate a fairly large increase in the ratio of capital to net output over
  28
     In our model, idiosyncratic returns are statistically independent across time, but were they persistent they would act
much like persistent heterogeneity in discount rates to spread out the wealth distribution, because discount rates and returns
enter similarly in consumers’ Euler equations.
  29
     Nirei & Aoki (2016) observe the same effect.



                                                             21
                                 capital - net output ratio                               top 1% wealth share
                        4.2                                                   38
                                       perfect foresight
                        4.1            myopic                                 36

                          4                                                   34

                        3.9                                                   32

                        3.8                                                   30

                        3.7                                                   28

                        3.6                                                   26
                              1970   1980    1990     2000       2010              1970    1980   1990    2000          2010


                                     Figure 11: Contrasting informational assumptions


the period 1967–2012.

7.3       Robustness to myopic agents
It is surely bold to assume that agents have perfect foresight on the entire path of the tax schedule, the
parameters governing the earnings process, and the resulting equilibrium prices. To gauge the sensitivity
of our findings to this assumption, we computed the transitional dynamics under complete myopia, i.e.,
a polar opposite case in terms of agents’ ability to predict. That is, in every period agents believe that
the current environment will prevail forever and, accordingly, they are surprised to learn about their
forecasting mistake in the subsequent period.30 Figure 11 shows selected model moments: we find that
the differences are very small and conclude that the perfect-foresight assumption is not critically driving
the results.

7.4       Robustness to the elasticity of substitution in production
The stability of the fraction of income accruing to labor, for a long time a central pillar of macroeconomic
models, has recently been questioned. Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014b), among others, document a
visible (though not large) decline in the labor share. Using a production function with a constant elasticity
of substitution (CES), they estimate an elasticity of substitution between capital and labor of 1.25. To
look into the possibility of a falling labor share, we use a standard CES production function,
                                                                                                             σ
                                                                             σ−1                    σ−1       σ−1
                               FCES (Kt , L) = ACES αCES Kt                   σ
                                                                                   + (1 − αCES )L    σ              ,          (8)

where ACES and αCES are chosen such that the initial steady state is identical to the Cobb-Douglas
benchmark. Over time, there is capital deepening, leading to a lower labor share because the elasticity
of substitution is above one. We find, however, only very small differences as compared to the Cobb-
Douglas benchmark (see Figure 12). Capital deepening leads to a smaller reaction of the interest rate,
  30
       See Section 4.2 for an exact description of how this experiment is conducted.


                                                                        22
                             capital - net output ratio                       interest rate (pre-tax)
                     4.3             Cobb-Douglas               0.065
                                     CES sigma=1.25
                     4.2
                     4.1
                                                                    0.06
                      4
                     3.9
                     3.8                                        0.055

                           1970    1980   1990   2000   2010               1970   1980   1990   2000   2010

                                  top 1% wealth share                             Gini gross income
                     38

                     36
                                                                     0.5
                     34

                     32
                                                                    0.45
                     30

                     28                                              0.4
                           1970    1980   1990   2000   2010               1970   1980   1990   2000   2010




               Figure 12: Cobb-Douglas vs. CES production function with elasticity σ = 1.25


so the rise in the capital-output ratio is slightly larger in equilibrium and the Gini coefficient on gross
income increases a small amount more (relative to the benchmark).31 At the same time, we find that top
wealth shares increase more slowly; unlike for the decline in tax progressivity, higher equilibrium interest
rates induce more savings across the whole wealth distribution. In other words, at least over the time
frame considered, the saving of the poor tends to be more elastic with respect to the interest rate than
the saving of the rich.

7.5    r − g?
Piketty & Zucman (2015) discuss the link between r − g, i.e., the difference between the real interest rate
and the growth rate of GDP, and wealth inequality. In a model with linear, random savings rules they
show that a permanent increase in r − g decreases the Pareto coefficient characterizing the right tail of the
wealth distribution. In our model, too, an increase in r − g would increase savings rates for all consumers
and thus decrease the Pareto coefficient in the right tail in steady state, as shown in the analysis in Section
5. But this result leaves open both the question of how an increase r − g affects overall wealth inequality
and the question of how wealth inequality evolves during the transition to a steady state after an increase
  31
    In addition, the gross labor share falls by about one percentage point over the period 1967–2012 in our model, though
the net labor share actually rises a little. Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014a) report that since 1975 the gross labor share in
the U.S. has fallen by about five percentage points and the net labor share by about two-and-a-half.



                                                               23
                                     pre-tax interest rate                                      top 1% wealth share
                 10                                                              29


                  9                                                              28

             %




                                                                             %
                  8                                                              27


                  7                                                              26


                  6                                                              25
                       0        20        40          60     80   100                  0   20       40          60       80        100
                                          year                                                         year
                               Gini Coefficient for Wealth                                 Gini Coefficient for Income
              0.82                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                 pre-tax income
              0.81                                                           0.45                                post-tax income


                 0.8                                                             0.4


              0.79                                                           0.35


              0.78                                                               0.3
                       0        20        40          60     80   100                  0   20       40          60       80        100
                                               year                                                      year


                           Figure 13: Impulse responses to interest-rate shock (partial equilibrium)


in r − g.
       To investigate these issues we conducted a partial-equilibrium experiment, starting from the distri-
bution of wealth in 1967, in which the pre-tax real interest rate increases by 50 percent for a ten-year
period and then returns to its original level.32 The resulting impulse responses are displayed in Figure
13. Surprisingly, the wealth share of the top 1% as well as the Gini coefficient for wealth initially decrease
sharply.33 Wealth inequality then rebounds and overshoots slightly before settling back to the steady-
state level. As in the experiment in Section 7.4, the model predicts a short-run elasticity of savings with
respect to changes in r that is larger for poorer agents. In the very long run, wealth inequality indeed
increases in response to a rise in r − g, but as pointed out by Gabaix et al. (2016) the dynamics implied
by the random growth mechanism work very slowly: it takes a long time to fill a long Pareto tail. In
our framework, then, movements in r − g certainly cannot explain the observed sharp changes in wealth
inequality over the period 1967–2012 upon which we focus. The partial equilibrium assumption is not
crucial for this finding. Finally, although wealth inequality falls on impact, income inequality increases
in this experiment because capital income constitutes a large fraction of total income for high-income
agents and the interest rate rises. The Gini coefficient for total income is plotted in the lower right panel
of Figure 13, showing a sharp increase as the interest-rate shock hits the economy.
  32
    There is no growth, i.e., we set g = 0.
  33
    The dynamics are very similar for other groups such as the top 10% or the top 0.1%; conversely, for groups such as the
bottom 50% wealth shares increase before returning to their original levels.




                                                                        24
                     top 10% wealth share                             top 1% wealth share
          85                                              50

                                                          45
          80
                                                          40
          75
                                                          35
          70                                              30
                                         model
                                         data (SZ)
          65                                              25

               1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100              1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100


                     top 0.1% wealth share                          top 0.01% wealth share
                                                          12

          20                                              10

                                                          8
          15
                                                          6

          10                                              4

                                                          2

               1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100              1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100


                               Figure 14: Top wealth shares in %, long run


7.6   The long run
We have focussed so far on the transitional dynamics of the wealth distribution over the period 1967–2012,
but what are the longer-run implications of the changes in earnings risk and, especially, tax progressivity
that have occurred over this time period? Figure 14 shows the model’s prediction for the evolution of top
wealth inequality in the 21st century, assuming no further changes in either earnings risk or taxes after
2012. The predictions are striking: the model suggests that the adjustment to the new fundamentals is
far from completion and that wealth inequality is likely to rise even more. As pointed out before, the
wealth distribution is a slow-moving object, especially in a setting with random growth in which the right
tail of the wealth distribution is Pareto-shaped. Changes in fundamentals (such as the structure of taxes)
that influence the consumption-savings decision differently for consumers with different wealth levels are
bound, then, to have long-lasting effects.
   The contrast between the behavior of the wealth distribution over the transitional period and the
eventual long-run steady-state wealth distribution (assuming an unchanged environment going forward)
underscores the hazards of focussing solely on steady states when attempting to quantify how fundamentals
affect wealth inequality. At the same time, we urge caution in interpreting 14 as a prediction for the
future, because no doubt the environment will not remain unchanged going forward, and perhaps changes
in wealth inequality will themselves lead to changes in, for example, the structure of taxes. Nonetheless,
the long-run analysis does emphasize how powerfully tax progressivity can shape the wealth distribution,



                                                     25
particularly in its right tail.


8    Concluding remarks
In this paper we use established macroeconomic theory with heterogeneous agents—the Bewley-Huggett-
Aiyagari setting—to examine a set of candidate explanations for the increase in U.S. wealth inequality
over the last 30 or so years. The method we follow is thus to (i) independently measure changes in
the environment, such as in the tax code and the earnings processes facing individuals; (ii) feed these
into the model assuming that the economy is in a steady state in 1967; (iii) examine the resulting wealth
distribution path; and (iv) conduct counterfactuals. We find that the model generates a path for inequality
that is reasonably close to that observed, the main exception being that the rise in inequality at the very
top of the distribution is under-predicted. The satisfactory performance of the model in predicting the
overall path for wealth inequality notwithstanding, the main contribution is the conclusion that the most
important factor—by far—behind the developments is the significant decline in tax progressivity that
began in the late 1970s.
    Declining tax progressivity, together with increasing earnings risk and higher earnings inequality
amongst top earnings, can also account for the rise in the capital-to-net-output ratio and at least some
of the decline in the (gross) labor share when the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is
larger than one as in Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014b). Our model thus provides an alternative to the
central mechanism—declining growth rates—to which Piketty (2014) draws attention in attempting to
connect these macroeconomic trends to rising inequality.
    Our findings merit several remarks. Although we find that tax progressivity has played a central role
in increasing inequality, our model is designed primarily as a positive rather than a normative tool. To
evaluate the pros and cons of, say, reversing the changes in tax progressivity, it is important to account
for the distortions created by labor taxation; in the present setting, labor earnings are exogenous and
taxation is levied jointly on all incomes. We do not think that the introduction of distortionary labor
taxation would change the model’s predictions for wealth inequality measurably, but it would be central for
understanding the welfare consequences of tax changes. Further research contrasting the larger distortions
of increased tax progressivity with the accompanying reductions in inequality seems very promising.
    To improve the model’s ability to account for the data, we conjecture that introducing a richer asset
framework could play a large role. We do not include aggregate asset-price movements in our present
setting—we do not consider either stock or housing as explicit, additional assets—and more generally we
do not allow changes in the heterogeneity of returns to assets. The latter is likely an important aspect
for the very top of the distribution, where in addition labor and asset incomes may be inextricably linked
in practice. In particular, many modern entrepreneurs hold a large part of their private assets in their
own companies, giving them an unbalanced portfolio that pays off greatly in successful states. With
better availability to tax records and register data more generally, there are hopes to measure how the
idiosyncratic returns to assets have evolved over time and we suspect that the variance here has risen




                                                    26
considerably, especially at the top. This is another great avenue for future research.34
    Regardless of one’s normative views on wealth inequality, there are many reasons to care about its
future course, as there are now many research contributions suggesting that the macroeconomy works
quite differently when there is significant heterogeneity among consumers. This goes for fiscal as well
as monetary policy; for examples, see Heathcote (2005), McKay & Reis (2016), and Brinca et al. (2016)
for fiscal policy and Auclert (2015), McKay et al. (2016), and Kaplan et al. (2016) for monetary policy.
The prediction from the present paper is that, barring reverses in the tax code, wealth inequality will go
up even further, thus potentially strengthening the case for further research on the heterogeneous-agent
approach to macroeconomics.




  34
     As we noted in Section 1, Fagereng et al. (2015) and Bach et al. (2015) have already embarked down this avenue using
data from Sweden and Norway.


                                                           27
A      Computational strategy
A.1       Dynamic programming problem
The consumers’ dynamic programming problem is solved by value-function iteration using Carroll (2006)’s
endogenous grid-point method (EGM) on a grid for cash-on-hand and the persistent idiosyncratic shocks
(β, p).
    Unlike in the plain Aiyagari (1994) model, the support of the ergodic wealth distribution is unbounded
in this framework. We use a log-spaced grid with 100 points for cash-on-hand (xi )100
                                                                                  i=1 with a very large
upper bound (one million times average wealth) to minimize the truncation error.35 Cubic splines are
used to interpolate the value function along the wealth dimension.
    The grid for the persistent component of individual productivity (pj )17
                                                                          j=1 is chosen to account for the
long right tail in earnings. First, we chose the grid points as the 0.0001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9,
0.925, 0.95, 0.975, 0.99, 0.999, ..., and 0.99999999 quantiles of the unconditional (i.e., cross-sectional)
p-distribution (which is a normal). Second, we compute the corresponding grid in actual efficiency units
of labor (ψ(p1 ), ..., ψ(p17 )). Third, given that in the current period p = pj for j = 1, ..., 17, we use Gauss-
Hermite quadrature to integrate over p′ |p, the value of idiosyncratic productivity in the next period, when
updating the value function. In doing so, we use linear interpolation in ψ(p)-space to evaluate the value
function off the grid (the value function is much more non-linear in p-space than in ψ(p)-space).36
    Regarding the discount factor, we choose the grid points (βm )15
                                                                  m=1 as the Gauss-Hermite quadrature
points of the unconditional (i.e., cross-sectional) β-distribution (this will turn out to be useful when
integrating over the joint distribution to compute aggregate wealth). Again, when updating the value
function, we integrate over β ′ |β using Gauss-Hermite quadrature and linear interpolation in β-space.
    In addition to the these three state variables, the setup requires numerical integration over the two
idiosyncratic i.i.d. shocks to earnings ν ′ and capital returns η ′ (as they affect next period’s cash-on-hand
x′ ). As both shocks are normally distributed, we use Gauss-Hermite quadrature once again.

A.2       Computing the ergodic distribution
The focus on tiny population groups such as the top 0.01% of the wealth distribution implies that solving
for the ergodic distribution directly is more efficient than simulating a large number of agents and applying
the ergodic theorem. In doing so, simulation error is eliminated; instead one can directly control the
numerical error by updating the distribution until convergence is reached.
    Specifically, note that the EGM entails using a grid for assets (ai )100
                                                                         i=1 . Given pj and βm , saving ai is
optimal with cash-on-hand x(ai ; pj , βm ) that solves

           u′ (x(ai ; pj , βm ) − ai ) = βm E       1 + rη ′ 1 − τ ′ (y ′ ) V1 (ai + y ′ − τ (y ′ ) + T, p′ , β ′ )|pj , βm .
                                                                                                                        

  35
     Alternatively, given that the Pareto tail has stabilized at some x̄, one could in principle also impute the distribution for
x > x̄. However, this did not turn out to be necessary as the log-spaced grid—which works well as the curvature of the
value function is high only close to the borrowing constraint—allows for selecting a very large upper bound while keeping
the number of grid points computationally feasible.
                                                                                                                            p
  36
     Note that these linear interpolation coefficients can be pre-computed, resulting in a 17 × 17 - matrix wp , where wj,·     are
the integration weights for evaluating next period’s value function on (p1 , ..., p17 ) given that in the current period p = pj .


                                                                   28
While the main advantage of the EGM is efficiency (x(ai ; pj , βm ) can be found without maximizing
the right-hand side of the Bellman equation), it is also convenient that the savings function is already
inverted. First, for all pj , βm , νq , ηh and for all ai , i = 1, ..., 100, there exists a unique level of asset holdings
a = s−1 (ai ; pj , βm , νq , ηh ) such that saving ai is optimal.37 Second, we define a finer grid for asset holdings
(ki )1000                                                                             −1
     i=1 and interpolate (using a cubic spline) to find the inverse savings function s (ki ; pj , βm , νq , ηh ).
Note that the borrowing constraint is binding for all k ≤ s−1 (k1 ; pj , βm , νq , ηh ). Finally, we can solve for
the ergodic distribution G(ki ; pj , βm ) ≡ P rob(k ≤ ki |p = pj , β = βm ) at the grid points (ki )1000       17
                                                                                                    i=1 , (pj )j=1
and (βm )15
         m=1 . To simplify notation, we will denote by Gj,m (ki ) this conditional cdf evaluated at grid
points (pj , βm ). This distribution has to satisfy
                                 Z Z Z Z
                 Gj,m (ki ) =                      G(s−1 (ki ; p, β, ν, η); p, β)dΓη (η)dΓν (ν)dΓβ (β|βm )dΓp (p|pj ).        (9)
                                  p   β   ν    η

Note that pj and βm are the realizations of the shock in period t + 1 and the integration is over the
shock values in period t. Nevertheless, e.g., Γβ (β|βm ) is the correct distribution as for any stationary
Gaussian AR(1) process zt the conditional random variables zt |zt+1 and zt+1 |zt have the same distribu-
tion.38 Starting from some initial distribution G0j,m (ki ) and using the short-hand notation s−1
                                                                                               j,m,q,h (ki ) =
s−1 (ki ; pj , βm , νq , ηh ), we update until convergence according to

                                                       wjp′ ,j        β
                                                                                              whη Ĝ0j,m (s−1
                                                   X             X             X          X
                              G1j ′ ,m′ (ki ) =                      wm ′ ,m        wqν                    j,m,q,h (ki )).   (10)
                                                   j             m              q         h


In (10), wqν and whη are the Gauss-Hermite quadrature weights for the transitory shocks ν and η (normalized
to sum to one). The construction of the integration weights for the persistent shocks p and β is based
on linear interpolation in ψ(p)- and β-space, respectively (see details below). Ĝ0j,m (·) linearly interpolates
G0j,m (ki ) off the grid in the k-dimension.
                         p           β
    Integration weights wj, ′ j and wm′ ,m . Consider the persistent earnings shock p. Conditional on its

value in the next period being p′ = pj ′ for some fixed j ′ ∈ {1, ..., 17}, the integration over the current
period value p is with respect to the distribution of p, conditional on p′ , where p|p′ ∼ N (ρP p′ + (1 −
ρP )µP , σ P ). Gauss-Hermite quadrature, here with ten sample points, entails evaluating the function of
                                                                                    √ P
interest G(s−1 (ki ; p, β, ν, η); p, β) at (p̃n )10                 P ′        P  P                   10
                                                 n=1 , where p̃n = ρ p + (1 − ρ )µ + 2σ x̃n and (x̃n )n=1 are the
roots of the Hermite polynomial, and approximating the integral using the associated weights (w̃n )10
                                                                                                   n=1 as

                                                     10
                                                 1 X
                                              ≈ √       w̃n G(s−1 (ki ; p̃n , β, ν, η); p̃n , β).
                                                  π n=1

Of course, p̃n will in general not lie on the pj -grid, where the function value is known. Hence, we have
to interpolate. Using linear interpolation, we can pre-compute the integration weights (wjp′ ,j )17
                                                                                                 j=1 we
  37 −1
    s     (ai ; pj , βm , νq , ηh ) is defined as the unique a that solves

                                                        x(ai ; pj , βm ) = a + y − τ (y) + T,

where y = rηh a + wl(pj , νq ).
 38
    That is, the densities satisfy fzt |zt+1 (x|y) = fzt+1 |zt (x|y).


                                                                           29
put on evaluating the function of interest at (G(s−1 (ki ; pj , β, ν, η); pj , β))17
                                                                                  j=1 in an efficient manner: for
n = 1, ..., 10, locate j(n) such that pj(n) ≤ p̃n ≤ pj(n)+1 and compute the linear interpolation coefficient
in ψ(p)-space λn as
                                                              ψ(p̃n ) − ψ(pj(n) )
                                                     λn =                           .
                                                            ψ(pj(n)+1 ) − ψ(pj(n) )

Then, looping over n = 1, ..., 10, add (1− λn ) √1π w̃n to wjp′ ,j(n) and λn √1π w̃n to wjp′ ,j(n)+1 . The construction
of the integration weights for β is analogous, except that linear interpolation can be performed directly
in β-space.
       Computing moments of the distribution. For example, aggregate wealth is given by
                                                 Z Z Z                    
                                       K=                       kdG(k|p, β) fp (p)fβ (β)dpdβ,
                                                 p   β      k


where fp (·) and fβ (·) are the unconditional (i.e., cross-sectional) normal densities of the persistent shocks
p and β. We integrate numerically according to

                        17           15                             1000
                                                                                                                !
                                                                           ki−1 + ki
                              w̄jp
                        X            X                              X
                                             β
                 K̂ =                      w̄m   k1 Gj,m (k1 ) +                     (Gj,m (ki ) − Gj,m (ki−1 )) .       (11)
                                                                               2
                        j=1          m=1                             i=2

                                                                                              β 15
As the discount factor grid (βm )15
                                 m=1 was chosen as the Gauss-Hermite sample points, we set (w̄m )m=1
to be the associated Gauss-Hermite quadrature weights. Recall that the Pareto tail transformation of
the persistent earnings component p prompted us to define a grid (pj )17
                                                                      j=1 with a particular emphasis on
the right tail. Hence, we (pre-)compute the integration weights (w̄jp )17
                                                                       j=1 manually: (i) define a very fine
equally spaced grid (p̂n )N
                          n=1 (if, say, N = 100, 000, this has to be carried out only once) that covers the
coarser grid (pj )17
                  j=1 ; (ii) for all n = 1, ..., N , locate j(n) and compute λn as above; (iii) looping over
                                            p                          p                                         σ )    P
n = 1, ..., N , add (1 − λn )fp (p̂n ) to w̄j(n) and λn fp (p̂n ) to w̄j(n)+1 (fp (·) is the pdf of p ∼ N (µP , 1−ρP );
                                           P17     p
and (iv) finally, normalize such that j=1 w̄j = 1.39

A.3       Transition experiments
The perfect-foresight transition experiment is computationally straightforward. Given the calibrated
initial steady state (K ⋆ , T ⋆ ), the new steady state (K ⋆⋆ , T ⋆⋆ ) is computed under the new exogenous
environment. We then search for a fixed point in (Kt , Tt )tt=t
                                                             1
                                                               0 +1
                                                                    -space where t1 − t0 is chosen to be
large enough that (Kt1 , Tt1 ) ≈ (K ⋆⋆ , T ⋆⋆ ). For each iteration, we first solve for the value functions and
corresponding (inverse) savings decisions backwards and subsequently roll the distribution forward, as
described in the previous sections for the steady state. Note that now the grids and integration weights
for the earnings process components are time-varying.40
  39
     Of course one could also use Gauss-Hermite quadrature here, as the corresponding weights and results coincide for all
practical purposes.
  40
     In particular, as the variance of the innovation term of the persistent earnings component σtP is time-varying, pt|t+1 is
no longer equal to pt+1|t in distribution (but still normal); hence the integration weights for the decision problem (forward-
looking) and the cross-sectional distribution (backward-looking) differ.



                                                                      30
      The myopic transition experiment is conceptually very different. Given a period t distribution Gtj,m (ki )
and savings decisions stj,m,q,h(k) (reflecting factor prices rt , wt , transfers Tt and exogenous environment
θt , all naively assumed to persist forever), Gt+1
                                               j,m (ki ) is obtained as in (10).
                                                                                41 In turn, Gt+1 (k ) and
                                                                                             j,m i
θt+1 determine Kt+1 (thus rt+1 , wt+1 ) and Tt+1 . The surprised agents expect this new endogenous and
exogenous environment to prevail forever and hence we solve the dynamic programming problem given
this environment and accordingly obtain st+1
                                         j,m,q,h (k). Note that no fixed point problem has to be solved
and the capital stock converges to the same new steady state as under perfect foresight. Theoretically,
this strategy could give rise to oscillatory paths of capital. However, this turns out not to be the case in
our application.




 41
      Again, the grids and integration weights for the earnings process components are time-varying.


                                                             31
References
Acemoglu, D. (2002). Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture, 40 (1), 7–72.

Aiyagari, S. R. (1994). Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 109 (3), pp. 659–684.

Aoki, S., & Nirei, M. (forthcoming). Zipf’s Law, Pareto’s Law, and the Evolution of Top Incomes in the
  United States. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Auclert, A. (2015). Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel. Working paper.

Bach, L., Calvet, L. E., & Sodini, P. (2015). Rich Pickings? Risk, Return, and Skill in the Portfolios of
  the Wealthy. Working paper.

Becker, R. A. (1980). On the Long-Run Steady State in a Simple Dynamic Model of Equilibrium with
  Heterogeneous Households. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95 (2), 375–382.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., & Luo, M. (2015a). Wealth Distribution and Social Mobility in the US: A
  Quantitative Approach. NBER Working Paper 21721, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., & Zhu, S. (2011). The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal Policy in Economies
  With Finitely Lived Agents. Econometrica, 79 (1), 123–157.

Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., & Zhu, S. (2015b). The Wealth Distribution in Bewley Economies with Capital
  Income Risk. Journal of Economic Theory, 159, Part A, 489 – 515.
  URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022053115001362

Bewley, T. (undated). Interest Bearing Money and the Equilibrium Stock of Capital. Manuscript.

Bricker, J., Henriques, A., Krimmel, J., & Sabelhaus, J. (2016). Measuring Income and Wealth at the
  Top Using Administrative and Survey Data. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 52 (1 (Spring),
  261–331.

Brinca, P., Holter, H., Krusell, P., & Malafry, L. (2016). Fiscal Multipliers in the 21st Century. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 77 , 53–69.

Cagetti, M., & De Nardi, M. (2006). Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth. Journal of Political
  Economy, 114 (5), 835–870.

Carroll, C. D. (2006). The Method of Endogenous Gridpoints for Solving Dynamic Stochastic Optimiza-
  tion Problems. Economics Letters, 91 (3), 312–320.

Carroll, C. D. (2012). Theoretical Foundations of Buffer Stock Saving. Working paper.




                                                   32
Carroll, C. D., & Kimball, M. S. (1996). On the Concavity of the Consumption Function. Econometrica,
  64 (4), 981–92.

Castañeda, A., Dı́as-Giménez, J., & Rı́os-Rull, J.-V. (2003). Accounting for the U.S. Earnings and Wealth
  Inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 111 (4), 818–857.

CBO (2015). The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025. Tech. rep., Congressional Budget Office.

Fagereng, A., Guiso, L., Malacrino, D., & Pistaferri, L. (2015). Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns
  to Wealth. Working paper.

Gabaix, X. (2009). Power Laws in Economics and Finance. Annual Review of Economics, 1 (1), 255–294.

Gabaix, X., Lasry, J.-M., Lions, P.-L., & Moll, B. (2016). The Dynamics of Inequality. Econometrica,
 84 (6), 2071–2111.
  URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3982/ECTA13569

Guerrieri, V., & Lorenzoni, G. (2011). Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap.
  NBER Working Papers 17583, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Heathcote, J. (2005). Fiscal policy with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 72 (1), 161–188.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., & Violante, G. L. (2010). The Macroeconomic Implications of Rising
  Wage Inequality in the United States. Journal of Political Economy, 118 (4), 681–722.

Hornstein, A., Krusell, P., & Violante, G. (2005). The Effects of Technical Change on Labor Market
  Inequalities , vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth. Elsevier.

Huggett, M. (1993). The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance Economies. Jour-
  nal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17 (5-6), 953–969.

Kaplan, G., Moll, B., & Violante, G. L. (2016). Monetary Policy According to HANK. Working paper.

Karabarbounis, L., & Neiman, B. (2014a). Capital Depreciation and Labor Shares Around the World:
  Measurement and Implications. Working paper.

Karabarbounis, L., & Neiman, B. (2014b). The Global Decline of the Labor Share. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 129 (1), 61–103.

Katz, L. F., & Murphy, K. M. (1992). Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
  Factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1), 35–78.

Kaymak, B., & Poschke, M. (2016). The Evolution of Wealth Inequality over Half a Century: The Role
  of Taxes, Transfers and Technology. Journal of Monetary Economics, 77 (C), 1–25.

Kennickell, A. B. (2011). Tossed and Turned: Wealth Dynamics of U.S. Households 2007-2009. Finance
  and Economics Discussion Series 2011-51, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

                                                    33
Kesten, H. (1973). Random Difference Equations and Renewal Theory for Products of Random Matrices.
  Acta Mathematica, 131 (1), 207–248.

Kopczuk, W. (2015). What Do We Know about the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares in the United States?
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29 (1), 47–66.

Kopczuk, W., & Saez, E. (2004). Top Wealth Shares in the United States, 1916-2000: Evidence from
  Estate Tax Returns. National Tax Journal, 2, Part 2 , 445–487.

Krusell, P., Mukoyama, T., Şahin, A., & Smith, Jr., A. (2009). Revisiting the Welfare Effects of Elimi-
  nating Business Cycles. Review of Economic Dynamics, 12 , 393–404.

Krusell, P., & Smith, Jr., A. (1998). Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroeconomy. Journal of
  Political Economy, 106 (5), 867–896.

Krusell, P., & Smith, Jr., A. (2006). Quantitative Macroeconomic Models with Heterogeneous Agents. In
  R. Blundell, W. Newey, & T. Persson (Eds.) Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and
  Applications, Ninth World Congress, Econometric Society Monographs, 41 , (pp. 298–340). Cambridge
  University Press.

Krusell, P., & Smith, Jr., A. (2015). Is Piketty’s “Second Law of Capitalism” Fundamental? Journal of
  Political Economy, 123 (4), 725–748.

McKay, A. (2013). Search for Financial Returns and Social Security Privatization. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 16 (2), 253–270.

McKay, A., Nakamura, E., & Steinsson, J. (2016). The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited. American
  Economic Review , 106 (10), 3133–3158.

McKay, A., & Reis, R. (2016). The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle. Economet-
  rica, 84 (1), 141–194.

Moskowitz, T. J., & Vissing-Jørgensen, A. (2002). The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A Private
  Equity Premium Puzzle? American Economic Review , 92 (4), 745–778.

Nirei, M., & Aoki, S. (2016). Pareto Distribution of Income in Neoclassical Growth Models. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 20 (1), 25–42.

Piketty, T. (1995). Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  110 (3), 551–84.

Piketty, T. (1997). The Dynamics of the Wealth Distribution and the Interest Rate with Credit Rationing.
  Review of Economic Studies, 64 , 173–189.

Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Translated by Arthur Goldhammer. Cambridge,
  MA: Belknap.


                                                     34
Piketty, T., & Saez, E. (2003). Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-1998. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 118 (1), 1–41.

Piketty, T., & Saez, E. (2007). How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax System? A Historical and
  International Perspective. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21 (1), 3–24.

Piketty, T., & Zucman, G. (2014). Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries 1700-2010.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (3), 1255–1310.

Piketty, T., & Zucman, G. (2015). Wealth and Inheritance in the Long Run (Chapter 15), vol. 2 of
  Handbook of Income Distribution. Elsevier.

Quadrini, V. (2000). Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility. Review of Economic Dynamics,
  3 (1), 1–40.

Quadrini, V., & Rios-Rull, J.-V. (2015). Inequality in Macroeconomics (Chapter 14), vol. 2 of Handbook
  of Income Distribution. Elsevier.

Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (2016). Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from
  Capitalized Income Tax Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2 , 519–578.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1969). Distribution of Income and Wealth Among Individuals. Econometrica, 37 (3),
  382–397.




                                                  35
