                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NON-COGNITIVE ABILITIES AND FINANCIAL DELINQUENCY:
          THE ROLE OF SELF-EFFICACY IN AVOIDING FINANCIAL DISTRESS

                                      Camelia M. Kuhnen
                                       Brian T. Melzer

                                      Working Paper 23028
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23028


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




Funding for this paper was provided by the University of North Carolina, and Northwestern
University. We thank Benjamin Keys, Tom DeLeire, Lindsey Leininger, seminar participants at
U.C. Berkeley, the University of Virginia, NC State University, participants at the AEA 2014
meeting, the 2014 FDIC Consumer Research Symposium and the 2015 University of Alberta
Frontiers in Finance conference for helpful comments and discussion. All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Camelia M. Kuhnen and Brian T. Melzer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Non-Cognitive Abilities and Financial Delinquency: The Role of Self-Efficacy in Avoiding
Financial Distress
Camelia M. Kuhnen and Brian T. Melzer
NBER Working Paper No. 23028
January 2017
JEL No. D03,D1,D14,D84,G02

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate a novel determinant of household financial delinquency, namely, people’s
subjective expectations regarding the cost-benefit trade-off in default decisions. These
expectations are determined by individuals’ self-efficacy, which is a non-cognitive ability that
measures how strongly people believe that their effort will influence future outcomes. Using
longitudinal household survey data, we show that people with higher self-efficacy, measured
earlier in life, are less likely to be financially delinquent later on and to face consequences such as
losing assets or access to traditional credit markets, are more likely to prepare for dealing with
potential adverse shocks such as a job loss or a health event, and when faced with such shocks,
are less likely to become financially delinquent. Complementing prior findings regarding the
effects of cognitive abilities, financial literacy and education on economic behavior, our evidence
suggests that non-cognitive abilities have an important role in household financial decision
making.


Camelia M. Kuhnen
University of North Carolina
Kenan-Flagler Business School
300 Kenan Center Drive, MC #4407
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
camelia_kuhnen@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Brian T. Melzer
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
b-melzer@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1         Introduction

A large number of U.S. households face financial fragility. In 2015, the Federal Reserve
Board found that nearly half of adults are ill-prepared for a financial disruption and would
struggle to cover emergency expenses should they arise.1 At the same time, nearly three

quarters of American households have debt outstanding and, over the past two decades,
an increasing share of borrowers have come from the bottom of the income and net worth
distributions, where income and savings buffers are small or absent.2 The financial fragility
of American households was particularly evident in the recent financial crisis, when one in
twelve households defaulted on outstanding loans and delinquent debt became an issue of

macroeconomic significance. But why is it that only some households become financially
delinquent, but many others do not?
        Existing work has characterized household default decisions as the result of a trade-off
between costs, such as loss of collateral or credit market exclusion, and benefits, such as

freeing up resources for consumption (e.g., Chatterjee et al. (2007)). Here, we present evi-
dence suggesting that individuals’ subjective perception of this trade-off is also an important
driver of how these individuals manage their liabilities. Specifically, we examine the role of
subjective beliefs that people have regarding the effect of their actions on future outcomes

on these individuals’ financial delinquency behavior.
        People vary in how strongly they believe that their actions or effort influence what the
future will bring. This characteristic, known as self-efficacy, is one of the non-cognitive abil-
ities that have been shown to improve individuals’ educational and labor market attainment
(Heckman et al. (2006), Lindqvist and Vestman (2011)). To see how self-efficacy can also

impact financial delinquency, consider a situation where a person has to spend effort to avoid
    1
     Specifically, forty-six percent of U.S. adults either could not cover an emergency expense costing $400,
or would cover it by selling something or borrowing money. The full report on the Survey of Household
Economics and Decisionmaking is available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/2015-report-economic-well-
being-us-households-201605.pdf
   2
     The share of households with debt substantially exceeds, for example, the shares with stock holdings
(48.8%) and retirement savings accounts (49.2%) (Survey of Consumer Finances, 2013).



                                                     1
a poor financial outcome. For example, the person might need to find ways to reduce spend-
ing today, or get a second job, in order to avoid defaulting on their credit card or mortgage
payments in the future. A simple way to conceptualize this is as an effort choice problem,

where providing effort is costly but it leads to an increase in the chance that the person will
avoid a poor outcome later. People with lower self-efficacy scores have lower estimates for
this increase than people with higher scores and thus choose to spend less effort, which will
lead to a lower probability of avoiding a bad outcome. Empirically, this setting implies that

individuals with lower self-efficacy will have higher rates of financial distress, will spend less
effort to prepare for potential adverse shocks, and upon encountering such shocks, will be
more likely to become delinquent.
   To study the relationship between self-efficacy and financial delinquency, we use the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) dataset. Self-efficacy scores of individuals

tracked in the NLSY are obtained as part of the regular interviews that participants complete
every two years. The NLSY data also provides a rich set of demographic characteristics,
as well as labor market outcomes and financial variables including indicators of financial
delinquency, consequences of delinquency, such as the loss of assets and the loss of access

to credit, as well as measures of financial preparedness and indicators of the occurrence of
negative cash flow shocks.
   Our empirical analysis provides evidence consistent with our hypotheses regarding the
effects of self-efficacy on financial distress. We find that lower self-efficacy scores predict

a higher probability of financial delinquency later in life, and a higher probability of loss
of assets and loss of access to traditional credit. Moreover, we find that individuals with
higher self-efficacy scores expend more effort preparing to mitigate potential adverse financial
shocks, and when such shocks occur, they are less likely to become delinquent. The effects

of self-efficacy are substantial and robust, and are not explained by differences in gender,
race, cognitive ability, educational attainment and income, risk and time preferences.
   We use two measures to capture people’s delinquency status in a particular year. First,


                                                2
we examine whether the NLSY respondents were at least 60 days behind making payments
on their credit card, vehicle loan, mortgage or other type of debt outstanding. Second, we
examine whether they were at least 60 days late paying their utilities, medical bills or other

type of bills. We find that delinquency rates for the people with the best self-efficacy scores in
our sample are lower by 5% than the delinquency rates of people with the lowest self-efficacy
scores. This is a sizeable difference, given that in our sample the average delinquency rates
are roughly 12% for either delinquency measure. Analyzing the consequences of financial

delinquency, we document that individuals with the highest self-efficacy scores, relative to
those with the lowest scores, have a 3% lower chance of having accounts in collection, an
outcome whose frequency in the data is about 18%, and a 2% lower chance to go through
foreclosure, asset repossession or bankruptcy, which occurs in 3% of our observations. The
higher self-efficacy individuals have a 3% to 5% better chance to have access to traditional

credit instruments, which represents up to a third of the frequency of traditional credit access
we observe in the sample, and their probability of using non-standard credit, specifically
payday loans, is 3% less than that of low self-efficacy individuals, a sizeable difference given
the 6% payday usage frequency in our sample.

   We investigate potential mechanisms that can drive the correlation we observe between
self-efficacy earlier in life, and financial distress – that is, delinquency and its consequences
– later on. We first test whether unobserved intra-family insurance, or parental inputs, can
explain our findings, as it is possible that individuals with higher self-efficacy scores may

also have families who can offer financial help in difficult times, and thus such individuals
will be more likely to avoid financial distress. We use the fact that in the NLSY data there
are many individuals who are part of sibling groups – namely, they have the same mother –
and who exhibit differences in self-efficacy. We re-estimate our main models for predicting

financial distress using mother fixed effects as additional controls, and confirm that intra-
family insurance can not fully account for the effects of self-efficacy on financial delinquency
and its consequences in terms of asset loss and credit access. We then test the specific


                                                3
predictions driven by our theoretical motivation, namely, that individuals with higher self-
efficacy will exert more effort to avoid bad outcomes, and when faced with negative financial
shocks, will fare better. As predicted, we find that a person’s preparedness to weather

financial shocks increases with self-efficacy, by a fifth to a half between those with the best
and the worst self-efficacy scores, depending on the preparedness measures used. These
measures include indicators as to whether the person has emergency funds saved up, has
health insurance or long-term care insurance, or has worked on their financial plans for

retirement. Moreover, we document that individuals with highest self-efficacy are 8% to
13% less likely than those with the lowest scores to become financially delinquent after being
faced with negative financial shocks stemming from job loss or from a health-related event.
   Our results have implications for the understanding and modeling of household default
decisions. Economic models characterize default as a strategic decision taken upon consid-

ering the trade-off between the benefit of expunging remaining debt payments and freeing
up resources for other consumption, and the costs of credit market exclusion, forgone col-
lateral and social stigma. Studies have examined the importance of strategic default as a
mechanism to eliminate debt in the absence of liquidity shocks (Deng et al. (2000), Foote

et al. (2008), Campbell and Cocco (2015)), and variations in costs and benefits stemming
from the legal environment (Fay et al. (2002)) or cultural norms (Guiso et al. (2013)) have
also been shown to predict default outcomes. Additionally, household financial default has
been found to be driven by the occurrence of income and expenditure shocks (Elul et al.

(2010), Gross and Notowidigdo (2011), Hsu et al. (2014)). Our insight is that differences in
individuals’ perception of the costs and benefits in the standard trade-off play a key role in
financial distress outcomes. Our findings imply that the typical sources of household-level
heterogeneity in theoretical models of default (e.g., Chatterjee et al. (2007)), namely, varying

time preferences and costs from credit market exclusion – exclude an important factor that
influences financial distress outcomes. While agents might still attempt to optimize their
actions, their subjective beliefs could matter in how they solve debt-related problems.


                                               4
   The evidence documented here suggests that non-cognitive abilities are important for
financial decisions and outcomes, and complements the findings of the recent literature in
economics and psychology regarding the significant role played by non-cognitive skills on

educational attainment (Heckman et al. (2006), Cadena and Keys (2013), Cadena and Keys
(2015)), wages (Lindqvist and Vestman (2011)), and health outcomes (Taylor and Seeman
(2000)). Moreover, our results complement the finance literature focused on the role of
cognitive abilities on household outcomes. This literature has shown that better cognitive

skills predict better outcomes in terms of mortgage delinquency, credit card usage, loan
choices, and savings and investment behavior (Gerardi et al. (2013), Agarwal and Mazumder
(2013), Stango and Zinman (2009), Grinblatt et al. (2011)). Financial literacy skills help
individuals choose better investment portfolios and plan better for retirement (Lusardi and
Mitchell (2009), Choi et al. (2010)). Education has positive effects on financial market

participation, credit market access, and credit management (Campbell (2006), Ru and Schoar
(2016), and Cole et al. (2012)). We contribute to this line of work in household finance
by showing that non-cognitive skills, in particular people’s capacity to believe that they
can influence their future through their effort, are also helpful for attaining good financial

outcomes in life.
   Our paper also adds to the emerging literature regarding the connection between sub-
jective expectations and household financial decisions. Individuals who are moderately op-
timistic about their life work harder, invest more in equities and have more savings (Puri

and Robinson (2007)). People who believe their future is not under their control are more
likely to lack interest in learning about investment options, to have low savings, and to
be indebted over long horizons (Shapiro and Wu (2011), Cole et al. (2012), Caputo (2012)).
Also, subjective expectations about macroeconomic conditions (rather than about one’s per-

sonal situation), which are driven by broad economic developments (Greenwood and Shleifer
(2014), Malmendier and Nagel (2016), Kuchler and Zafar (2016)), as well as by people’s
personal socieoeconomic situation (Kuhnen and Miu (forthcoming)), have been shown to


                                              5
predict households’ investment decisions (Kezdi and Willis (2011)). An interesting ques-
tion for future work is whether subjective expectations about macroeconomic outcomes, and
those about one’s personal outcomes – for example, self-efficacy – are related, and how much

these two types of expectations contribute to the observed variation across households in
their financial decisions.



2     Self-efficacy and financial decision making

People’s capacity to believe that they can influence future outcomes through their actions has
been captured by three related concepts in psychology: locus of control (Rotter (1966)), the

sense of mastery (Pearlin et al. (1981)) and self-efficacy (Bandura (1986)). High self-efficacy,
mastery or having an internal locus of control have been shown to predict better physical
and mental health (Taylor and Seeman (2000)), better academic achievements (Kalil and
Khalid (2010)), higher job satisfaction and job performance (Judge and Bono (2001)), and

a less negative impact of encountering economic hardship or being in a low-income group on
psychological well-being and physical health (Lachman and Weaver (1998), Pudrovska et al.
(2005)). In our analysis, due to data availability, we focus on the Pearlin mastery measure.


2.1    Measuring self-efficacy

The Pearlin Mastery score is compiled from responses to a battery of seven statements and

is designed to measure mastery, or self-efficacy – that is, the extent to which individuals
perceive themselves to be in control of their lives and future outcomes. For each statement,
the respondent ranks the strength of their agreement on a scale of one (strongly agree) to
four (strongly disagree). The seven Pearlin statements are: (1) “No way I can solve some of
the problems I have.”; (2) “Sometimes I feel that I am being pushed around in life.”; (3) “I

have little control over the things that happen to me.”; (4) “I can do just about anything I
really set my mind to.”; (5) “I often feel helpless in dealing with the problems of life.”; (6)


                                               6
“What happens to me in the future mostly depends on me.”; (7) “There is little I can do to
change many of the important things in my life.”
   After reversing the scoring for items 4 and 6 so that higher scores correspond to greater

mastery or self-efficacy, the 7 scores are summed to give a total raw score ranging between 7
and 28. In our analysis, we assign each individual to a percentile in the distribution of these
raw scores, and use this percentile as our self-efficacy measures, to help with interpreting the
magnitude of the estimated effects of self-efficacy on variables related to financial distress.

Using the raw Pearlin score, rather than the percentile measure, in our regressions leads to
similar results in terms of economic importance and statistical significance.


2.2    How can self-efficacy affect the likelihood of financial distress?

In this section, we provide a simple theoretical framework for understanding the role of self-
efficacy in an individual’s decision to default on outstanding debt. We consider an effort

choice problem describing a situation where a person has to spend effort to avoid a poor
financial outcome, for instance, by identifying ways to cut spending today, or to secure
additional income, in order to avoid defaulting on their credit card or mortgage payments
in the future. In this situation, increasing the effort e provided has some cost c(e) but
it increases the probability that the person will obtain a high (H) rather than a low (L)

outcome later. The actual probability of obtaining the high outcome H is the effort level e,
and the probability of obtaining the low outcome L is 1 − e. However, people believe that
the probability of outcome H is e ∗ s, where s ∈ [0, 1] measures their self-efficacy. If s = 1,
people correctly assess that the probability of getting the high outcome is equal to the effort

e they provide. If s < 1, people have a pessimistic assessment of the impact their effort has
on the probability of getting the high outcome.
   The person chooses the effort level e to maximize the perceived benefit minus the cost
of effort, i.e., they maximize the expression −c(e) + β[esH + (1 − es)L], where β captures
                                                               γe2
the person’s patience. Assuming the cost function is c(e) =     2
                                                                   ,   with γ > 0, the first order


                                               7
                                                              βs(H−L)
condition implies that the effort level selected is e∗ =         γ
                                                                      .   Hence the probability that
the low outcome L is realized will be 1 for the lowest self-efficacy (i.e., s = 0) people and
will be 1 − β(H−L)
               γ
                   for the highest self-efficacy (i.e., s = 1) ones. Therefore, we have a simple

expression for how differences in the level of self-efficacy should relate to differences in the
observed frequency of low outcomes, such as distress events in our data. Namely, Pr{L
                                                   β(H−L)
outcome if s = 0} − Pr{L outcome if s = 1}=           γ
                                                          .    Equivalently, this can be expressed
      dP r{L outcome}
as:          ds
                        = − β(H−L)
                               γ
                                   < 0.

      This simple example provides the intuition for our main empirical predictions. Namely,
we expect to observe in the data that lower self-efficacy is associated with a higher probability
of financial distress, and with a lower level of effort spent preparing to avoid delinquency.



3       Data and summary statistics

3.1      Data

Our primary data source is the National Longitudinal Survey Youth 1979, Child and Young
Adult sample (NLSY79CYA), a longitudinal survey that follows the children of women in the
original NLSY 1979 sample throughout childhood and into adulthood. The NLSY79CYA

survey, which is administered every two years, began in 1986 and continues today, with
data released through the 2014 interview. The survey questionnaire has two components,
a child questionnaire administered to those age 14 or younger and a young adult question-
naire administered to those age 15 and older. The child survey focuses on the family and

schooling environments, and the child’s health as well as his cognitive, emotional and social
development, while the young adult survey continues to focus on schooling, psychological de-
velopment and social development, but also tracks respondents marital history, employment
history and financial history as they move into adulthood. Despite the label young adult,

the latter questionnaire is used for sample members throughout adulthood, which means
that by 2014, we observe a number of sample members that are well into their 30s.


                                               8
   The original NLSY79 survey followed roughly 13,000 individuals, and by 2014 the Child
and Young sample on which we focus includes 11,512 individuals. In our analysis of finan-
cial distress and self-efficacy, we focus on adults that are 21 years old or older as of 2014,

at which point they are likely to be financially independent. This portion of the sample
includes 6031 individuals for which we have demographic information. Overlapping subsets
of these individuals are present in the 2010, 2012 and 2014 waves of the survey. For parts
of our analysis we are also able to bring in data from the original NLSY79 sample, which

contains older adults, who are approaching retirement age. This original NLSY79 sample
does not have detailed information about financial delinquency or financial distress in gen-
eral, but it does contain some data items that capture credit demand and also that provide
information about these households’ financial preparedness efforts. Hence in the analysis we
will supplement the results based on the NLSY79CYA sample of younger adults, for which

we have good measures of financial delinquency and fragility, with several results based on
the older sample of adults in the NLSY79 original dataset.


3.2    Summary Statistics

Summary statistics regarding our sample are reported in Table 1. The panel data set we
use in the analysis covers approximately 12,000 person-year observations, across years 2010,

2012 and 2014. Our independent variable of interest is the Pearlin Mastery score, a measure
of self-efficacy, obtained in each wave of interviews. We assign each individual to a percentile
in the distribution of the Pearlin scores in our sample, based on the average of their Pearlin
scores prior to the years when financial outcomes are measured.

   To quantify people’s time and risk preferences, we obtain measures of the participants’
patience and propensity to avoid risky behaviors, based on interviews conducted in childhood.
The patience score ranges from 1 to 3, with 3 being the best, and it refers to the assessment
of the degree to which people exhibited impulsive behaviors during NLSY interviews. The

same measure of patience has been previously used by DellaVigna and Paserman (2005) to


                                               9
document that more impatient individuals exert less effort to search for jobs and have longer
unemployment spells. As our measure for the propensity to avoid risky behaviors, we use
the first principal component of the person’s normalized scores on three scales available in

the survey (risk-taking, excitement and danger).
   To assess people’s cognitive ability, we use the person’s scores on the Peabody Individual
Achievement Test (PIAT), which tests math ability as well as reading recognition and reading
comprehension. These measures of cognitive ability are taken throughout childhood, and we

focus on the last available measure, which most commonly is taken at age 13 or 14. The
PIAT ability scores are measured in percentiles and normalized by age group relative to
scores in a national sample in 1968. The first principal component of there three scores is
our measure of the person’s cognitive ability.
   Turning to education, in 19% of our person-year observations participants report having

a college or graduate degree, in 8.53% of observations they report having completed some
college, in 55.26% of observations they report having only a high school diploma, and in
17.25% of observations participants report failing to complete high school. The rate of
college degree completion is lower than U.S. averages because some sample members are still

in their 20s. The average of the respondent’s age is 27 years, with a standard deviation of
4.20 years. Approximately 48% of the sample are men.
   Racially, the composition of the sample is tilted toward minorities, with both blacks
(34.90% of the sample) and hispanics (21.85% of the sample) being intentionally oversampled

in the original NLSY data set.
   The average person is in a household that includes just over three people, has income
of about $29,000 and debt of $21,770. The distribution of debt is highly skewed, as some
households have significant debt, mainly due to mortgages, while about 53% of the sample

have debt close to zero. Within our sample, the incidence of having a credit card, a vehicle
loan or a mortgage is 41.89%, 30.93% and 15.21%, respectively.
   Among household financial variables, the data on household debt are quite rich, while the


                                             10
data on assets are less comprehensive and detailed (in particular, the survey lacks information
on financial asset holdings). Since 2000, each respondent to the young adult questionnaire
reports the outstanding balances on credit card, vehicle and mortgage loans, as well as the

estimated value of the underlying collateral for the latter two categories. In 2010, 2012 and
2014, various questions about credit delinquency, asset loss, difficulties accessing credit, and
financial preparedness were added to the survey. These measures comprise the key dependent
variables in our study.

   Specifically, we can observe whether, as of 2010, 2012 and 2014, a person has been at least
60 days behind on payments for their credit card, vehicle loans, other type of loans, or bills
over the last year. The mortgage delinquency measure differs slightly in that it measures
delinquency over the 2 years rather than the prior 12 months. We also observe if the person
had assets repossessed or their property foreclosed in the prior 2 years, and whether in the

prior 12 months, the person had accounts sent to a bill collector, had filed for bankruptcy,
or had resorted to borrowing from payday lenders. We also use the respondents’ answers to
questions relating to whether they have emergency funds available (this data item is only
available in 2012 and 2014), and whether they have health insurance, as measures for the

extent to which they prepare for potential adverse shocks that can impact their financial
situation later in life.
   Overall, in our person-year sample of approximately 12,000 observations we observe that
the frequency of being delinquent as indicated by being late making debt payments or being

late paying bills is 11.35% and 12.50%, respectively. If we measure delinquency as being late
with making either of these two types of payments, the frequency of delinquency is 18.81%.
The incidence of having accounts sent to collection agencies is 18.20%, and that of experienc-
ing asset foreclosure or repossession, or bankruptcy is 3.15%. Respondents indicate having a

credit card, a vehicle loan, or a mortgage in 41.89%, 30.93%, and 15.21%, of our person-year
observations, respectively, and in 5.86% of observations, they state that they have borrowed
money from a payday lender. In 3.67% of the person-year observations respondents report


                                              11
having emergency funds saved up, and in 34.28% of observations, respondents report having
no health insurance.



4     Results

4.1    Self-efficacy and financial delinquency

As predicted, we find that there is a negative relationship between a person’s self-efficacy
earlier in life, and their likelihood of being financially delinquent later on. This result can be

seen in the simple plot in Figure 1, which presents the incidence of financial delinquency in
a given survey year, as a function of the self-efficacy of respondents measured in years prior
to when the delinquency status is assessed. The financial delinquency status indicator is
defined as 1 if the respondent indicated being late paying their debt (Late debtit ), or paying

their bills (Late billsit ), and it is 0 otherwise. The variable Late debtit captures whether
person i in year t reports being late with making the required payments on their credit
card, vehicle loan, mortgage or other type of debt outstanding, and Late billsit captures
whether the person reports being late with paying their medical, utilities or other bills.
The figure shows the average delinquency rates, as well as standard error bars, for each

of five categories of Pearlin scores, each containing approximatively one fifth of the 12,196
person-year observations in our sample. The incidence of financial delinquency decreases
significantly from the lowest self-efficacy levels to the highest. For people in the lowest of the
five bins of self-efficacy (those with raw Pearlin scores below 20), the average incidence of

delinquency is 23.11%, whereas for those in the highest of the five bins of self-efficacy (those
with raw Pearlin scores greater than 24) the average incidence of delinquency is 13.96%. The
difference between these two rates of delinquency is significant at p < 0.01.
    We then further examine the strength of this relationship between self-efficacy and delin-

quency in regression models where we measure self-efficacy in a finer way, using a person’s
percentile in the Pearlin score distribution, and where we gradually add in predictors of


                                               12
delinquency such as age, race and gender, which are arguably exogenous, as well as other
control variables including measures of the person’s cognitive ability, risk and time prefer-
ences, education, income and indebteness status. In line with the pattern observed in Figure

1, in the linear probability models estimated in Table 2 we document that there is a signifi-
cant negative correlation between a person’s self-efficacy earlier in life, and their likelihood
of later on being financially delinquent.3 The first indicator of financial delinquency that
we use in the analysis, Late debtit , captures whether person i in year t reports being late

with making the required payments on their credit card, vehicle loan, mortgage or other
type of debt outstanding. The second indicator, Late billsit captures whether the person re-
ports being late with paying their bills (medical, utilities or other). The correlation between
Self -ef f icacyi and either of these two indicators of financial delinquency is negative and
significant in all specification in the table, for any set of control variables we include. In the

most stringent specification which is the one that includes the full set of control variables,
we document that an increase in the self-efficacy percentile from 0% to 100% corresponds to
a 5.56% drop in the probability of being late with making debt payments (p < 0.01), and to
a drop of 5.28% in the probability of being late with bill payments (p < 0.01). These effects

are sizeable in light of the observed frequency of delinquency along these two dimensions in
our sample, of about 12%, as reported in Table 1.
       Unsurprisingly in light of prior work in household finance regarding the effects of educa-
tion and literacy on economic behavior, we also find that respondents with lower education

levels relative to the reference group of graduate degree holders have a significantly higher
probability of being delinquent. Moreover, we find that people who are more risk averse and
more patient have lower delinquency rates. Higher incomes lead to a lower rate of being
delinquent in terms of paying bills, but, all else equal, do not influence to the probability

of being late making debt payments. Demographic factors are also important, in that older
people, women and non-white respondents have higher rates of financial delinquency.
   3
   All of our results are virtually unchanged if we use probit models instead of linear probability models.
We use OLS simply due to the ease of interpretation of the estimated coefficients in these models.


                                                    13
4.2    Self-efficacy and consequences of financial delinquency

In Tables 3 and 4 we examine the relationship between a person’s self-efficacy earlier in life,
and the likelihood of facing negative consequences caused by financial delinquency. In Table
3 we focus on indicators of asset loss, whereas in Table 4 we focus on indications of loss of
access to traditional credit.
   As expected, in Table 3 we document that, controlling for age, race, gender, education

and income, as well as measures of cognitive ability, risk and time preference, individuals with
higher levels of self-efficacy have a 2.84% lower probability of having accounts in collection
(p < 0.1), and a 1.54% lower probability of having a property foreclosed, assets repossessed,
or being bankrupt (p < 0.05). These effects are large, given that the frequencies with which

these two categories of outcomes occur in the data, shown in Table 1, are roughly 18% and
3%, respectively.
   In Table 4 we document that in terms of access to credit, lower self-efficacy corresponds
to worse outcomes. In the first two columns in the table we use data from the NLSY79

older adults dataset, which provides information (not available in our main dataset covering
younger adults) in recent waves of the survey as to whether the responded applied for credit,
and whether contingent on applying, they were rejected. Including the full set of controls
deployed so far in the analysis, the regression in the first column of the table shows that
self-efficacy does not predict whether people apply for credit. However, the regression in

the second column indicates that among people who applied for credit, the rejection rate
is significantly lower among people with higher self-efficacy. A increase in the self-efficacy
percentile from 0% to 100% corresponds to a drop of 10.18% in the credit application rejection
probability (p < 0.01). In other words, we observe that in the sample of old adults, low

self-efficacy corresponds to a lower probability of accessing traditional credit. The same
conclusion can be drawn for our main sample, that is, for younger adults, for which we can
measure whether they have access to traditional credit instruments, and whether they resort
to non-standard credit sources – specifically, payday loans. Columns three to five in Table


                                              14
4 have as dependent variables indicator variables that measure whether the respondent has
a credit card, a car loan, or a mortgage loan. The dependent variable in the last column
in the table indicates whether the person has taken out a payday loan. We document that

increasing the self-efficacy percentile from 0% to 100% increases the probability of having
traditional credit sources by 3.76% for credit cards, 5.24% for vehicle loans, and 4.95% for
mortgages, respectively (all significant at p < 0.05 or better). Moreover, the same change
in self-efficacy corresponds to a drop of 2.90% in the probability that the person has taken

out a payday loan (p < 0.01), an effect equal to half of the observed 5.86% rate of payday
lending usage in our sample.


4.3    Potential mechanisms underlying the effects of self-efficacy on

       financial delinquency and its consequences

Our theoretical framework implies that the mechanism explaining the connection between

self-efficacy and distress is based on effort provision. Namely, higher self-efficacy people
believe that their effort has a high impact on their financial situation, and thus will provide
a high level of effort to avoid a bad outcome. However, outside of our framework, another
explanation for our findings so far is that there are omitted factors that drive both self-

efficacy and the distress likelihood. An prominent such factor is parental investment, or
intra-family insurance. Specifically, it is possible that individuals with high levels of self-
efficacy grow up in families where parents invest more in their offspring in terms of character
formation, but also, perhaps, offer more financial support to children should they encounter

adversity in life. In Tables 5 and 6 we examine whether differential parental investment can
explain the relationship we have documented between self-efficacy and financial delinquency
and its consequences. In the regression models in Table 5 we take advantage of the fact
that many of the individuals in our sample have siblings, and thus we can include mother
fixed-effects as additional determinants of financial delinquency and its consequences. For

all of the outcomes we examine – being late making loan payments or paying bills, losing

                                              15
assets, or the ability to access traditional credit – the effects of self-efficacy are statisticaly
significant and similar in sign and magnitude to those documented in Tables 2, 3 and 4. In
other words, this analysis suggests that intra-family insurance can not fully account for the

effects of self-efficacy on financial delinquency and its consequences in terms of asset loss and
credit access. Moreover, when we split the data based on the net worth of the respondents’
mothers in Table 6, we find that the largest effect of self-efficacy on the likelihood of financial
delinquency, as measured by the Late debtit indicator, is obtained among individuals whose

mothers are in the lowest tertile in terms of net worth. For these individuals, the difference
in the probability of delinquency between those with the highest and those with the lowest
self-efficacy scores is 8.91% (p < 0.01), which is larger than the average effect of 5.56% found
in the main specification in Table 2. Among individuals with mothers in the wealthiest
tercile of the sample, self-efficacy has a negative impact on delinquency, but the estimated

effect is smaller (a drop in delinquency of 3.01% from the highest to the lowest self-efficacy
levels) and statistically not different from zero. These results suggest that self-efficacy is
particularly helpful to individuals who face more economically adverse environments early
in life.

    We then document evidence consistent with the mechanism proposed in our theoretical
framework, namely, that individuals with higher self-efficacy will exert more effort to avoid
bad outcomes. Specifically, in Tables 7 and 8 we show that a person’s preparedness to
weather financial shocks increases with self-efficacy. Moreover, in Table 9 we document that

individuals with higher self-efficacy are more likely than the rest of the population to avoid
financial delinquency after being faced with negative financial shocks stemming from job loss
or from a health-related event.
    To measure a person’s effort in making preparations to be able to deal with potential

adverse financial events, we use several variables available in the NLSY79CYA sample, and
complement those with other measures available in the NLSY79 original sample. Thus, we
can examine the correlation between self-efficacy and indicators of financial preparedness in


                                                16
younger, as well as in older adults. In Table 7 we use two indicators of financial preparedness:
having emergency funds saved up, and having health insurance, which are data items avail-
able for the NLSY79CYA sample of younger adults. We find that increasing the self-efficacy

percentile from 0% to 100% corresponds to a 7.59% increase in the probability that people
have emergency funds available and a 6.13% decreased in the probability that they do not
have health insurance (p < 0.01 for both estimates). The negative effect of self-efficacy on
the likelihood of being uninsured continues to be large and significant (-5.18%, p < 0.05)

even after we control for whether health insurance is offered to the individual through their
job. This controls for possible effects of self-efficacy on a person’ choice of job type, and thus
allows us to isolate the effect of self-efficacy on the decision to get health insurance, rather
on the availability of insurance. In Table 8 we use three indicators of financial preparedness
available in the NLSY79 sample of older adults: having set aside emergency funds, having

already engaged in activities to help with financial aspects of retirement planning, and hav-
ing long-term care insurance. We find that an increase in the self-efficacy percentile from
0% to 100% corresponds to an increase of 12.02% (p < 0.01) in the probability of having
emergency funds, an increase of 8.45% (p < 0.01) in the probability of retirement planning

activities, and 3.01% (p < 0.1) in the probability of having long-term care insurance. Thus,
across younger and older adults, we document that self-efficacy earlier in life can help predict
the degree to which people have worked to prepare themselves to deal with potential adverse
financial shocks later on.

   This result suggests that we should observe, as implied by our theoretical setting, that
people with higher self-efficacy will be better able to weather negative financial events. The
evidence in Table 9 supports this implication. There, we consider two indicators of negative
financial shocks: whether the person has lost their job in the past year, and whether they

have incurred a health shock leading to significant medical expenses. In the regression
models in the first and fourth columns in the table, we document that self-efficacy is not
related to the probability of either of these two types of shocks occurring. However, as the


                                               17
results in the other regressions in the table show, the likelihood of financial delinquency
following such a shock is significantly smaller for people with higher self-efficacy. In columns
two and three we examine the role of the job loss indicator and its interaction with the

person’s self-efficacy on the probability that the individual is late making debt payments,
and paying their bills, respectively. In columns five and six we examine the role of the
health shock indicator and its interaction with the person’s self-efficacy on the same two
indicators of financial delinquency – namely, being late making debt payments, and paying

bills. Across these four specifications we find that the shock itself, either job loss or health
issue, increases the probability of financial delinquency significantly, by 4.86% to 13.28%
(p < 0.01), a finding consistent with prior studies that have shown that job loss and large
medical expenditures increase default (Elul et al. (2010), Gross and Notowidigdo (2011), Hsu
et al. (2014)). Moreover, self-efficacy continues to be a negative predictor of delinquency, in

line with all our results so far.
   The novel finding in these models is the negative effect on the likelihood of delinquency
of the interaction term between the financial shock indicator and self-efficacy. Across these
regression models, comparing the coefficient on the financial shock indicator and on the

interaction term between the financial shock indicator and the person’s self-efficacy shows
that negative financial shocks increase the probability of financial delinquency significantly
only among people with low self-efficacy. Specifically, increasing the self-efficacy percentile
from 0% to 100% leads to a drop of 13.14% (p < 0.01) and 13.35% (p < 0.05), respectively,

in the likelihood of being late paying debt and that of being late paying bills, if a job loss
occurs, which implies that among the highest self-efficacy people job loss has negligible effects
on financial delinquency. Similarly, we find that increasing the self-efficacy percentile from
0% to 100% lowers the probability of being late paying bills by 7.46% (p < 0.01)) in the

event that a health shock occurs, almost completely mitigating the 8.40% increase in this
type of delinquency caused by the health shock itself. Thus, these results show that high
self-efficacy can significantly lessen the impact of a job loss or of an adverse health event on


                                               18
the individual’s propensity to become financially delinquent.



5     Discussion

Our analysis provides evidence that self-efficacy may be an important determinant of house-
hold financial distress. It is important to emphasize that our findings are not subject to a

concern about reverse causality. If self-efficacy and distress were measured contemporane-
ously, one might worry that respondents express having less control over their lives because
they have recently defaulted on debt. For this reason we take advantage of the longitudinal
structure of the NLSY and use the self-efficacy measure obtained years before the financial

outcomes are realized. As a result, the negative correlation that we document does not
represent the effect of past financial default on self-efficacy.
    In light of prior evidence that self-efficacy and other non-cognitive abilities have important
effects on behavior, omitted variables bias is certainly possible. We control for a number of

important observable differences such as income, educational attainment, or parental inputs,
but there are nevertheless unobserved variables such as financial wealth and expectations
for income growth and uncertainty that may also explain delinquency decisions. A related
concern is that our control variables suffer from measurement error, and that self-efficacy
proxies for unmeasured ability.

    Our self-efficacy measure may also contain aspects of general optimism as measured in
Puri and Robinson (2007), but there are important differences between the two. General
optimism differs from self-efficacy, in that it does not specifically measure the subjective
impact of agency, that is, the perception of the impact of one’s effort, on the likelihood of

obtaining a good future outcome. Rather, increased optimism refers to a shift upward in the
distribution of outcomes people believe are possible. Therefore, optimism and self-efficacy
have different implications for the level of effort exerted by people to attain good outcomes.
Individuals with high levels of optimism will not work very hard, since they expect the good



                                                19
outcome to happen anyway, and this implies that excessive optimism is detrimental, a finding
documented by Puri and Robinson (2007). Individuals with high self-efficacy, on the other
hand, will expend high levels of effort to try to accomplish a good outcome, because of their

perceived high return to effort. In our data, we indeed find no detrimental effect of having
the highest levels of self-efficacy. On the contrary, as can be seen in Figure 1, individuals
with the highest self efficacy are those with the lowest rates of financial distress.



6     Conclusion

Recent work in economics and psychology has emphasized the importance of non-cognitive

abilities in educational and job market success. Here, we find that non-cognitive skills also
play an important role in determining financial success. More specifically, we find that self-
efficacy predicts substantial differences in financial distress later in life. Individuals who
believe more strongly that they can change future outcomes though their actions, are less

likely, years later, to be delinquent on loans, and to suffer consequences such as having assets
repossessed or property foreclosed, or to lose access to traditional credit. We also document
that those with higher self efficacy prepare more to avoid financial distress later in life, and
have a lower probability of being financially delinquent upon facing negative financial shocks
induced by a job loss or a health event.

    Identifying the role of non-cognitive abilities such as self-efficacy on household financial
outcomes is useful because, unlike other characteristics that may be pre-determined, non-
cognitive skills can be improved via interventions at various stages in life. For example,
Heckman et al. (2013) show that an intervention in early childhood, the Perry Preschool

program, improved participants schooling and labor market outcomes mainly through an
increase in non-cognitive skills. It is therefore possible that by helping people believe more
in their own capacity to influence the future, they will in fact take action and achieve better
financial outcomes. We believe this is a fruitful avenue for future work in household finance.



                                               20
References

Agarwal, S. and Mazumder, B.: 2013, Cognitive abilities and household financial decision
  making, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(1), 193–207.

Bandura, A.: 1986, Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory,

  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Cadena, B. C. and Keys, B. J.: 2013, Can self-control explain avoiding free money? Evidence
  from interest-free student loans, Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4), 1117–1129.

Cadena, B. C. and Keys, B. J.: 2015, Human capital and the lifetime costs of impatience,

  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(3), 126–153.

Campbell, J. Y.: 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.

Campbell, J. Y. and Cocco, J. F.: 2015, A model of mortgage default, Journal of Finance
  70(4), 1495–1554.

Caputo, R. K.: 2012, Patterns and predictors of debt: A panel study, 1985-2008, Journal of
  Sociology and Social Welfare 39(2), 7–29.

Chatterjee, S., Corbae, D., Nakajima, M. and Rios-Rull, J.-V.: 2007, A quantitative theory
  of unsecured consumer credit with risk of default, Econometrica 75(6), 1525–1589.

Choi, J. J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B. C.: 2010, Why does the law of one price fail? An

  experiment on index mutual funds, Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1405–1432.

Cole, S., Paulson, A. and Shastry, G. K.: 2012, Smart money: The effect of education on
  financial behavior, Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 09-071 .

DellaVigna, S. and Paserman, M. D.: 2005, Job search and impatience, Journal of Labor

  Economics 23(3).



                                              21
Deng, Y., Quigley, J. M. and Van Order, R.: 2000, Mortgage terminations, heterogeneity
  and the exercise of mortgage options, Econometrica 68(2), 275–307.

Elul, R., Souleles, N., Chomsisengphet, S., Glennon, D. and Hunt, R.: 2010, What “triggers”

  mortgage default?, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 100, 490–494.

Fay, S., Hurst, E. and White, M. J.: 2002, The household bankruptcy decision, American
  Economic Review 92(3), 706–718.

Foote, C., Gerardi, K. and Willen, P.: 2008, Negative equity and foreclosure: Theory and

  evidence, Journal of Urban Economics 6(2), 234–245.

Gerardi, K., Goette, L. and Meier, S.: 2013, Numerical ability predicts mortgage default,
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(28), 11267–11271.

Greenwood, R. and Shleifer, A.: 2014, Expectations of returns and expected returns, Review

  of Financial Studies 27(3), 714–746.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M. and Linnainmaa, J.: 2011, Iq and stock market participation,
  Journal of Finance 66(6), 2119–2164.

Gross, T. and Notowidigdo, M. J.: 2011, Health insurance and the consumer bankruptcy de-

  cision: Evidence from expansions of medicaid, Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8), 767–
  778.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L.: 2013, The determinants of attitudes toward strategic
  default on mortgages, The Journal of Finance 68, 1473–1515.

Heckman, J. J., Pinto, R. and Savelyev, P.: 2013, Understanding the mechanisms through
  which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes, American Economic
  Review 103(6), 2052–2086.




                                             22
Heckman, J. J., Sixrud, J. and Urzua, S.: 2006, The effects of cognitive and non-cognitive
  abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior, Journal of Labor Economics
  24(3), 411–482.

Hsu, J., Melzer, B. T. and Matsa, D. A.: 2014, Positive externalities of social insurance:
  Unemployment insurance and consumer credit, NBER Working Paper w20353 .

Judge, T. A. and Bono, J. E.: 2001, Relationship of core self-evaluations traits - self-esteem,
  generalized self-efficacy, locus of control and emotional stability - with job satisfaction and

  job performance: A meta-analysis, Journal of Applied Psychology 86, 80–92.

Kalil, A. and Khalid, S.: 2010, Non-cognitive skills and educational attainment, Working
  paper .

Kezdi, G. and Willis, R. J.: 2011, Household stock market beliefs and learning, NBER

  Working Paper No. 17614 .

Kuchler, T. and Zafar, B.: 2016, Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
  outcomes, Working paper .

Kuhnen, C. M. and Miu, A. C.: forthcoming, Socioeconomic status and learning from finan-

  cial information, Journal of Financial Economics .

Lachman, M. E. and Weaver, S. L.: 1998, The sense of control as a moderator of social
  class differences in health and well-being, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
  74, 763–773.

Lindqvist, E. and Vestman, R.: 2011, The labor market returns to cognitive and noncognitive
  ability: Evidence from the Swedish enlistment, American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics 3(1), 101–128.

Lusardi, A.-M. and Mitchell, O.: 2009, How ordinary consumers make complex economic



                                               23
  decisions: Financial literacy and retirement readiness, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search Working Paper No. 15350. .

Malmendier, U. and Nagel, S.: 2016, Learning from inflation experiences, Quarterly Journal

  of Economics 131(1), 53–87.

Pearlin, L. I., Menaghan, E. G., Lieberman, M. A. and Mullan, J. T.: 1981, The stress
  process, Journal of Health and Social Behavior 22(4), 337–356.

Pudrovska, T., Schieman, S., Pearlin, L. I. and Nguyen, K.: 2005, The sense of mastery as a

  mediator and moderator in the association between economic hardship and health in late
  life, Journal of Aging and Health 17(5), 634–660.

Puri, M. and Robinson, D. T.: 2007, Optimism and economic choice, Journal of Financial
  Economics 86(1), 71–99.

Rotter, J. B.: 1966, Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of rein-
  forcement, Psychological Monographs: General and Applied 80(1), 1–28.

Ru, H. and Schoar, A.: 2016, Do credit card companies screen for behavioral biases?, NBER
  Working Paper 22360 .

Shapiro, J. and Wu, S.: 2011, Fatalism and savings, Journal of Socio-Economics 40, 645–651.

Stango, V. and Zinman, J.: 2009, Exponential growth bias and household finance, Journal
  of Finance 64(6), 2807–2849.

Taylor, S. E. and Seeman, T. E.: 2000, Socioeconomic status and health in industrial nations:

  Social, psychological, and biological pathways, New York: New York Academy of Sciences,
  chapter Psychosocial resources and the SES-health relationship, pp. 210–225.




                                             24
                                                                   Financial delinquency rates and self−efficacy
                   26            24
    Financial delinquency rate (%)
  14    16     18  1220    22




                                 13−20                                   20.2−21.3                                    21.4−22.6                                       22.7−24                                24.2−28
                                                                                    Average Pearlin score prior to the year
                                                                                when the financial delinquency status is assessed
                                      Note: Each of the five bins of self efficacy (Pearlin score) in the figure represent approximatively one fifth of the 12,196 person−year observations in our sample.




Figure 1: The incidence of financial delinquency in a given survey year, as a function of
the self-efficacy of respondents measured earlier in life. The figure shows the average delin-
quency rates, as well as standard error bars, for each of five categories of Pearlin scores,
each containing approximatively one fifth of the 12,196 person-year observations in our sam-
ple. Financial delinquency is defined based on whether the respondent indicated being late
paying their debt, or paying their bills. For 18.81% of our observations, the respondent is
classified as being financially delinquent.




                                                                                                                        25
                               Table 1: Summary statistics.
The person-year observations summarized below refer to 6031 unique individuals in years
2010, 2012, and 2014, when questions regarding financial variables are asked of the partici-
pants in the National Longitudinal Survey Youth 1979 Child and Young Adult sample.
      Variable                                       Mean           St. Dev.       N
      Self -Ef f icacyi (Pearlin percentile score)    0.51              0.29   12,196
      Ageit (years)                                  27.03              4.20   12,196
      Cognitive abilityi (normalized)                -0.09              0.99   12,196
      Risk aversioni (normalized)                    -0.02              0.98   12,196
      P atiencei                                      2.43              0.44   12,196
      Income(log)it                                   8.78              3.46   12,196

      Late debtit                                               Yes: 11.35%    11,892
      Late billsit                                              Yes: 12.50%    11,878
      Accounts in Collectionit                                  Yes: 18.20%    12,151
      F oreclosure, Repossession, orBankruptcyit                 Yes: 3.15%    12,187
      Credit Cardit                                             Yes: 41.89%    12,191
      V ehicle loanit                                           Yes: 30.93%    12,087
      Mortgageit                                                Yes: 15.21%    12,196
      P ayday loanit                                             Yes: 5.86%    12,180
      Emergency f undsit                                         Yes: 3.67%     8,423
      No health insuranceit                                     Yes: 34.28%    12,196

      Education                                      No high school: 17.25%    12,196
                                                        High school: 55.26%    12,196
                                                        Some college: 8.53%    12,196
                                                            College: 15.49%    12,196
                                                    Graduate degree: 3.47%     12,196
      Gender                                          48% men, 52% women       12,196
      Race                                                  21.85% hispanic    12,196
                                                               34.90% black    12,196
                                              43.25% non-black, non-hispanic   12,196




                                              26
Table 2: Self-efficacy and financial delinquency. Linear probability models, with standard
errors clustered by participant. Probit models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi refers
to person i’s percentile in the distribution of Pearlin scores. Education omitted category:
Graduate degreei . T-statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance
at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


 Dependent              Late         Late        Late       Late         Late        Late
 variable               debtit      debtit       debtit     billsit      billsit     billsit
 Self -ef f icacyi        –4.68        –5.01       –5.56       –9.55        –7.26       –5.28
                              ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                      (–4.16)     (–4.21)     (–4.65)     (–8.21)∗∗∗   (–6.09) ∗∗∗
                                                                                   (–4.43)∗∗∗
 Ageit                                  0.25        0.21                     0.68        0.76
                                          ∗∗∗
                                   (3.35)      (2.68)∗∗∗                (8.19) ∗∗∗
                                                                                    (8.89)∗∗∗
 Cognitive abilityi                     0.92        0.93                    –1.85       –0.29
                                           ∗∗
                                    (2.45)      (2.22)∗∗               (–4.83) ∗∗∗
                                                                                      (–0.70)
 Risk aversioni                        –0.78       –0.70                    –1.31       –1.22
                                   (–2.11)∗∗    (–1.93)∗               (–3.54)∗∗∗ (–3.30)∗∗∗
 P atiencei                            –2.70       –2.91                    –4.21       –3.25
                                  (–3.47)∗∗∗ (–3.74)∗∗∗                (–5.46)∗∗∗ (–4.22)∗∗∗
 No highschooli                                     7.04                                11.79
                                               (4.11)∗∗∗                            (7.07)∗∗∗
 Highschooli                                        7.80                                 8.41
                                               (5.27)∗∗∗                            (6.34)∗∗∗
 Some collegei                                      5.00                                 4.68
                                               (2.96)∗∗∗                            (2.95)∗∗∗
 Collegei                                           2.36                                 1.88
                                                  (1.62)                               (1.51)
 Income(log)it                                      0.02                                –0.40
                                                  (0.20)                           (–3.59)∗∗∗
 Has Debtit                                         8.13
                                              (10.90)∗∗∗
 Gender FEs                  No          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
 Race FEs                    No          Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
 R2                       0.002         0.01        0.03        0.01       0.03         0.04
 Observations             11892       11892       11892       11878       11878        11878




                                             27
Table 3: Self-efficacy and asset-related consequences of financial delinquency. Linear prob-
ability models, with standard errors clustered by participant. Probit models yield similar
results. Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile in the distribution of Pearlin scores.
Education omitted category: Graduate degreei . T-statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ ,
∗∗
   and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


 Dependent                         Accounts in              F oreclosure, Repossession
 variable                          Collectionit                     orBankruptcyit
 Self -ef f icacyi         –4.68         –4.20       –2.84    –1.98        –1.72       –1.54
                               ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗       ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
                       (–3.30)      (–2.82)       (–1.90) (–3.22)      (–2.74)     (–2.41)∗∗
 Ageit                                    0.51        0.54                  0.27        0.27
                                     (5.48)∗∗∗   (5.66)∗∗∗              (6.29)∗∗∗ (6.04)∗∗∗
 Cognitive abilityi                       0.92        2.66                 –0.32       –0.04
                                              ∗         ∗∗∗
                                       (1.90)    (5.16)                  (–1.63)     (–0.18)
 Risk aversioni                          –1.09       –0.79                 –0.20       –0.14
                                             ∗∗           ∗
                                     (–2.37)      (–1.74)                (–1.01)     (–0.72)
 P atiencei                              –6.89       –5.95                 –0.38       –0.24
                                            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
                                    (–6.83)     (–5.91)                  (–0.96)     (–0.58)
 No highschooli                                      14.98                              2.62
                                                 (6.99)∗∗∗                         (2.71)∗∗∗
 Highschooli                                         13.52                              2.27
                                                 (7.49)∗∗∗                         (2.78)∗∗∗
 Some collegei                                        7.64                              1.08
                                                        ∗∗∗
                                                 (3.65)                               (1.18)
 Collegei                                             0.71                             –0.01
                                                    (0.41)                           (–0.01)
 Income(log)it                                        0.41                              0.13
                                                        ∗∗∗
                                                 (3.63)                            (2.77)∗∗∗
 Gender FEs                   No           Yes         Yes      Yes          Yes         Yes
 Race FEs                     No           Yes         Yes      Yes          Yes         Yes
 R2                        0.001          0.02        0.04    0.001         0.01        0.01
 Observations              12151        12151       12151     12187        12187      12187




                                               28
Table 4: Self-efficacy and credit-related consequences of delinquency. Data are from the
NLSY79 original cohort in the first two columns, and from the NLSY97CYA in the last four
columns. Linear probability models, with standard errors clustered by participant. Probit
models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile in the distribution
of Pearlin scores. Education omitted category: Graduate degreei . T-statistics are shown in
parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


 Dependent               Applied      Applied&     Credit       V ehicle        Mort-      P ayday
 variable              f or creditit rejectedit     cardit       loanit         gageit      loanit
 Self -ef f icacyi              1.33     –10.18          3.76        5.24           4.95       –2.90
                                              ∗∗∗           ∗∗
                              (0.58) (–3.05)         (2.15)     (3.17)∗∗∗      (3.76) ∗∗∗
                                                                                          (–3.31)∗∗∗
 Ageit                         –0.35       –1.12         0.34        0.89           2.03        0.25
                             (–1.23) (–2.75)∗∗∗    (3.21)∗∗∗    (8.88)∗∗∗     (23.06)∗∗∗   (4.21)∗∗∗
 Cognitive abilityi             0.32        0.02         6.05        0.62          –0.43        0.35
                           (9.93)∗∗∗      (0.46) (10.06)∗∗∗        (1.09)        (–0.93)      (1.16)
 Risk aversioni                 0.43        0.50         0.53        0.97           0.57       –0.15
                                    ∗
                             (1.95)       (1.32)       (1.02)    (1.99)∗∗         (1.43)     (–0.54)
 P atiencei                    –0.61        0.14         4.26        0.74           1.42       –1.61
                                                           ∗∗∗
                             (–0.31)      (0.04)   (3.78)          (0.69)         (1.59) (–2.69)∗∗∗
 No highschooli                –7.41       11.22      –45.47        –5.96         –12.91        5.26
                           (–2.40)∗∗    (2.09)∗∗ (–18.35)∗∗∗ (–2.07)∗∗        (–4.74)∗∗∗   (4.59)∗∗∗
 Highschooli                    0.05        7.82      –32.11         1.70          –9.41        4.49
                              (0.02) (2.72)∗∗∗ (–14.17)∗∗∗         (0.62)     (–3.56)∗∗∗   (4.88)∗∗∗
 Some collegei                  2.96        3.03      –16.50        10.15          –3.19        3.45
                                                           ∗∗∗
                              (0.99)      (0.89) (–6.20)        (3.30)∗∗∗        (–1.08) (3.03)∗∗∗
 Collegei                      –2.04        0.14        –5.13        1.89          –1.95        1.21
                                                            ∗∗
                             (–0.75)      (0.05)   (–2.27)         (0.67)        (–0.71)      (1.39)
 Income(log)it                  3.65       –4.41         2.40        4.03           1.53        0.47
                                  ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
                          (13.10)     (–4.55)     (20.48)      (51.31)∗∗∗     (18.15) ∗∗∗
                                                                                           (7.46)∗∗∗
 Gender FEs                      Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
 Race FEs                        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes
 R2                             0.12        0.09         0.24        0.15           0.14        0.02
 Observations                   5561        2336       12191       12087           12196      12180




                                                29
     Table 5: Self-efficacy and financial delinquency: parental investment as a mechanism. Linear probability models, with standard
     errors clustered by participant. Probit models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile in the
     distribution of Pearlin scores. The controls omitted here for brevity are the same as those in the full specifications in Tables 2
     through 4. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


                                                             Accounts      F oreclosure,   Credit card,
                   Dependent             Late      Late          in       Repossession,    V ehicle loan,   P ayday
                   variable              debtit    billsit  collectionit or Bankruptcyit or Mortgageit       loanit
30




                   Self -ef f icacyi       –4.17     –4.06        –4.04             –3.50             8.57     –3.06
                                       (–2.42)∗∗ (–2.17)∗∗    (–1.98)∗∗         (–3.65)∗∗∗       (3.60)∗∗∗ (–2.59)∗∗∗
                   Controls                  Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes       Yes
                   Mother FEs                Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes       Yes
                   Gender FEs                Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes       Yes
                   Race FEs                  Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes              Yes       Yes
                   R2                       0.09       0.10         0.17             0.04             0.38      0.12
                   Observations           11892      11878        12151             12187           12196      12180
Table 6: Self-efficacy and financial delinquency: heterogeneous effects based on parental en-
vironment. Linear probability models, with standard errors clustered by participant. Probit
models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile in the distribution
of Pearlin scores. The controls omitted here for brevity are the same as those in the full
specifications in Tables 2 through 4. T-statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗
indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


  Dependent
  variable                                           Late debtit
                                               Lowest tertile Middle tertile Highest tertile
                                 All              of mother      of mother       of mother
                           observations           net worth      net worth       net worth
  Self -ef f icacyi       –4.17        –5.56           –8.91          –6.35           –3.01
                              ∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
                      (–2.42)      (–4.66)        (–4.07)        (–2.96)            (–1.59)
  Mother net                           –0.01
  worthi (’000s)                   (–5.51)∗∗∗
  Controls                  Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
  Mother FEs                Yes           No             No             No              No
  Gender FEs                Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
  Race FEs                  Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
  R2                       0.09         0.03            0.04           0.02            0.03
  Observations           11892         11891            3708           4068            4115




                                                31
Table 7: Self-efficacy and financial preparedness early in adulthood. Linear probability
models, with standard errors clustered by participant. Probit models yield similar results.
Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile in the distribution of Pearlin scores. Education
omitted category: Graduate degreei . T-statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗
indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


              Dependent                 Emergency No health No health
              variable                   f undsit    insuranceit insuranceit
              Self -ef f icacyi                7.59         –6.13       –5.18
                                          (3.68)∗∗∗    (–3.25)∗∗∗   (–2.33)∗∗
              Ageit                           –0.24         –0.18       –0.53
                                                   ∗             ∗
                                           (–1.94)       (–1.66)   (–3.84)∗∗∗
              Cognitive abilityi              –1.88          0.25        0.83
                                                 ∗∗∗
                                         (–2.65)           (0.39)      (1.12)
              Risk aversioni                   0.35         –2.24       –1.01
                                             (0.56)    (–3.99)∗∗∗     (–1.54)
              P atiencei                       7.36         –6.68       –6.63
                                          (5.68)∗∗∗    (–5.47)∗∗∗  (–4.60)∗∗∗
              No highschooli                 –32.27         25.85       22.98
                                                 ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                                         (–9.69)        (9.71)      (7.80)∗∗∗
              Highschooli                    –25.03         13.07        8.94
                                                 ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                                         (–8.15)        (5.70)      (4.13)∗∗∗
              Some collegei                  –16.54          4.75        2.50
                                                 ∗∗∗             ∗
                                         (–4.74)          (1.83)       (1.01)
              Collegei                        –7.39          0.12        0.28
                                          (–2.33)∗∗        (0.05)      (0.13)
              Income(log)it                    1.65         –0.24       –2.73
                                         (11.05)∗∗∗       (–1.60)  (–9.11)∗∗∗
              Health insurance                                         –12.77
              of f ered by employeri                               (–6.03)∗∗∗
              Gender FEs                        Yes           Yes         Yes
              Race FEs                          Yes           Yes         Yes
              R2                               0.07          0.06        0.08
              Observations                     8423        12196         6725




                                               32
Table 8: Self-efficacy and financial preparedness late in adulthood. Data come from the
NLSY79 original sample. Linear probability models, with standard errors clustered by par-
ticipant. Probit models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi refers to person i’s percentile
in the distribution of Pearlin scores. Education omitted category: Graduate degreei . T-
statistics are shown in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
level, respectively.


             Dependent          Emergency Retirement Long-term care
             variable            f undsit     planningit    insuranceit
             Self -ef f icacyi         12.02          8.45            3.01
                                  (5.37)∗∗∗      (3.65)∗∗∗         (1.92)∗
             Ageit                      0.65          0.71            0.36
                                    (2.35)∗∗      (2.57)∗∗         (1.93)∗
             Cognitive abilityi         0.14          0.23           –0.02
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                                  (4.40)         (7.45)            (–1.10)
             Risk aversioni             0.88          1.10           –0.12
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                                  (4.03)         (4.80)            (–0.80)
             P atiencei                –1.85          0.75           –1.88
                                     (–0.97)        (0.38)         (–1.51)
             No highschooli           –18.54        –22.78           –9.35
                                 (–6.17)∗∗∗     (–7.60)∗∗∗      (–4.36)∗∗∗
             Highschooli              –13.74        –14.16           –6.22
                                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                                 (–5.58)        (–6.22)         (–3.31)∗∗∗
             Some collegei             –7.94         –4.06           –4.32
                                          ∗∗∗
                                 (–2.71)           (–1.50)       (–1.99)∗∗
             Collegei                   1.61         –3.63           –5.34
                                      (0.61)       (–1.56)      (–2.66)∗∗∗
             Income(log)it              3.84          2.70            1.07
                                 (12.46)∗∗∗      (8.44)∗∗∗       (5.82)∗∗∗
             Net worthi (’000s)                       0.04            0.01
                                                        ∗∗∗
                                                (13.44)          (3.84)∗∗∗
             Gender FEs                  Yes           Yes             Yes
             Race FEs                    Yes           Yes             Yes
               2
             R                          0.13          0.19            0.02
             Observations               5565          5445            5466




                                              33
Table 9: Self-efficacy and dealing with financial shocks. Linear probability models, with
standard errors clustered by participant. Probit models yield similar results. Self -ef f icacyi
refers to person i’s percentile in the distribution of Pearlin scores. The controls omitted here
for brevity are the same as those in the full specifications in Table 2. T-statistics are shown
in parentheses. ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.


  Dependent                Lost     Late        Late    Health    Late       Late
  variable                 jobit    debtit     billsit  shockit   debtit     billsit
  Self -ef f icacyi         –0.00     –5.05       –4.34    0.00     –4.96       –3.24
                          (–0.37) (–3.96)∗∗∗ (–3.48)∗∗∗  (0.30) (–3.72)∗∗∗ (–2.46)∗∗
  Lost jobi                           13.28       10.91
                                          ∗∗∗
                                   (4.18)     (3.32)∗∗∗
  Lost jobi                          –13.14     –13.35
                                          ∗∗∗
    X Self -ef f icacyi           (–2.61)     (–2.51)∗∗
  Health shocki                                                      4.86        8.40
                                                                        ∗∗∗
                                                                 (3.21)     (5.10)∗∗∗
  Health shocki                                                     –2.24       –7.46
    X Self -ef f icacyi                                           (–0.93) (–2.92)∗∗∗
  Controls                    Yes       Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
  Gender FEs                  Yes       Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
  Race FEs                    Yes       Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
  R2                         0.01      0.03        0.04    0.04      0.03        0.05
  Observations             10742      10545      10535   12196      11892      11878




                                              34
