                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MAXIMIZING THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE FINANCE:
                     FUNDING PROJECTS OR PILOT PROJECTS?

                                       Matthew J. Kotchen

                                       Working Paper 23023
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23023


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Matthew J. Kotchen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Maximizing the Impact of Climate Finance: Funding Projects or Pilot Projects?
Matthew J. Kotchen
NBER Working Paper No. 23023
January 2017
JEL No. G18,H2,Q4,Q5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper contributes to the understanding of how to maximize the impact of publicly provided
climate finance to leverage the private sector. Agencies seeking to promote private investment in
support of climate change mitigation and adaptation may have a choice between subsidizing
projects or pilot projects. Pilots are either scaled down versions of full projects or an experimental
phase that generates better information about whether a full project is likely to succeed or fail.
Drawing on insights about the value of experimentation for entrepreneurship and raising private
capital, the theoretical model developed herein provides guidance about when subsidizing
projects or pilots is more efficient.


Matthew J. Kotchen
School of Forestry & Environmental Studies,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu
1     Introduction
The term “climate nance” refers generally to public and private nancing from
regional, national, and international entities in support of climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation. The need for e¢cient deployment of climate nance is on
the rise. In December 2015, representatives from 195 countries signed the Paris
climate agreement, rea¢rming the goal of limiting the global average temperature
to less than 2 degrees Celsius above the preindustrial level (Article 2, UNFCCC
2015). With the agreement having entered into force in April 2016, achieving the
Paris goal—or even something close to it—will require fundamental changes to
the world’s energy systems, including the promotion of greater energy e¢ciency
and the scaling up of zero- and low-carbon sources of energy (IPCC 2014). The
 nancing required to achieve the transition—in addition to growing nancial de-
mands for climate change adaptation—will be substantial. The World Economic
Forum (2013) estimates the need for $700 billion per year above and beyond the
$5 trillion per year in business as usual infrastructure investment through 2030.
    The actual amount of global climate nance that took place in 2014 is esti-
mated at $391 billion (Buchner et al. 2015). Of this amount, $148 billion (38
percent) was from public sources, and $243 billon (62 percent) was from private
investment. While a signi cant majority of climate nance is raised and spent
within the same country, the developed countries have pledged to scale up their
provision of climate nance in developing countries to at least $100 billion per
year by 2020 (UNFCCC 2009, 2015). In addition to public and private nancial
‡ows through bilateral channels, several multilateral agencies focus explicitly on
climate nance, including the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), the Climate
Investment Funds (CIFs), and the recently created Green Climate Fund (GCF).
Multilateral development banks themselves are also increasing their already sig-
ni cant emphasis on climate nance. In 2015, for example, the World Bank set
the goal of increasing climate related nance from 21 percent of its portfolio to
28 percent by 2020 (World Bank 2015).
    Along with the growing demand and supply of climate          nance has come

                                        1
greater recognition that public sources of funding alone will be insu¢cient to
meet the challenges of climate change. The proverbial Holy Grail of climate -
nance is nding new and e¤ective ways to use public money to leverage larger
pools of private nance in support of climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Indeed, the goal of using public resources to leverage the private sector is explicit
in most channels of climate nance, and serves as the basis of political pressure
to mobilize more. There is nevertheless surprisingly little economic research on
how to most e¢ciently deploy public resources to achieve this goal.1
       This paper contributes to the understanding of how to maximize the impact
of publicly provided climate nance to leverage the private sector. I consider the
speci c question of whether public money is more e¢ciently spent on subsidiz-
ing projects or pilot projects. I de ne pilots as an experimental phase prior to
project execution where the primary objective is to generate better information
about whether a full project is likely to succeed or fail. Many climate related
investments, such as renewable energy projects in developing countries, are as-
sociated with a high degree of uncertainty, with reasons ranging from adminis-
trative feasibility to political stability, in addition to basic nancial viability. An
experimental phase in the form of a pilot project enables learning more about a
project’s likely success before committing to the full, and potentially much larger,
investment. Public agencies seeking to promote private investment may therefore
have a choice between subsidizing projects or pilot projects. This paper provides
guidance about when subsidizing one or the other is more e¢cient.
       The model builds upon the notion of staged investment within the literatures
on entrepreneurship and venture capital (Sahlman 1990; Gompers 1995; Gompers
and Learner 2004), and in particular on Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf’s (2016) model
   1
    I am not aware of any theoretical economic research on the use of public resources to
leverage the private sector in the context of mobilizing climate nance. Two empirical papers
that evaluate the e¤ectiveness of climate nance to leverage the private sector in international
development are Buntaine and Pizer (2014) and Kotchen and Negi (2015). More conceptually,
Stewart, Kingsbury and Rudyk (2009) provide an edited volume that considers a number of
regulatory frameworks and areas of need for international climate nance. More recently,
Fischer (2016) develops a theoretical model for the study of climate nance as a strategic
export subsidy that is subject to both external bene ts and free riding.


                                              2
of nancing entrepreneurial experimentation. The primary point of departure is
inclusion of a public sector that not only takes account of public, non-market
bene ts, but also has the ability to subsidize private sector investment. The model
is useful for identifying necessary conditions for a pilot to provide social bene ts
above and beyond a project itself. These are based on intuitive relationships
between the expected value of additional information and the costs of obtaining
it. A somewhat counterintuitive result is that pilots create value because they
may reveal bad information rather than good information about projects. The
reason is that su¢ciently bad information from a pilot creates an opportunity to
abandon a full project without having to make the entire investment up front.
Analysis of the model also shows how the opportunity to conduct a pilot can
make the di¤erence between whether or not an investment is socially desirable,
thereby creating new opportunities for e¢cient climate nance.
   The most novel ndings of the paper relate to optimal subsidy policy. I show
that the choice of subsidizing projects or pilots depends on the characteristics
of both and, more importantly, on an institution’s objective function. Agencies
engaged in public climate nance may reasonably seek to maximize social net
bene ts on a case-by-case basis or, alternatively, to maximize the social bene-
 ts per unit of the subsidy (i.e., the bene t-cost ratio). The former objective
is consistent with the standard bene t-cost criterion, while the latter is more
consistent with the aim of agencies that seek to maximize the climate bene ts
of a chosen set of projects subject to a budget constraint. I nd that agencies
seeking to maximize social net bene ts should target projects or pilots depending
on the size of a project’s social bene ts. Speci cally, pilots are preferable when
the bene ts are smaller, because in these cases the additional information from
a pilot has the potential to change a project’s desirability. If, however, agencies
seek to maximize the bene ts per unit of the subsidy, then there is a clear policy
recommendation: subsidizing viable pilots rather than projects is always more
e¢cient.
   Theoretical results about how to maximize the impact of publicly provided


                                         3
climate nance are the central contributions of what follows. The next section
further motivates the notion of pilot projects as experiments that provide infor-
mation using a simple example. Section 3 describes the basic setup of the model
from a private sector and planner’s perspective. Section 4 derives necessary and
su¢cient conditions for pilot projects to have social value. Section 5 establishes
the main results about optimal subsidy policy. Section 6 concludes with broader
policy implications and suggestions for further research in the nascent area of
climate nance.


2     Pilots as Experiments
When the outcome of a new venture is uncertain, experimentation can provide
valuable information to entrepreneurs and investors because they can learn more
about potential outcomes without having to invest the full amount up front. After
learning the results of an experiment, investors may abandon ventures that are
less likely to succeed and better sort good from bad investments without needing
to fully commit all of the necessary resources. The importance of experimentation
for entrepreneurship is well-established. Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf (2014)
provide a detailed review of the literature and show the ways in which experi-
mentation explains why entrepreneurial ventures succeed in di¤erent industries,
regions, and periods of time.
    The aim of this paper is to show how lessons about the nancing of entrepre-
neurial experimentation can inform more e¢cient climate nance. Speci cally,
I extend the model developed by Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2016) to include a
public sector and thereby account for decisions that agencies are likely to face
when looking to promote private sector investment in climate change mitigation
and adaptation. Agencies may have the option to choose between subsidizing
projects or pilot projects. The key idea is that pilot projects have potential value
because of the information they may generate rather than pro ts, and thereby
function as experiments. The following example illustrates the basic setup and


                                         4
some key ideas without the formal structure of a model, which is developed in
the next section.

   Example.—Consider a private sector project (e.g., a renewable energy project)
that will cost $11M to execute. There are risks associated with the project, per-
haps due in part to its proposed location in a developing country. Assume the
chances of success or failure are 50-50. With success the project would generate
revenue of $20M , and with failure the project would generate zero revenue. The
expected value of the project is

                     (:5  $20M ) + (:5  0)   $11M =   $1M:                   (1)

From a private-sector perspective, therefore, the project would not proceed.
   Now assume there is an opportunity to run a pilot project that would provide
better information about the likelihood of success, without requiring a commit-
ment to the full project. We can think of the pilot as an experiment because it
provides information. Assume that good information would increase the proba-
bility of success to .8, and bad information would decrease the probability to .2.
Assume further that the chances of good or bad information are 50-50, and the
cost of running the pilot is $3M . This amount represents the net loss after ac-
counting for any revenue the pilot may generate. Because the full project would
never be pro table with realization of the bad outcome, the expected value of the
pilot along with the full project option is

                    :5  (:8  $20M   $11M )    $3M =    $:5M:                 (2)

It follows that from a private-sector perspective, the pilot would not proceed
either.
   Let us now shift gears from the private to the public perspective. Assume
the successful project would generate $4M in non-market bene ts (e.g., avoided
damages from emissions). The expected value of these non-market bene ts from


                                         5
carrying out the project is :5  $4M = $2M , which can be added to (1) to yield
the expected social value of the project itself at $1M . The project is therefore
socially desirable, even if not privately pro table, and a climate nance subsidy
would be warranted. The expected value of the non-market bene ts from the
pilot with the project option is :5  :8  $4M = $1:6, which adding to (2) yields
net social bene ts of $1:1M .
    The question of interest here is whether resources from a public agency would
be better spent subsidizing the project or the pilot project. The answer in this
example is the pilot because it costs less to subsidize ($:5M versus $1M ) and
yields greater social net bene ts (by $:1M ). Notice, however, that this nding is
not necessarily intuitive because it recommends subsidizing a pilot project that
costs $3M to run when the expected loss from the project itself is only $1M .
Intuition might suggest this is a waste of resources.
    I now turn to a more general model to help illuminate why pilots may be
advantageous and to identify circumstances when public climate nance should
seek to focus on subsidizing projects or pilot projects. I also consider how the
optimal strategy depends on whether the objective is to maximize net bene ts
(as shown here) or the alternative of maximizing the bene t-cost ratio.


3     Model Setup
Let $X denote the cost to implement a project. If successful, the project will
generate revenue $V and non-market social bene ts $H. If the project fails, both
the revenue and non-market social bene ts will be zero. The probability of success
is p, and the probability of failure is (1       p). There is also an opportunity to run
a pilot, the value of which is primarily more information about the probability of
success and failure. Running the pilot has a net cost of $Y . “Good” information
means the probability of a successful project is g, and “bad” information means
the probability is b. The probability of good information from the pilot is q and
bad information is (1 q). The unconditional probability of success from the pilot


                                             6
with the project option must match that for the project itself, requiring that

                                 p = qg + (1    q)b:                             (3)

It is clear from this expression that the conditional probabilities must satisfy
g  p  b.
   I begin with the expected values of the project and pilot from a private sector
perspective. The expected value of carrying out the project itself (denoted with
subscript P ) is
                                  EPV = pV     X:                                (4)

Notice that the non-market social bene ts are not taken into account. The pilot
with the project option (denoted with subscript P P ) has an expected private
value of

             EPV P = q maxfgV    X; 0g + (1    q) maxfbV     X; 0g    Y:         (5)

The two max operators in this expression re‡ect the way that the project need
only take place if it has a positive expected value conditional on learning the good
or bad information, and each outcome is weighted by its respective probability.
The expected value also accounts for the pilot’s up-front cost Y .
   The private-sector perspective re‡ected in expressions (4) and (5) is identical
to Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf’s (2016) model of entrepreneurial experimentation.
In what follows, I highlight some new insights applicable to the private-sector per-
spective, but the main point of departure is the inclusion of social, non-market
bene ts and the focus on a public rather than private perspective. In order to
provide a potential role for e¢cient intervention in the form of public climate -
nance, I focus on cases where the private sector would not undertake the project
or pilot project on its own. Speci cally, I assume the expected values to the pri-
vate sector of the project itself and the pilot with the project option are negative.

The private sector assumption: Both EPV < 0 and EPV P < 0.

                                         7
    Let us now shift focus to the public perspective. To keep notation compact,
let W = V +H represent the combined private and public bene ts. The expected
value of the project itself from the social perspective is

                                    EPW = pW        X:                                  (6)

In parallel, the expected value of the pilot with the project option from the social
perspective is


            EPWP = q maxfgW         X; 0g + (1     q) maxfbW       X; 0g    Y:          (7)

The only di¤erence between these expressions and those above is inclusion of H
in addition to V .
    I now turn to the question of when the pilot has positive social bene ts in
comparison to the project itself. The key feature of the setup is that even if
the private sector assumption holds, it is still possible for (6), (7), or both to be
positive. The conditions of particular interest, as we will see, are those when the
pilot can have positive social value above and beyond the project, or even when
the project itself does not.


4     The Value of a Pilot
Let us rst consider the project itself. Whether a project has positive social value
depends simply on whether (6) is greater than zero, keeping in mind that the
private sector assumption implies (4) is less than zero.2 Having established the
project as the baseline, it follows that whether a pilot project has positive social
value depends on two conditions: it must yield bene ts that are both greater
than those for the project itself and greater than zero. The second condition is
necessary to allow for the possibility that the pilot may have positive value even
   2
     Throughout much of the analysis and discussion that follows, statements about value are
more accurately described as expected values. Nevertheless, I often drop the “expected” mod-
i er assuming the meaning is clear.


                                             8
though the project does not. Speci cally, it must hold that (7) is greater than
(6) and greater than zero.
   We can immediately prove two necessary an intuitive conditions for a pilot
project to have positive social bene ts.

Necessary Condition 1: g > b.

To prove this inequality, assume to the contrary that g = b. Substituting (3) into
(7) yields EPWP = maxfpW      X; 0g     Y < EPW , which contradicts the possibility
of the pilot having positive net bene ts beyond the project. This result shows
how there must be something to learn from the pilot in order for it to have
value. If not, then g = b = p, and there is no di¤erence between the good and
bad information, nor the probability of success when viewed through the pilot or
the project itself. Hence there is no potential bene t of the pilot to justify its
additional cost.
   The second condition requires the bad information to be su¢ciently bad.

Necessary Condition 2: bW          X < 0.

Consider again a proof by contradiction. Assuming bW        X  0, means that (7)
can be written as

                   EPWP = q(gW        X) + (1   q)(bW    X)    Y
                        = [pW      X]      Y
                        = EPW     Y

where the second equality follows from using (3) and rearranging. This expression
implies that EPWP < EPW , and hence the pilot will provide no additional value if
conditional on the bad information, the project would still have positive net
bene ts. The reason is that the project would be socially bene cial with or
without the pilot, in which case the pilot only entails additional cost without the
potential to change a decision about the social desirability of the project.

                                           9
   Building on the previous discussion and necessary conditions, we can now
state the following proposition.

Proposition 1 The pilot will have positive net social value if and only if EPWP >
maxfEPW ; 0g, and this is equivalent to satisfying

                      q(gW       X)    Y > maxfpW             X; 0g:            (8)

Notice that the left-hand side depends only on the expected value of the project
conditional on good information from the pilot. This is because, as we have
already shown, a necessary condition for the pilot to have positive social value is
that the project would not be socially bene cial conditional on bad information.
Indeed, the value of the pilot arises because the project can be abandoned without
having to ever invest X if the information is bad.
   To build further intuition and see the applicability of Proposition 1, it is
useful to consider how the net social value of a pilot depends on the magnitude
of the potential bene ts. We can consider changes to either the private or public
components, V or H, simultaneously, nesting the insights into the study of W ,
while ensuring the private sector assumption continues to hold. Using (8), the
social net bene t of the pilot can be written as

                 N BP P = q(gW         X)    Y       maxfpW       X; 0g:

Treating W as a variable, we can then rewrite the expression as
                            (
                                q(gW    X)       Y             if W  X=p
            N BP P (W ) =                                                   ;   (9)
                                 (1    q)(bW         X)   Y    otherwise

where the second line follows by substituting in (3) and rearranging.
   Figure 1 illustrates the function graphically, along with the underlying ex-
pected values for the project and pilot evaluated at di¤erent levels of W , denoted
              W
EpW (W ) and Epp (W ), respectively. The gure shows a case where Proposition 1


                                            10
Figure 1: Graphical illustration of the expected values for the project, the pilot,
and the net bene t of the pilot as a function of market and non-market social
values




                                        11
can be satis ed for some value of W . Neither the pilot nor the project have pos-
itive, net social value if W  W . Keep in mind that satisfying the private sector
assumption requires that V < W . The pilot has positive, net social value and
is preferable to the project if W 2 (W ; W ).3 Within this range, the net bene t
of the pilot is simply the expected value of the pilot when the project itself has
negative expected value; yet at su¢ciently high levels of W , when the project has
a positive expected value, the net bene t of the pilot is the di¤erence between
the expected values. The implication is that N BP P (W ) is initially increasing in
W , yet begins to decrease when the project itself has positive net social bene ts.
Then ultimately it is the project that has positive, net social value when W > W .
       Taken together, these results provide two general insights about the potential
value of pilot projects from a social perspective. The rst is that pilots only
have greater net bene ts over projects within a speci c range of social bene ts.
Of particular interest is that part of this range is where projects themselves do
not have positive, net social bene ts. Hence the potential for conducting a pilot
project can be pivotal for making a project socially desirable, even when neither
the project or the pilot are bene cial from a private perspective. The second
insight is that for projects with su¢ciently high social bene ts, pilots add no
additional value to already su¢ciently bene cial projects.
       Let us now return to the assumption underlying Figure 1—that Proposition
1 can be satis ed for some value of W . It is straightforward to see from the
 gure that this requires N BP P ( Xp ) > 0. Using (9), which follows from the fact
that N BP P ( Xp ) = EPWP ( Xp ), this inequality can be rewritten and interpreted as
another necessary condition for a pilot project to have positive net social bene ts.
                                   qg    p
Necessary Condition 3:                  > .
                                 Y + qX  X
The left-hand side is the ratio of the probability of project success to the expected
cost of conducting the pilot with the project option. The right-hand side is the
   3
    It is straightforward to solve for W = Y +qX
                                             qg  and W = (1q)XY
                                                            (1q)b , assuming both values of
W exist, as shown with the con guration of parameters in Figure 1 that allow for the possibility
to satisfy Proposition 1.

                                              12
ratio of the probability of project success to project costs, without the pilot
option. Intuitively, we could multiply both sides by W to see that the condition
requires the ratio of the expected social bene t to cost must be greater for the
pilot in order for the pilot to have positive net social bene ts. This condition is
necessary but not su¢cient because, as can be seen in Figure 1, the bene ts W
can still be too low or high to justify the pilot. Nevertheless, we will see in the
next section how this condition is important for understanding optimal subsidy
policy.
    Before turning to subsidy policy, however, it is worth highlighting one more
condition, which can be derived from Necessary Condition 3 and seen in Figure
1. We know from (3) that p  qg, so rearranging the previous condition yields
the following.

Necessary Condition 4: Y + qX < X.

This implies quite simply that the expected costs for the pilot with the project
option must be less than the costs for the project itself. This result is interesting
because it underscores again how the value of the pilot arises because of the
ability to abandon what might emerge as an undesirable project. Rearranging
the condition as Y < (1      q)X shows how the pilot cost must be less than the
expected cost savings from abandoning a bad project. Referring back to Figure
1, it is clear how lowering Y results in a vertical shift up of N BP P (W ), thereby
increasing the potential value of a pilot.


5     Optimal Subsidy Policy
The private sector assumption implies that the private net bene ts of both the
project and pilot are strictly negative. This means that a private sector entity
would undertake neither without a strictly positive subsidy. The question of
interest is which subsidy would a planner optimally choose—that for the project
or pilot—and under what circumstances? The answer depends, as we will see,

                                         13
not only on features of the project and pilot, but also in an important way on
reasonable variants of the planner’s objective function.
    The required subsidy for either the project or pilot is de ned as the expected,
net private sector loss. Assuming it is possible for the pilot to have positive net
social value, these have the following magnitudes for the project and pilot project,
respectively:

                                sP = X         pV > 0                                       (10)
                              sP P = Y         q(gV      X) > 0:                            (11)

It is straightforward to see in Figure 1 that a lower subsidy is required for the
pilot than the project, because by assumption V < W . More formally, we can
derive the condition under which the required pilot subsidy is less than that for
the project. Using (10) and (11), satisfying sP > sP P is equivalent to satisfying
(XY qX)
  pqg
            > V , and it turns out that Necessary Condition 3 is su¢cient to satisfy
this inequality.4 Hence we can assert that if Necessary Condition 3 holds, the
pilot will always require a lower subsidy than the project. In other words, if the
pilot has the potential to be socially desirable, it must require a lower subsidy.
This, however, does not necessarily mean the planner should choose to subsidize
the pilot. In what follows, I consider three cases that di¤er according to the
objective function.


5.1     Net bene ts with subsidy as transfer
Let us begin with the assumption that the planner seeks to maximize social net
bene ts and treats the subsidy payment as a transfer. This objective is consistent,
for example, with the perspective of a country subsidizing pilots or projects for
    4
      By Necessary Condition 4 (implied by Necessary Condition 3) and (3), the left-hand side
is positive, so the condition will be satis ed if V is su¢ciently small. We therefore need only
show that the inequality is satis ed for the maximum value of V allowed by the Private Sector
Assumption (i.e., V = W = Y +qXqg ), in which case a bit of rearranging shows that the inequality
simpli es to Necessary Condition 3.



                                               14
which all bene ts and costs accrue within its borders. In this case, the choice of
whether or not to subsidize the pilot depends entirely on whether or not the pilot
maximizes social net bene ts, and the previous results carry over to inform the
optimal subsidy policy.

Proposition 2 If the objective is to maximize social net bene ts, and subsidies
are treated as transfers, then satisfying Proposition 1 is necessary and su¢cient
to recommend subsidizing the pilot.

   If we again consider how the results di¤er treating W as a variable, we can
derive the optimal subsidy policy at di¤erent levels of the total bene ts. The
question is whether the planner would seek to subsidize the pilot, the project, or
neither at di¤erent levels of W . The answer simply depends on which one yields
the highest net bene ts. Assuming the interesting case, where it is possible for
the pilot to be preferred (i.e., all necessary conditions are satis ed), we have the
following optimal subsidy policy:
                                8
                                < 0      if W < W
                                >
                                >
                          s =
                           
                                  sP P if W 2 [W ; W ]                          (12)
                                >
                                >
                                : s    if W  W :
                                    P


Referring back to Figure 1, this implies that the planner chooses net bene ts
consistent with maxf0; EPWP ; EPW g and the corresponding subsidy f0; sP P ; sP g.
Then, for the same reasoning described previously, the optimal policy is to provide
no subsidy at su¢ciently low levels of W , subsidize the pilot at intermediate levels
of W , and subsidize the project itself at su¢ciently high levels of W .


5.2    Public bene ts with subsidy as cost
Let us now modify the objective function to one where the planner cares only
about the public, non-market bene ts and treats the subsidy payment as a cost
rather than a transfer. This objective may more accurately capture the aim of


                                         15
international climate nance, where transfer payments are often made through
bilateral or multilateral channels between countries. For example, country A
may consider bilateral aid to country B for a renewable energy project, where
country A faces an opportunity cost of the subsidy, and bene ts from the avoided
greenhouse-gas emissions globally. In this case, the subsidy is a cost and only the
public bene ts are of concern.
   Interestingly, this change to the objective has no a¤ect on the optimal subsidy
policy. To see why, we can rewrite the modi ed net bene ts as equivalent to the
net bene ts considered previously. The expected net bene ts for the project are

                          pH     sP = pH      (X    pV )
                                    = pW       X
                                    = EPW ;

and the expected net bene ts for the pilot (assuming the necessary conditions
are satis ed) are

           q maxfgH; 0g    sP P = q maxfgH; 0g        (Y   q(gV     X))
                                 = q maxfgW        X; 0g   Y
                                 = EPWP :

Because this implies no change from the case analyzed previously, we can state
the following result:

Proposition 3 If the objective is to maximize net bene ts—de ned as the di¤er-
ence between the public, non-market bene ts and the subsidy cost—then satisfying
Proposition 1 is necessary and su¢cient to recommend subsidizing the pilot.

A further corollary is that the optimal subsidy policy de ned as s in equation
(12) remains the same even with modi cation of the objective function.
   The key element of these results is that subsidies are set at the minimum
amount to cover private-sector losses. In the context of climate nance, this

                                        16
is often referred to as subsidizing, or co- nancing, only the “incremental cost”
necessary to get projects up and running.5 Here nancing only the incremental
cost implies the useful equivalency. The subsidy is either an implicit cost through
the private sector (the previous subsection), or an explicit cost to the planner (this
subsection), while in both cases, the only remaining bene ts are those that are
public and non-market. Hence the optimal subsidy policy is invariant to either
objective function.


5.3       Ratio of bene ts to costs
The third and nal set of objective functions to consider is one where the planner
seeks to maximize a bene t-cost ratio rather than net bene ts. In many respects,
this objective may be the most closely aligned with that of many climate nance
institutions. Instead of evaluating projects on a case-by-case basis, the objec-
tive of providing climate nance may be to choose a portfolio of initiatives that
maximize climate bene ts subject to a budget constraint. Indeed, this is central
to the multilateral institutions of the GEF, the CIFs, and the GCF referenced
in the introduction. The same can be said for domestic programs such as the
U.S. Department of Energy’s loan guarantee programs in support of clean energy
projects.6 In such cases, choosing the alternatives that have the highest bene t
to cost ratio is central to implementing an optimal climate nance strategy.
       Here again, however, the circumstances may dictate what should count as
bene ts and costs. Should the focus be on public and private net bene ts while
treating the subsidy as a transfer? Or should only the public bene ts count
with the subsidy as an explicit cost? The previous discussion shows how the
former might apply when the full scope is domestic, while the latter when it is
international. Nevertheless, arguments can be made in favor of either among the
   5
     In practice, setting subsidies equal to the incremental costs poses a number of challenges
owing to asymmetric information and potential adverse selection. The problem is one of mech-
anism design with similarities to those considered in the literature on payments for ecosystem
services. For examples see Ferraro (2008), Jack, Kousky and Sims (2008), and Polasky, Lewis,
Plantinga and Nelson (2014).
   6
     See https://energy.gov/lpo/loan-programs-o¢ce.


                                              17
range of institutions—governmental and non-governmental—that provide climate
 nance. Here I consider both possibilities.
   Let us rst de ne the ratio of public bene ts to the corresponding subsidy,
in parallel with the previous subsection. Because the subsidies remain set at the
incremental value, there are no remaining private bene ts. It follows that the
project ratio can be written as

                                     pH    pH
                              rP =      =      ;
                                     sP   X pV

and the pilot ratio as

                                  qgH          qgH
                         rP P =        =                   :
                                  sP P   Y    q(gV    X)

Both ratios will be greater than one assuming the net bene ts for the project and
pilot are each positive, a requirement for potentially warranting a subsidy.
   To compare the two alternatives, consider the question of when the pilot has
a greater ratio. After a few lines of rearranging terms, it follows immediately
that
                                               qg    p
                         rP P > rP ()               > ;
                                             Y + qX  X
which is simply Necessary Condition 3. Multiplying both sides by W , it is also
a relationship between the ratio of all bene ts to costs, treating the subsidy as a
transfer, as in subsection 5.1. We therefore have an equivalence again, and can
summarize the key results as follows:

Proposition 4 If the objective is to maximize the bene t-cost ratio—de ned as
(i) the public, non-market bene ts over the subsidy cost; or (ii) all social bene ts
to costs, treating the subsidy as a transfer—then satisfying Necessary Condition
3 along with W > W is su¢cient to always recommend subsidizing the pilot over
the project.

   Proposition 4 means that even if the pilot does not maximize net bene ts, it
can still maximize the ratio of bene ts to costs. Moreover, when it maximizes

                                        18
the ratio of bene ts to costs, it will also maximize the ratio of public bene ts to
subsidy costs. Importantly, the conditions underlying this result are also weaker
than those for maximizing the net bene ts: satisfying the necessary conditions
from Section 4 are su¢cient. In particular, with a focus on bene t-cost ratios
rather than net bene ts, it no longer holds that the project is preferred to the
pilot at su¢ciently high levels of the public bene ts. Instead, there is a clear
policy recommendation for the optimal provision of climate nance: it is always
optimal to subsidize pilots rather than projects.


6     Conclusion
International e¤orts to address climate change are growing increasingly reliant
on climate nance. A lesson from the run up to the 2015 Paris agreement was
that many developing countries consider climate nance from developed coun-
tries as a quid pro quo for their own commitments to reduce emissions (Kotchen
2015). There is also growing demand in all countries to nance climate change
resilience and adaptation, in addition to mitigation. Central to e¤ective and ef-
 cient deployment of climate nance is the need to use public money to leverage
signi cantly larger amounts of private investment, yet surprisingly little research
has focused on how to accomplish this goal.
    As an early contribution to what will surely be an emerging literature, this pa-
per considers how to maximize the impact of publicly provided climate nance to
leverage the private sector. The question of interest is one that many agencies al-
ready face: should they target subsidies towards projects or pilot projects, where
the later provides better information about a full project’s likely success? The
model builds on Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf’s (2016) setup for nancing entrepre-
neurial experimentation, with the di¤erence being the inclusion of a public sector.
An important result is that the opportunity to conduct pilots can expand the set
of socially bene cial, climate-related investments. The model also illustrates the
somewhat counterintuitive scenario where it can be optimal to subsidize a pilot


                                         19
project that costs more than the subsidy needed for a project itself.
   With respect to optimal subsidy policy more generally, the results di¤er in
important ways depending on an agency’s objective function. If agencies consider
investments on a case-by-case basis with the goal of maximizing social net bene-
 ts, then decisions about whether to subsidize a project or pilot project depend
importantly on the size of the non-market social bene ts. In this case, pilots are
preferred when the social bene ts are lower because the information they reveal
could lead to prudent abandonment of the project at an early stage. If, however,
the agency seeks to maximize the bene ts per unit of the subsidy, then the policy
recommendation is to always subsidize the pilot rather than the project.
   While the theoretical results of this paper provide useful guidance for more ef-
 cient, publicly provided climate nance, many opportunities for future research
remain. For example, within the context of the base model, other topics that
could be accounted for in future extensions include risk aversion, di¤erences be-
tween private and public costs of conducting a pilot, and how the information
revealed by a pilot may be endogenous to its costs. Additionally, given the im-
portance of setting subsidies at their minimum (i.e., incremental) cost, further
research would be particularly useful on mechanism designed in the deployment
of climate nance to address problems of asymmetric information between the
private and public sectors.




                                        20
References
Buchner, B K., C Trabacchi, F. Mazza, D. Abramskiehn, and D. Wang (2015)
  Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2015. A Climate Policy Initiative Re-
  port. San Francisco, California.

Buntaine, M. T. and W. A. Pizer (2015) “Encouraging Clean Energy Investment
  in Developing Countries: What Role for Aid?” Climate Policy, 51(5): 543-564.

Ferraro, P. J. (2008) “Asymmetric Information and Contract Design for Pay-
  ments for Environmental Services,” Ecological Economics, 65(4), 810-821.

Fischer, C. (2016) “Environmental Protection for Sale: Strategic Green Indus-
  trial Policy and Climate Finance,” Environmental and Resource Economics,
  Forthcoming. DOI 10.1007/s10640-016-0092-5.

Gompers, P . A. (1995) “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of
  Venture Capital,” Journal of Finance, 50(5): 1461-1289.

Gomper, P. A. and J. Lerner (2004) The Venture Capital Cycle. Cambridge, MA:
  MIT Press.

IPCC (2014) Climate Change 2014: Working Group III Contribution to the
  Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
  Cambridge University Press.

Jack, K., C Kousky, and K. R. E. Sims (2008) “Designing Payments for Ecosys-
  tem Services: Lessons from Previous Experience with Incentive-based Mecha-
  nisms” Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences, 105(28), 9465-9470.

Kerr, W. R., R. Nanda, and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2014) “Entrepreneurship as
  Experimentation,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3) 25-48.

Kotchen, M. J. (2015) “A View From the United States,” in Towards a Workable
  and E¤ective Climate Regime, edited by S. Barrett, C. Carraro, and J. de
  Melo, VoxEU ebook.

                                     21
Kotchen, M. J. and N. K. Negi (2016) “Co nancing in Environment and Devel-
  opment: Evidence from the Global Environment Facility,” NBER Working
  Paper 21139, and forthcoming in The World Bank Economic Review.

Nanda, R. and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2016) “Financing Entrepreneurial Experimen-
  tation,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 16, 1-23.

Polasky, S., D. J. Lewis, A. J. Plantinga, and E. Nelson (2014) “Implementing
  the Optimal Provision of Ecosystem Services,” Proceedings of the National
  Academies of Sciences, 111(17), 6248-6253.

Sahlman, W. A. (1990) “The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Or-
  ganizations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27(2): 473-521.

Stewart, R. B., B. Kingbury, and B. Rudyk (2009) Climate Finance: Regulatory
  and Funding Strategies for Climate Change and Global Development, eds. New
  York, New York University Press.

UNFCCC (2009) The Copenhagen Accord, in the Report of the Conference of
  the Parties on its Fifteenth Session. United Nations Framework Convention
  on Climate Change, FCC/CP/2009/11/Add.1.

UNFCCC (2015) Conference of the Parties Twenty- rst Session: Adoption of the
  Paris Agreement. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
  FCC/CP/2015/L.9.

World Bank (2015) “Funding Boost for Climate Action,” The World Bank News,
  October 10, 2015.

World Economic Forum (2013) The Green Investment Report: The Ways and
  Means to Unlock Private Finance for Green Growth. Geneva, Switzerland.




                                     22
