NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRISON WORK PROGRAMS IN A MODEL OF DETERRENCE
A. Mitchell Polinsky
Working Paper 23026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

Research on this article was supported by the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at
Stanford Law School. Helpful comments were provided by Christine Jolls, Louis Kaplow,
Steven Shavell, Abraham Wickelgren, and two anonymous referees, and valuable research
assistance by Paul Riskind. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by A. Mitchell Polinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Prison Work Programs in a Model of Deterrence
A. Mitchell Polinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 23026
January 2017
JEL No. H23,J41,J48,K14,K42
ABSTRACT
This article considers the social desirability of prison work programs in a model in which the
function of imprisonment is to deter crime. Two types of prison work programs are studied—
voluntary ones and mandatory ones. A voluntary work program generates net social benefits: if
prisoners are paid a wage that just compensates them for their disutility from work, the deterrent
effect of the prison sentence is unaffected, but society obtains the product of the work program.
But a mandatory work program yields even higher net social benefits: if prisoners are forced to
work without compensation, the deterrent effect of the prison sentence rises, allowing society to
restore deterrence and save resources by reducing the probability of detection or the sentence
length, and also to obtain greater output than under the optimal voluntary work program. In an
extension of the basic analysis, however, in which prisoners vary in their disutility from work, a
voluntary work program may be superior to a mandatory work program because prisoners with
relatively high disutility from work can elect not to work.

A. Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
polinsky@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Many countries require prisoners to perform labor during the terms of their incarceration,
and such practices often have been in place for centuries. 1 In the United States, for instance,
prison work has been a significant feature of penal policy since the late eighteenth century. 2
Work programs of some kind exist in 88 percent of the nation’s prisons and employ
approximately 775,000 prisoners, 3 and prison industries have annual sales of $1.7 billion. 4
Prisoners perform myriad jobs, from farming, to making furniture and clothing, to maintaining
the infrastructure of prisons themselves (painting prison buildings, caring for prison grounds, and
so forth).
In this article I undertake an analysis of the social desirability of prison work programs
within the conventional economic model of deterrence. 5 Work programs have the obvious
benefit of generating valuable output, but they can have two conflicting effects on deterrence.
On one hand, the disutility that prisoners bear from working increases the deterrent effect of any
given prison term. 6 On the other hand, any compensation that prisoners receive for their work
decreases the deterrent effect of imprisonment. Thus, an assessment of the desirability of prison

1

See generally United Nations (1955) and Gibson (2011).

2

See Barnes (1921) and American Correctional Association (1986, pp. 1-8).

3

See Stephan (2008, p. 5, Table 6 & Appendix table 16).

4

See Seiter (2016, p. 408).

5

To my knowledge, prison work programs have not previously been addressed in economic literature on
crime. For example, this topic is not mentioned in two recent surveys of the economics of crime and punishment —
Levitt and Miles (2007) and Polinsky and Shavell (2007) — nor in a survey of the economics of prisons — Avio
(1998).
6

Section 4.

The strength of this effect is diminished to the extent that prisoners enjoy some work; see comment (b) in

-2-

work programs must take into account both the direct benefits of prison output and the indirect
effects on deterrence. 7
I consider two types of prison work programs: voluntary ones in which inmates are
offered opportunities to work, which they are free to accept or reject, and are paid a wage; and
mandatory ones that require prisoners to work, and that might include some compensation. 8 I
assess the social desirability of a prison work program compared to no work program; derive the
socially optimal features of each type of prison work program (such as the optimal wage rate in a
voluntary program); and compare the merits of a mandatory work program to a voluntary one.
I first analyze prison work programs in Section 2 in a benchmark model in which
individuals are identical except for the potential gain they would obtain from committing a
crime. In particular, were they to participate in a prison work program, it is assumed that they
would each have the same productivity and would each suffer the same disutility from working.
A voluntary work program is superior to no work program in the benchmark case. To
understand why, suppose that the wage in the voluntary program equals the disutility that
prisoners would bear from working, and assume that prisoners would choose to work at this
wage. A voluntary work program with this wage would leave the disutility of the prison

7

I distinguish between a prison work program and a prison vocational training program. A work program,
as I use that term, is for the purpose of producing valuable output within prisons given the present skills of prisoners,
whereas a vocational training program is focused on developing prisoners’ skills so as to better prepare them for
productive work outside of prison after they complete their sentences. In practice, of course, there is not such a rigid
distinction since prisoners may learn some useful skills in work programs and may produce some useful output in
vocational training programs. But I will not in this paper be concerned with the enhancement of skills by prisoners
or with their prospects for employment after serving their sentences (though see comment (d) in Section 4).
8

Both types of prison work programs are used in practice, though mandatory ones predominate; see
comment (e) in Section 4.

-3-

sentence—and thus deterrence—unchanged. But taxpayers are better off because they obtain the
value of prisoners’ output. Hence, a voluntary work program would be socially desirable. 9
However, a mandatory work program can function even better than a voluntary work
program. In essence, that is because prisoners are made worse off by being forced to work
without pay. This results in an increase in deterrence, everything else equal. The level of
welfare of prisoners, and hence deterrence, can be restored either by shortening the prison term
or by lowering the probability of detection, either of which would improve the welfare of
taxpayers by lowering public costs. 10 Because taxpayers obtain this benefit in addition to the
value of prisoners’ output, while the level of welfare of prisoners is unaffected, a mandatory
work program is superior to a voluntary one.
In Section 3 I reconsider the merits of prison work programs under two extensions of the
benchmark model. I first explain that if prisoners differ in terms of their productivity, the
ranking of the policies is not affected. For essentially the same reasons as those discussed above,
a mandatory work program is preferable to a voluntary one, which in turn is preferable to no
work program.
However, if prisoners differ in terms of their disutility from work, the ranking of the
policies might change. Although a voluntary prison work program would continue to be superior
to no work program, a mandatory work program no longer is necessarily preferable to a
voluntary work program. The potential advantage of a voluntary work program is that it allows
prisoners with relatively high disutility from work to opt out of working. Everything else equal,

9

I demonstrate that the optimal voluntary prison work program offers prisoners the opportunity to work at
the first-best number of hours and pays them the lowest possible wage that induces them to work.
10

I show in the benchmark model that the optimal mandatory prison work program requires prisoners to
engage in maximal work (exceeding the level of work under the optimal voluntary program) and does not

-4-

this is socially desirable if their disutility from work exceeds the value of their output. For
similar reasons, a hybrid prison work program—in which some work is mandatory and some
work is voluntary—may be superior to a mandatory work program alone.
Section 4 concludes with several comments, including on the role of prison work
programs when the purpose of imprisonment is incapacitation or rehabilitation.

2. Prison Work Programs in the Benchmark Model
In this section I begin by describing the standard model of deterrence through
imprisonment, in which prison work programs are absent, and then analyze voluntary and
mandatory work programs within this framework.
A. The Benchmark Model 11
Risk-neutral individuals contemplate committing a harmful act in order to obtain a
benefit that varies among them. If they commit the act, they are caught with a positive
probability. They are assumed to have no wealth, so that the only sanction that can be imposed
on them is a prison sentence.
Let
h = harm caused if the offense is committed; h > 0;
b = benefit to an individual from committing the offense; b ≥ 0;
v(b) = density of b among individuals; v(b) > 0 for all b ≥ 0;
p = probability of catching an offender; p > 0;
k(p) = cost to the state to maintain the probability p; k(p) > 0; k(p) > 0;

compensate them for this work. The logic used to support this conclusion also would support making prison less
desirable in myriad other ways in order to increase deterrence, a point I discuss in comment (g) in Section 4.
11

This model is well known; see, for example, Polinsky and Shavell (2007).

-5-

s = prison sentence for the offense; s > 0; and
c = cost to the state per unit time to imprison an individual.
Sentences are measured in units of time corresponding to one dollar of disutility. 12
An individual will commit an offense if his benefit b exceeds the expected disutility of
the sentence ps. 13
Social welfare equals the benefits that individuals obtain from committing harmful acts,
less the harms they cause, less the disutility that they bear from imprisonment, and less the
state’s cost of imprisoning individuals and maintaining the probability of detection. Hence,
social welfare in the absence of a prison work program is
∞

∫[b – h – ps(1 + c)]v(b)db – k(p).

ps

(1)

The state’s problem is to choose the probability of detection p and the sentence s to
maximize (1). Let p*N and s*N be the optimal probability and sentence in the benchmark model
(subscript “N” for “no” prison work program). For present purposes, it is not necessary to
characterize these results. 14
B. A Voluntary Prison Work Program
Now consider a voluntary work program in which prisoners choose whether to participate
given the wage offered per unit time. If they decide to participate, I assume that they work for a
fixed number of hours specified by the state.

12

Implicit in this construction is that the disutility of a sentence is proportional to its length. My results do
not depend on this assumption, but it simplifies the analysis.
13

indifferent.

There is no loss of generality in assuming that an individual will not commit the offense when he is

14

It will also be the case that I do not need to derive the optimal probability of detection and sentence under
the voluntary and mandatory prison work programs.

-6-

Let
λ̄ = maximum fraction of time that a prisoner is capable of working per period; λ̄ < 1;
λV = fraction of time prisoners work per period under a voluntary work program;
0 ≤ λV ≤ λ̄;
d(λ) = disutility of time worked per period; d(0) = 0; d′(λ) > 0; d″(λ) > 0;
n = output per period if full-time work (that is, if λ = 1); n > 0; 15 and
wV = wage per period if full-time work under a voluntary work program; wV ≥ 0.
The disutility from working is in addition to the normal disutility of time in prison, so if a
prisoner chooses to work the total disutility from a sentence s is s(1 + d(λV)). Output is measured
in units that correspond to one dollar of value. For notational simplicity, I will in the present
section drop the subscript on w (other than in the statements of the propositions).
Additionally, I assume that the maximum value of prison work per period is less than the
public cost of imprisonment per period, that is, λ̄n < c. 16
It will be useful to define the level of work that maximizes the net social value of work.
Let
λ* = first-best level of work per period,

15

To the extent that work by prisoners increases the unemployment of non-prisoners (for example, by using
prison labor for groundskeeping rather than private labor), the social value of prison labor is reduced. This effect, if
applicable, can be incorporated implicitly through the value of n.
16

This assumption is supported by the following observations. The average annual public cost per prisoner
has been estimated to be $31,286 in fiscal year 2010; see Henrichson and Delaney (2012, p. 9). If prisoners could
work up to ten hours a day, seven days a week, fifty-two weeks a year, and if their output were valued on average at
the 2010 Federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, the average value of their annual output would be $26,390. For
simplicity, I assume that the public cost of imprisoning individuals is the same whether there are work programs or
not, though it is plausible that work programs would cause the state to incur additional supervision costs.

-7-

that is, the λ that maximizes the value of the output of work net of the disutility incurred to
produce it, λn – d(λ). I assume that λ* > 0, which implies that n > d′(0), and that λ* < λ̄. 17 Thus,
λ* is an interior solution satisfying d′(λ) = n.
If a prisoner chooses to participate in the voluntary work program, he will earn λVw and
suffer disutility d(λV) per period. Thus, assuming that he will participate if he is indifferent, he
will participate if λVw ≥ d(λV) or, equivalently, if w ≥ d(λV)/λV. Let
~ (λ ) = minimum wage at and above which a prisoner would choose to participate in a
w
V
voluntary work program and below which he would decline to participate,
~ (λ ) = d(λ )/λ .
where w
V
V
V
~ , an individual will commit an offense if his benefit b exceeds the
Assuming w ≥ w
expected disutility of the sentence, which is ps(1 + d(λV) – λVw). Relative to the situation in
which there is no work program, he now suffers additional disutility from work d(λV), but obtains
wage income λVw.
Social welfare will reflect not only the factors that were included in the absence of a work
program—the benefit from offenses less their harm, the disutility of imprisonment, and the
public cost of imprisonment and enforcement—but also the disutility that prisoners bear from
~ , social welfare under a voluntary
working and the value of their output. Accordingly, if w ≥ w
prison work program is
∞

∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λV) – λVn)]v(b)db – k(p).

ps(1 + d(λV) – λVw)

17

(2)

For example, if the first-best level of work is fifty hours a week, it seems plausible that an able-bodied
prisoner would be capable of working more than this.

-8-

Note that because the wage w is a transfer payment, it only affects social welfare through its
~ , no one will work
effect on the level of deterrence (the lower bound of the integral). If w < w
and social welfare will be given by (1).
The state’s problem is to choose p, s, λV, and w to maximize (2), subject to the constraints
~ . The optimal values will be designated with an asterisk.
that λV ≤ λ̄ and w ≥ w
Proposition 1: A voluntary prison work program is superior to not having a prison work
program.
Comment: Even though I assumed that some work is socially desirable—that is, d′(0) <
n—it does not necessarily follow that a voluntary prison work program is superior to no work
program. This is because, to motivate prisoners to work, they have to be paid a wage, which will
reduce the deterrent effect of the prison sentence, everything else equal. But by paying prisoners
a wage that just compensates them for their disutility from work, they can be induced to work
without being deterred less, resulting in a social gain due to their productive output.
Proof: Set p = p*N , s = s*N . I will show that, given these values, there exists a voluntary
prison work program that results in higher social welfare (2) than without a work program (1).
~ (λ ) = d(λ )/λ . Then the
For any λV > 0 under the voluntary work program, let the wage be w
V
V
V
~ (λ ))
level of deterrence will be the same as that without a work program since ps(1 + d(λV) – λVw
V
= p*N s*N . Thus, social welfare under the voluntary work program will be higher if the integrand in
(2) exceeds that in (1), that is, if
b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λV) – λVn) > b – h – p*Ns*N(1 + c),

(3)

which will hold if λVn – d(λV) > 0. Let f(λV) = λVn – d(λV). Clearly, f(0) = 0. Moreover, f ′(0) = n
– d′(0) > 0, where the inequality follows from the assumption that λ* > 0. Hence, there exists a
λV > 0 in the neighborhood of 0 such that (3) holds. □
-9-

The next proposition characterizes the optimal voluntary prison work program.
Proposition 2: The optimal voluntary prison work program
(a) offers prisoners the opportunity to work at the first-best level of work, λ*V = λ*; and
(b) employs the lowest possible wage that induces prisoners to work, which is less than
~ (λ*) = d(λ*)/λ* < n.
the marginal value of the output of prison work, w*V = w
Comments: (i) It is not surprising that the optimal voluntary prison work program sets the
level of work at the first-best level, since this maximizes the net social value of work.
(ii) In a private labor market, in which workers can choose how much to work, they
would need to be paid a wage equal to the marginal value of their output in order to induce them
to choose the first-best level of work. But in a voluntary prison labor market, where the level of
work is chosen by the state and can be set at the first-best level, prisoners only need to be paid
enough to induce them to prefer working to not working. In other words, they only have to be
paid enough to compensate them for their average disutility from work. Since their marginal
disutility from work is increasing, their average disutility from work is less than their marginal
disutility. This implies that, if prisoners are paid the lowest possible wage that induces them to
work, they will be receiving less than the marginal value of their work.
(iii) The reason that the optimal wage to employ in a voluntary prison labor program is
the lowest possible wage that induces prisoners to work should by now be familiar. Any higher
wage would reduce deterrence and require costly public expenditures on enforcement or
imprisonment to offset this reduction.
Proof: I first establish that, for any voluntary work program λV > 0 in which prisoners are
~ (λ ) = d(λ )/λ . The optimal wage cannot be lower
induced to work, the optimal wage equals w
V
V
V
^>
than this since prisoners would then choose to not work. Suppose the wage were higher, say w

- 10 -

~ (λ ). Then the wage could be lowered to w
~ (λ ), which would increase deterrence, and the
w
V
V
probability of detection could be lowered to some p◦ < p so as to return deterrence to its original
~ ) = ps(1 + d(λ ) – λ w
^ 18 This would have two beneficial effects on
level: p◦s(1 + d(λV) – λVw
V
V ).
social welfare (2). First, the cost of maintaining the probability of detection would decline.
Second, the expected sentence length ps would decline, which would raise social welfare if
(1 + c + d(λV) – λVn) > 0; that this inequality holds follows from the assumption that λ̄n < c.
~ (λ ) = d(λ )/λ .
Hence, the optimal wage is w
V
V
V
~ (λ )), equals ps
Given the preceding result, the level of deterrence, ps(1 + d(λV) – λVw
V
regardless of λV. Thus, the optimal λV can be derived by maximizing the integrand of social
welfare (2). The resulting first-order condition is –ps(d′(λV) – n) = 0, implying that d′(λV) = n;
hence, λ*V = λ*.
~ (λ*) =
Since d(0) = 0, d′(λ) > 0, and d″(λ) > 0, it follows that d′(λ) > d(λ)/λ. Thus, w
d(λ*)/λ* < d′(λ*) = n. □
C. A Mandatory Prison Work Program
Next consider a mandatory work program in which prisoners are told how much they
have to work and might be compensated for this work. Let
λM = fraction of time prisoners are required to work per period under a mandatory work
program; 0 ≤ λM ≤ λ̄; and
wM = wage per period if full-time work under a mandatory work program; wM ≥ 0.
For notational simplicity, I will drop the subscript on w when there is no ambiguity.

18

In this proof, as in subsequent proofs, it would be possible to obtain the same result by lowering the

- 11 -

Since the expected disutility of the sentence now is ps(1 + d(λM) – λMw), social welfare
under a mandatory prison work program is
∞

∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λM) – λMn)]v(b)db – k(p).

ps(1 + d(λM) – λMw)

(4)

The state’s problem is to choose p, s, λM, and w to maximize (4), subject to the constraint
that λM ≤ λ̄.
Proposition 3: A mandatory prison work program is superior to a voluntary prison work
program.
Comment: A mandatory prison work program obviously can duplicate the level of work
that would be achieved under a voluntary work program. The fundamental advantage of a
mandatory work program stems from the fact that it can make prisoners work regardless of how
little they are paid, whereas a voluntary program is constrained by having to offer a wage high
enough to induce prisoners to work. Thus, a mandatory work program can make prisoners worse
off than they would be under a voluntary work program, in which case the probability of
detection or the length of the sentence (or both) can be lowered relative to that under a voluntary
work program without lessening deterrence. The resulting savings in enforcement costs or
prison costs makes a mandatory work program superior to a voluntary one.
Proof: Let p, s, λ, and w be the probability of detection, sentence, level of work offered,
~ (λ). The resulting
and wage under a voluntary prison work program, where λ  (0, λ̄] and w ≥ w
level of deterrence will be ps(1 + d(λ) – λw). Under the mandatory work program, set sM = s, λM
= λ, and choose a wM < w. Then it will be possible to select a pM < p such that pMs(1 + d(λM) –
λMwM) = ps(1 + d(λ) – λw), so that the levels of deterrence under the voluntary and mandatory
sentence length s rather than the probability p, or by lowering both to some extent. For simplicity in the proofs I just
lower p, though in the comments following the proofs I refer to the possibility of lowering p or s (or both).

- 12 -

work programs will be the same. Social welfare under the mandatory program will exceed that
under the voluntary program if
b – h – pMs(1 + c + d(λM) – λMn) > b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λ) – λn),

(5)

which follows from λ̄n < c (implying that the expression in parentheses is positive) and pM < p.
Moreover, the cost of enforcement will be lower under the mandatory work program, k(pM) <
k(p). □
Proposition 4: The optimal mandatory prison work program
* = λ̄; and
(a) requires prisoners to work at the maximal level, λM
* = 0.
(b) does not compensate prisoners for their work, wM
Comments: (i) It is easy to see why it is optimal not to compensate prisoners for their
work under a mandatory work program. On one hand, compensating them would improve their
welfare in prison and thereby reduce deterrence, which would be socially costly to offset by
raising the probability of detection or lengthening the prison sentence. On the other hand, there
is no adverse effect on their output as a result of not compensating them since their work is
mandatory. 19
(ii) Parallel intuition explains why the optimal work requirement is maximal. By
requiring prisoners to work as much as possible without compensation, the disutility of prison
per unit time is maximized. This increases deterrence and allows the probability of detection or
the sentence to be reduced, saving enforcement or sanctioning costs. While the resulting
decrease in the expected sentence length reduces output, everything else equal, the value of this

19

Section 4.

This statement might need to be qualified for reasons outside of the present model; see comment (a) in

- 13 -

lost output is more than offset by the corresponding savings in the public cost of imprisonment
(given λ̄n < c).
(iii) It might be surprising that the optimal work requirement is maximal even if, as I
assume, this level of work exceeds the first-best level, λ̄ > λ*. For example, how could it be that
it is desirable to require maximal work even if the corresponding level of disutility imposed on a
prisoner, d(λ̄), exceeds the value of the resulting output, λ̄n? The explanation is that when the
work requirement is raised, the expected disutility from imprisonment, ps(1 + d(λ)), can be kept
constant by lowering the probability of detection p or the sentence length s (or both). With this
adjustment, the aggregate welfare of offenders and the aggregate level of harm is unchanged.
But the state gains as a result of a reduction of the expected net cost of imprisonment per
offender, ps(c – λn), due to a decline in ps and an increase in λ. The state also will gain through
lower enforcement costs if the decline in ps is due in part to a reduction in p.
* = 0. Suppose otherwise and consider some wM > 0; let pM, sM,
Proof: I first show that wM
and λM be the optimal probability, sentence, and work requirement under a mandatory work
program given this wM. The resulting level of deterrence is pMsM(1 + d(λM) – λMwM). If wM is
lowered to 0, deterrence will rise. Lower pM to p^M so as to restore deterrence to its original level;
hence p^M solves
p^MsM(1 + d(λM)) = pMsM(1 + d(λM) – λMwM).

(6)

Lowering pM to p^M raises social welfare (4) both because the expected net social costs of
imprisonment, ps(1 + c + d(λ) – λn) > 0, decline; and the cost of enforcement, k(p), declines.
Hence, wM > 0 could not have been optimal.
* = λ̄ will be demonstrated in a similar fashion. Consider some λM < λ̄ and let pM,
That λM
sM, and wM = 0 be the optimal probability, sentence, and wage rate under a mandatory work
- 14 -

program given this λM. The resulting level of deterrence is pMsM(1 + d(λM)). Raise λM to λ̄ and
lower pM to p^M so as to maintain deterrence at its original level, where p^M solves
p^MsM(1 + d(λ̄)) = pMsM(1 + d(λM)).

(7)

This will have two beneficial effects on social welfare (4). First, the expected net social costs of
imprisonment decline, that is
p^MsM(1 + c + d(λ̄) – λ̄n) < pMsM(1 + c + d(λM) – λMn).

(8)

To see that (8) holds, rewrite it using (7) and divide through by sM to obtain
p^M(c – λ̄n) < pM(c – λMn).

(9)

The result follows because p^M < pM and λM < λ̄. Second, lowering pM to p^M reduces enforcement
costs, k(p). Thus, λM < λ̄ could not have been optimal. □

3. Extensions
In this section I consider two generalizations of the benchmark model, first allowing
prisoners to vary with respect to their productivity and then with respect to their disutility from
imprisonment. In each case I discuss the ranking of the two types of prison work programs and
no work program.
A. Prisoners Differ in Productivity
For many types of prison work, there could be significant variations in the productivity of
prisoners. Able-bodied younger prisoners may be able to collect more trash along a highway
than older prisoners. Some prisoners may be able to concentrate on complicated tasks better than
others and consequently make fewer errors in operating prison machinery, such as that used to
make license plates.
Let
- 15 -

α = productivity coefficient; α ≥ 0; and
z(α) = density of α among prisoners; z(α) > 0 for all α ≥ 0.
Thus, the productivity an α-type prisoner is αn. I assume that the mean of α is 1; that the
densities of b (the benefit from committing the offense) and α are independent; and that the state
only knows the distribution of α among prisoners, not its value for each one. 20
Voluntary prison work program: Given the state’s information, the same work program
and wage rate must be offered to all prisoners. Since a prisoner’s decision whether to work only
depends on these values and the disutility from work, which does not vary among prisoners in
the present case, the behavior of prisoners will be the same as in the benchmark model. All will
~ and none will work if w < w
~.
work if w ≥ w
~ , social welfare under a voluntary work program will now be
Assuming w ≥ w
∞∞

∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λV) – λVαn)]v(b)db}z(α)dα – k(p).

0 ps(1 + d(λV) – λVwV)

(10)

Mandatory prison work program: Although the optimal wage under a mandatory prison
work program was shown to be zero in the benchmark model, I will not preclude here the
possibility that the wage is positive. Hence, social welfare under a mandatory prison work
program is in the present case
∞∞

∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + d(λM) – λMαn)]v(b)db}z(α)dα – k(p).

0 ps(1 + d(λM) – λMwM)

(11)

Proposition 5: If prisoners differ in their productivity, then the ranking of the policy
alternatives is the same as that in the benchmark model:

20

For instance, it would be difficult to assess the effectiveness of a prisoner who is assigned automotive or
plumbing repair tasks that are nonstandard in character. (In other circumstances, however, individual productivity
may be easy to observe, such as for the job of making shoes.)

- 16 -

(a) a voluntary prison work program is superior to not having a prison work program; and
(b) a mandatory prison work program is superior to a voluntary prison work program.
Comment: The ranking of the policy alternatives in the benchmark model is unaffected
by variations in the productivity of prisoners since this variability does not affect the disutility
borne by prisoners from working, their behavior, or their total output. Variation per se in worker
productivity is immaterial.
Proof: The proof of part (a) is essentially identical to the proof of Proposition 1. All that
needs to be recognized is that, since the mean of α is 1, (10) is the same as (2). Similarly, the
proof of part (b) follows from the proof of Proposition 3 since (11) is the same as (4). □
B. Prisoners Differ in Disutility From Work
The disutility of work also could vary widely among prisoners. Picking up trash along a
highway would be more distasteful to individuals with weak backs than to those with normal
backs. Working in a noisy machine shop may be more stressful to some prisoners than to others.
To reflect such variations, 21 let
τ = disutility coefficient; τ ≥ 0; and
r(τ) = density of τ among prisoners; r(τ) > 0 for all τ ≥ 0.
Thus, the disutility from work for a τ-type prisoner is τd(λ). I assume that the mean of τ is 1; that
the densities of b and τ are independent; and that the state can only observe the distribution of τ,
not its value for a particular prisoner.
Voluntary prison work program: Since the work program and wage rate offered for work
has to be the same for all prisoners, whether they will choose to work will vary among them. A
τ-type prisoner will choose to work if s(1 + τd(λV) – λVwV) ≤ s or λVwV – τd(λV) ≥ 0. Let

- 17 -

~τ (λ , w ) = critical disutility coefficient at and below which a prisoner will choose to work
V
V
and above which would choose not to work,
so ~τ solves λVwV – τd(λV) = 0, and thus ~τ (λV, wV) = λVwV/d(λV).
Social welfare under a voluntary work program will now be
~
τ∞

∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + τd(λV) – λVn)]v(b)db}r(τ)dτ

0 ps(1 + τd(λV) – λVwV)

(12)

∞∞

+ ∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c)]v(b)db}r(τ)dτ – k(p).
~
τ ps

The first term reflects the contribution to social welfare by prisoners who choose to work and the
second term the contribution by those who decline to work.
Mandatory prison work program: Under a mandatory work program, variations in the
disutility from work will affect the level of deterrence, but not whether a prisoner works.
Again allowing for the possibility of a positive wage, social welfare under a mandatory
prison work program is in the present case
∞∞

∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + τd(λM) – λMn)]v(b)db}r(τ)dτ – k(p).

0 ps(1 + τd(λM) – λMwM)

(13)

Proposition 6: If prisoners differ in their disutility from work, then
(a) a voluntary prison work program is superior to not having a prison work program;
(b) a mandatory prison work program could be superior or inferior to a voluntary prison
work program;

21

For simplicity, I consider one extension at a time, and therefore here assume that prisoners are equally
productive.

- 18 -

* < λ̄,
(c) the optimal mandatory prison work program might not require maximal work, λM
and such a work program could be superior to a voluntary prison work program (and therefore
also to no work program); and
* < λ̄ holds, a hybrid prison work program in which some work is mandatory
(d) when λM
and some work is voluntary is superior to a mandatory work program alone.
Comments: (i) The first part of the proposition can be explained as follows. Given a
positive wage under a voluntary work program, prisoners with relatively low levels of disutility
from work will choose to work. The marginal prisoner will be indifferent between working and
not working, and therefore will be deterred to the same extent as he would be if there were no
work program. But the inframarginal prisoners, whose levels of disutility from working are
lower, will be strictly better off by participating in the work program and therefore will be
deterred less. The optimal wage rate balances the social benefit from having more prisoners
work, as the wage rate is raised, with the social detriment of more crime. Note, however, that
starting from a wage rate of zero, there are no inframarginal prisoners who will be deterred less if
the wage rate is raised slightly; the only prisoners who pursue the opportunity to work will be
those with negligible disutility from work and who will be indifferent between working and not
working. Since there will be no first-order reduction in deterrence, but there will be a first-order
enhancement of social welfare due to the productive output of these prisoners, it will always be
desirable to employ a positive wage rate. In other words, it will always be better to have a
voluntary prison work program than none at all.
(ii) With respect to the second part of the proposition, first observe that if the variation
among prisoners in the disutility from work is small, then the results tend towards those in the
benchmark case in which a mandatory work program is preferable to a voluntary work program.

- 19 -

Hence, the main result that needs to be explained here is why, if there is significant variation
among prisoners in the disutility of work, a mandatory work program might be inferior to a
voluntary one. In essence, the potential advantage of a voluntary work program is that it allows
prisoners with relatively high disutility from work to opt out of working; were they forced to
work, their disutility from work could well exceed the value of their output. Put differently, a
voluntary work program beneficially harnesses the private information of prisoners about their
disutility from work in a way that a mandatory work program cannot.
(iii) To illustrate this point more concretely, suppose that there are an equal number of
two types of prisoners, those with low disutility from work and those with high disutility from
work. Suppose, too, that the value of the output from work is midway between these two levels
of disutility and is the same for both groups. Then, if the state requires all prisoners to work—it
cannot observe their levels of disutility and distinguish between the two types—the aggregate
value of the output from prison work will be just offset by the aggregate disutility associated
with that work. There would be no net social gain from prison work. In contrast, if the state
were to use a voluntary work program and set the wage at a level that would just induce
prisoners with low disutility from work to accept it, then there would be a net social gain from
their work since the value of their output would exceed their low level of disutility.
(iv) The preceding advantage of a voluntary work program needs to be balanced against
its disadvantage with respect to achieving deterrence. As I have explained, a voluntary work
program cannot increase deterrence because, if prisoners were made worse off as a result of it,
they would elect not to participate in it. A mandatory work program, however, can increase
deterrence by forcing prisoners to work without compensation. This advantage of a mandatory
work program was what led the mandatory program to be superior to the voluntary program in

- 20 -

the benchmark model. Hence, when prisoners vary in their disutility from work, which work
program is preferable depends on a comparison of the disutility-sorting advantage of the
voluntary program to the deterrence-enhancing advantage of the mandatory program. In the
Appendix I provide an example in which this balancing favors a voluntary prison work program.
(v) To understand why the optimal mandatory work requirement might not be maximal
when prisoners differ in their disutility from work, reconsider the argument used to explain why
the optimal work requirement is maximal in the benchmark model. If it were not, it could be
raised and the expected sentence length lowered (by shortening the sentence or reducing the
probability of detection) so as to keep deterrence the same for everyone, since the disutility from
work was the same for everyone in the benchmark model. But when individuals differ in their
disutility from work, raising the work requirement and lowering the expected sentence length
will have differential effects on individuals, increasing deterrence for those with relatively high
disutility and lowering deterrence for those with relatively low disutility. Then, whether it is
socially desirable to raise the mandatory work requirement will depend on, among other factors,
how the disutility of work varies among individuals. I provide an example in the Appendix in
which work is socially detrimental on average—in the sense that the mean level of disutility per
unit time exceeds the value of output per unit time—and the optimal mandatory work
requirement is less than maximal.
(vi) Even if a mandatory prison work program does not require maximal work, it will still
generate more deterrence than a voluntary prison work program. Therefore, if the harm from the
offense is high enough, such a work program will be superior to a voluntary work program (and,
for the same reason, to no work program).

- 21 -

(vii) Whenever a mandatory prison work program does not require maximum work, it is
possible to consider a hybrid work program in which prisoners are offered the opportunity to
work some additional time for which they are compensated. The explanation of why a hybrid
work program is superior to a pure mandatory work program is essentially the same as the
explanation, provided in comment (i) above, of why a voluntary work program is superior to no
work program. Offering prisoners an opportunity to work for pay for some additional time
beyond that which they are required to work will be attractive to prisoners with relatively low
disutility from work. Marginal prisoners who volunteer for this additional work will be deterred
to the same extent as under the pure mandatory work program (their additional disutility will be
just offset by their compensation), but society will gain some additional output. Inframarginal
prisoners, whose disutility from work is lower, will be deterred less as a result of undertaking
this additional work. But, as explained in comment (i), if one starts at a wage of zero, it will be
socially desirable to raise the wage because the prisoners who first volunteer will be marginal
prisoners, generating valuable output with a negligible loss of deterrence. 22
Proof: (a) Since a voluntary work program with w = 0 is equivalent to not having a work
program, I will demonstrate the result of part (a) by evaluating the derivative of social welfare
under a voluntary work program (12) with respect to w at w = 0, which is
2

[1 – V(ps)][psλVn/d(λV)]r(0) > 0,

(14)

where V(.) is the cumulative distribution function of b. Hence, w*V > 0, implying that a voluntary
work program is superior to no work program.

22

I am grateful to Abraham Wickelgren for suggesting that I pursue parts (c) and (d) of Proposition 6 and
for anticipating some of the intuition behind these results.

- 22 -

(b) Proposition 3 established that if there is no variation among prisoners in the disutility
from work, a mandatory work program is strictly superior to a voluntary one. Clearly, therefore,
if the variation among prisoners in the disutility from work is sufficiently small, a mandatory
work program will remain superior to a voluntary work program. That a mandatory work
program can be inferior to a voluntary one when the disutility from work varies among prisoners
is demonstrated in the Appendix in an example.
(c) This part also is demonstrated in the Appendix in an example similar to the one used
to establish part (b).
(d) The proof of this part parallels that of part (a). Let p, s, λM, and wM be the optimal
values of the policy instruments under a pure mandatory prison work program, and assume that
λM < λ̄. Consider a hybrid work program in which prisoners are offered the opportunity to work
an additional fraction of time λV, where 0 < λV ≤ λ̄ – λM, at a wage of wV. Under this hybrid
work program a τ-type prisoner will choose to work the additional time if s(1 + τd(λM + λV) –
λMwM – λVwV) ≤ s(1 + τd(λM) – λMwM). Hence, the critical disutility coefficient is ~τ (λV, wV) =
λVwV/[d(λM + λV) – d(λM)] and social welfare is
~
τ∞

∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + τd(λM + λV) – (λM + λV)n)]v(b)db}r(τ)dτ

0 ps(1 + τd(λM + λV) – λMwM – λVwV)

(15)

∞∞

+ ∫{∫[b – h – ps(1 + c + τd(λM) – λMn)]v(b)db}r(τ)dτ – k(p).
~
τ ps(1 + τd(λM) – λMwM)

The first term relates to the prisoners who choose the elective work, while the second term
concerns those who just perform the mandatory work. The derivative of (15) with respect to wV
is, at wV = 0,
2

[1 – V(ps(1 – λMwM))][psλVn/[d(λM + λV) – d(λM)]]r(0) > 0.

- 23 -

(16)

Thus, w*V > 0, implying that a hybrid work program is preferable to a pure mandatory work
program. □

4. Concluding Remarks
I conclude with a number of comments.
(a) What if the productivity of prisoners is under their control? I assumed that the output
of prisoners in work programs was fixed per unit time. In many circumstances, however, a
prisoner’s output might be influenced by his effort, such as how vigilant he is in picking up trash
along a highway or how much he concentrates on the tasks required to make a pair of shoes.
When prisoner effort of this sort is unobservable by administrators of prison work programs,
there is an argument for paying prisoners for their output even under a mandatory work program,
or paying them more than the minimum required to induce them to work under a voluntary work
program. The reason, of course, is that this will generate more output. Prisoners paid by the
weight of their collected trash or the number of shoes they produce undoubtedly will collect
more and produce more. Because these additional payments will tend to reduce deterrence, their
desirability will depend on a comparison of the value of the additional output they generate to the
public cost of raising the probability of detection or the length of the sentence in order to restore
deterrence.
(b) What if prisoners like prison work? I assumed that prisoners bear disutility from
working, but this might not always be the case. Although prisoners may dislike picking up trash
along a highway on a hot day or having to clean bathrooms, they might obtain some satisfaction
from repairing prison uniforms or preparing and serving food in the prison kitchen. If prisoners
like some prison work, then the deterrent effect of a mandatory work program would decline to a

- 24 -

degree. Similarly, a voluntary work program could result in lower deterrence if prisoners prefer
to do some work even without compensation. But for my analysis to be affected in an essential
way, it would have to be the case that prisoners like work so much that they would prefer to
work without pay for the maximum possible amount of time (say ten hours a day every day of
the year) than not to work.
(c) What if the goal of imprisonment is incapacitation? Suppose that the objective of
imprisonment is to incapacitate prisoners—to keep them from committing additional crimes—
rather than to deter them from committing crimes. 23 The degree to which this objective is
satisfied depends solely on the probability of detection and the sentence—specifically, on the
expected sentence length ps. Given the probability of detection and the sentence, is a prison
work program desirable, and if so, is a mandatory or voluntary program better? For simplicity, I
will answer these questions under the assumptions of the benchmark model in which prisoners
are equally productive and bear the same disutility from work. First observe that if deterrence is
not a concern, then there is no reason to choose one work program over the other, for each can
achieve whatever level of work λ is desired. The mandatory work program can require this level
of work, and the voluntary work program can offer a high enough wage to induce prisoners to
work this much. Moreover, assuming that the first-best level of work is positive (that is, n >
d′(0)), a prison work program will be desirable even when the objective of imprisonment is
incapacitation.
(d) What if the goal of imprisonment is rehabilitation? Alternatively, suppose that the
rehabilitation of prisoners is the goal of imprisonment, that is, helping them to return to their
communities as more productive members of society. Closely related to this objective would be

- 25 -

the desire to provide vocational training to prisoners. Given these objectives, prison work
programs that include an element of vocational training obviously would be desirable, especially
ones that provide work similar to that which prisoners can perform outside of prison, such as
working in factories producing apparel or providing food services. A mandatory prison work
program would have an advantage over a voluntary one in that all prisoners would obtain the
benefit of vocational training, rather than just those who elect to participate.
(e) What is the character of prison work programs in practice? 24 States generally require
able-bodied prisoners to work, 25 with the exception that prisoners who are awaiting trial for
sentencing may volunteer to work. The majority of the work is directed towards the maintenance
and daily operation of the prison, including laundry and food services, cleaning, landscaping, and
infrastructure repairs. A limited number of prisoners (approximately 8 percent of the prison
population) work for so-called “prison industries” that make products, such as garments and
wood furniture, or provide services, such as printing, that are sold to state governments. Such
prisoners are paid between $2.63 and $7.64 per day. An even smaller number of prisoners work
within the prison for private sector employers on a voluntary basis. These prisoners are paid
wages that are comparable to wages paid for similar jobs outside of prison, but then have
deductions assessed for room and board, taxes, victim restitution, and family support, leaving
them on average with less than half of their nominal wages. Similarly, in Federal prisons

23

Of course, imprisonment can serve both of these goals (and others, as I note in the next comment)
simultaneously. For clarity, I will discuss each goal as if it were the only one.
24

The following description is based primarily on Seiter (2016, pp. 70 & 406-09).

25

For example, in California “[e]very able-bodied person committed to the custody of the Secretary of the
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation is obligated to work . . .” See <http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/regulations/
adult_ operations/docs/Title15-2015.pdf> at p. 28. Ohio “requires all inmates to work” unless they are assigned to
an alternative prison program or are classified as “medically idle.” See <http://www.drc.ohio.gov/web/drc_policies/
documents/54-WRK-06.pdf> at p. 2.

- 26 -

inmates are required to work if they are medically able, and are paid 12 cents to 40 cents per
hour. 26
(f) How do political considerations affect the assessment of prison work programs?
Although my focus in this article has been on the design of an ideal — social welfare
maximizing — prison work program, it is of some interest to observe that the use of prison labor
is politically controversial and gives rise to opportunistic behavior by interest groups. Prison
work programs have been criticized on the grounds that they in effect re-create the conditions of
slavery in which a predominantly black population of prisoners is forced to perform physically
arduous work with little or no compensation. Labor unions have lobbied against prison work
programs that reduce the demand for private sector workers (such as in the production of
clothing or furniture), while businesses that participate in convict leasing programs in which
prisoners are paid below-market wages have a motive to support such programs.
(g) Are prison work programs the best way to increase deterrence? As seen, a benefit of
a mandatory prison work program that does not compensate prisoners is that it enhances
deterrence by increasing the disutility borne by prisoners. There are, of course, other ways to
enhance deterrence by making time in prison less attractive, such as confining prisoners to their
cells more hours each day or providing them less appetizing food. If there were no constraint on
the disutility that could be imposed on prisoners, it might be argued that all of these ways of
making prisoners worse off should be undertaken because they all improve deterrence and likely
reduce the public cost of operating prisons. But if there are social norms or constitutional
constraints that limit the disutility that can be imposed on prisoners, the optimal use of
mandatory prison work programs would reflect a comparison of such programs to these

26

See Federal Bureau of Prisons, Work Programs, available at <http://www.bop.gov/inmates/custody_and_

- 27 -

alternatives, and may well result in a more restricted use of mandatory work programs than has
been suggested in this article. (Note, however, that a social limit on the disutility that can be
imposed on prisoners would not constrain the use of voluntary prison work programs since
prisoners can never be made worse off under such programs.)

care/work_programs.jsp>.

- 28 -

Appendix
Example establishing part (b) of Proposition 6:
I will demonstrate through an example that a voluntary prison work program can be
superior to a mandatory one when the disutility of work varies among prisoners. (It also will be
the case in this example that a mandatory work program is preferable to no work program.)
The example employs discrete distributions of the benefit from committing the offense and
the disutility from work. For simplicity, I assume that it is costless to set the probability of
detection and that it is set equal to 1. 27
Let
bL = low benefit to an individual from committing the offense; bL > 0;
bH = high benefit to an individual from committing the offense; bH > bL;
φ = fraction of low-benefit individuals; 0 < φ < 1;
dL = low disutility of time worked per period; dL > 0;
dH = high disutility of time worked per period; dH > dL; and
θ = fraction of low-disutility-of-time-worked individuals; 0 < θ < 1.
The other variables employed in the example have been defined in the main body of the article.
I assume in the example that it is possible to deter bL-types by the threat of prison without
an accompanying work program; that bH-types cannot be deterred by prison even with the
harshest mandatory work program; and that the harm exceeds bH:
bL < s̄ < s̄(1 + λ̄dH) < bH < h,

(A1)

where s̄ is the maximal sentence length. I also assume that prison work is socially beneficial on
average (averaged over the dL-types and dH-types),

- 29 -

n > θdL + (1 – θ)dH,

(A2)

and that
dL < n < dH.

(A3)

No prison work program: The level of deterrence is s. If s < bL, no one will be deterred
and the level of social welfare will be
φbL + (1 – φ)bH – h – s(1 + c).

(A4)

Clearly, in this case, the optimal s is 0, in which case social welfare will be
φbL + (1 – φ)bH – h.

(A5)

If s  bL, the bL-types will be deterred, but not the bH-types, so the level of social welfare
will be
(1 – φ)[bH – h – s(1 + c)].

(A6)

In this case, the optimal s is as low as possible consistent with continuing to deter the bL-types,
that is, such that s = bL. Then social welfare is (A6) with s = bL.
I assume that social welfare (A6) with s = bL will exceed (A5), where no one is deterred.
This requires that
φh – bL – (1 – φ)bLc > 0,

(A7)

which clearly will hold for h sufficiently high.
Mandatory prison work program: Given s, λ, and w, there are three possible outcomes in
the example under a mandatory work program: (1) no bL-types are deterred; (2) only bL-types
with high disutility from work dH are deterred; or (3) all bL-types are deterred. In all three cases
no bH-types are deterred.
In the first case, s(1 + λdH – λw) < bL and social welfare is

27

It will be clear that I could modify the example by making the conventional assumption that it is costly to

- 30 -

φ{θ[bL – h – s(1 + c + λdL – λn)] + (1 – θ)[bL – h – s(1 + c + λdH – λn)]}

(A8)

+ (1 – φ){θ[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdL – λn)] + (1 – θ)[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdH – λn)]}.
Since λ̄n < c, the terms in parentheses multiplying s are all positive, implying that the optimal s
is 0. Hence, maximal social welfare in the first case is (A5).
In the second case, s(1 + λdL – λw) < bL ≤ s(1 + λdH – λw) and social welfare is
φθ[bL – h – s(1 + c + λdL – λn)]

(A9)

+ (1 – φ){θ[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdL – λn)] + (1 – θ)[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdH – λn)]}.
Given any λ and w, since λ̄n < c, the optimal s is the lowest s that still allows deterrence of the
bL-types with high disutility from work dH. This s satisfies bL = s(1 + λdH – λw). It is clear from
this condition and (A9) that the lower w is, the lower s can be and the higher social welfare will
be. Hence, w* = 0 and λ* and s* satisfy bL = s(1 + λdH).
In the third case, bL ≤ s(1 + λdL – λw) and social welfare is
(1 – φ){θ[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdL – λn)] + (1 – θ)[bH – h – s(1 + c + λdH – λn)]}.

(A10)

By parallel reasoning to that in the second case, w* = 0 and λ* and s* satisfy bL = s(1 + λdL).
Now observe that social welfare in the third case under the mandatory work program
exceeds that when there is no work program and the bL-types are deterred. Specifically, the
claim is that (A10) with any λ  (0, λ̄] and s satisfying bL = s(1 + λdL) exceeds (A6) with s = bL.
After dividing (A10) and (A6) by (1 – φ), this condition can be expressed as
θ[bH – h – s(λ)(1 + c + λdL – λn)] + (1 – θ)[bH – h – s(λ)(1 + c + λdH – λn)]

(A11)

> bH – h – bL(1 + c),
where s(λ) = bL/(1 + λdL), or, equivalently, as
bL(1 + c) > s(λ)(1 + c – λ[n – θdL – (1 – θ)dH]).

raise the probability, provided that the cost of setting the probability equal to 1 is sufficiently low.

- 31 -

(A12).

The inequality in (A12) follows from (A2) and the observation that bL > s(λ) > 0.
The result in the preceding paragraph also implies that, under a mandatory work program,
the outcome in the third case is superior to the outcome in the first case. This is because the
outcome in the first case is the same as that when there is no work program and no deterrence,
which was assumed to be inferior to the outcome when there is no work program and the bLtypes are deterred.
It remains to compare the outcomes in the second and third cases under a mandatory
work program. I will show that if harm h is high enough, social welfare in the third case exceeds
that in the second case. Rewrite social welfare in the third case (A10) as
(1 – φ){bH – h – s(1 + c – λ[n – θdL – (1 – θ)dH])}.

(A13)

Since the term in brackets is positive (see (A2)), a lower bound of (A13) is
(1 – φ){bH – h – s̄(1 + c)}.

(A14)

Similarly, an upper bound on social welfare in the second case (A9) is
φθ[bL – h] + (1 – φ){bH – h}.

(A15)

Social welfare in the third case will exceed that in the second case if (A14) less (A15) is positive,
which can be written as
–(1 – φ)s̄(1 + c) – φθbL + φθh > 0.

(A16)

Clearly, (A16) will hold for h high enough, which is what I will assume.
Voluntary prison work program: Because my object in this example is to show that a
voluntary prison work program can be superior to a mandatory one when the disutility of work
varies among prisoners, I will not undertake a full analysis here of the voluntary work program.
Instead, I will show that under an assumption that is consistent with the assumptions already

- 32 -

made, a voluntary work program will generate a higher level of social welfare than the best
mandatory work program.
* , where λM
* is the optimal λ in
Consider a voluntary work program in which s = bL, λ = λM
the third case of a mandatory work program, and w = dL. At this wage, prisoners with low
disutility from work will participate in the work program (they are indifferent), but prisoners
with high disutility from work will not. The level of deterrence for prisoners in the former group
will be s(1 + λdL – λw) = bL and the level of deterrence for prisoners in the latter group will be s =
bL. Thus, all bL-types will be deterred and all bH-types will commit the offense, as under the best
mandatory work program; but only the subset of bH-types with low disutility from work will
participate in the work program. Social welfare under this voluntary work program will be
* dL – λM
* n)] + (1 – θ)[bH – h – bL(1 + c)]}.
(1 – φ){θ[bH – h – bL(1 + c + λM

(A17)

The foregoing voluntary work program will be superior to the best mandatory work
* and s = sM
* , where sM
* satisfies bL = sM
* (1 + λM
* dL).
program if (A17) exceeds (A10) with λ = λM
After some manipulation this condition can be expressed as
* (dL – n)) > 0.
(1 – θ)(dH – n) – dL(1 + c + θλM

(A18)

The limit of the left-hand side of (A18) as dL goes to 0 is (1 – θ)(dH – n), which is positive since
dH > n (see (A3)). Hence, the voluntary work program will be preferable if dL is sufficiently low.
In sum, for h sufficiently high and dL sufficiently low, the voluntary work program under
consideration will be superior to the best mandatory work program. The following intuition
explains this result in the example. If the harm h is high enough, maximal deterrence is
desirable, meaning deterrence of all of the low-benefit types (by assumption, the high-benefit
types cannot be deterred). This level of deterrence can be achieved with a shorter sentence under
the mandatory work program than under the voluntary work program because the mandatory

- 33 -

program can impose greater disutility on prisoners by making them work without compensation.
* > 0, the optimal sentence is bL/(1 + λM
* dL) < bL under the mandatory program
Specifically, if λM
and bL under the voluntary one. Everything else equal, this favors the mandatory work program,
but this advantage tends to decline the lower is dL (as dL goes to 0, the optimal sentence under the
mandatory program goes to bL). On the other hand, the advantage of the voluntary work
program over the mandatory one stems from the observation that, if the wage rate under the
voluntary program is set equal to dL, it will induce only those prisoners with low disutility from
work to participate in the work program, whereas the mandatory program forces all prisoners to
work. Because there is a net social loss from work by high-disutility-of-work prisoners (dH > n),
this difference favors the voluntary work program. Hence, if the deterrence advantage of the
mandatory work program is small enough (that is, if dL is small enough), then the voluntary work
program will be preferable.
Example demonstrating part (c) of Proposition 6:
I first establish through a slight variation of the preceding example that when the disutility
of work varies among prisoners, the optimal work requirement under a mandatory work program
* < λ̄. The assumption (A2) that prison work is socially beneficial on
might not be maximal, λM
average is reversed, so now
n < θdL + (1 – θ)dH;

(A19)

and assumption (A3) is replaced with
dL < n < (1 – θ)dH.

(A20)

There are again three cases to consider under a mandatory prison work program: (1) no
bL-types are deterred; (2) only bL-types with high disutility from work dH are deterred; or (3) all

- 34 -

bL-types are deterred. It is clear from the prior discussion that if harm h is high enough, the
outcome in the third case will be the preferred one, which is what I will assume.
* might be less than λ̄, I will show that the derivative of social welfare with
To see that λM
respect to λ in this case will, when evaluated at λ = λ̄, be negative if dL is sufficiently low. As
observed above, social welfare in the third case is (A10) where λ and s must satisfy bL = s(1 +
λdL). After substituting s(λ) = bL/(1 + λdL) into (A10), the sign of its derivative with respect to λ,
evaluated at λ̄, can be shown to be the same as the sign of
dL(1 + c – λ̄[n – θdL – (1 – θ)dH]) + (1 + λ̄dL)[n – θdL – (1 – θ)dH].

(A21)

Given (A19), the first term is positive and the second term is negative. As dL goes to 0, however,
the first term goes to 0 and the second term goes to n – (1 – θ)dH < 0, where the inequality
follows from (A20). Thus, for dL sufficiently low, λ* < λ̄.
The intuition behind this result is as follows. Given assumption (A19) that prison work is
socially detrimental on average, there is a reason to choose the mandatory work requirement λ as
low as possible. But in order to maintain deterrence if λ is lowered, the sentence s has to be
increased, raising the social cost of imprisonment, everything else equal. In the third case it was
shown that s(λ) = bL/(1 + λdL); thus, if dL is very low, a reduction in λ will require s to rise only a
small amount (in the limit as dL goes to 0, not at all). Then the advantage of lowering λ to reduce
socially detrimental prison work will dominate.
Observe that the conditions assumed in this example — that h is sufficiently high so that
the third case of the mandatory work program applies and that dL is sufficiently low so that λ* <
λ̄ in that case — are the same ones that were assumed in the prior example to show that a
voluntary work program could be superior to a mandatory one. To see that a mandatory work

- 35 -

program in which λ* < λ̄ can be preferable to a voluntary work program, reverse the order of s̄
and bL in assumption (A1), so that
s̄ < bL < s̄(1 + λ̄dH) < bH < h.

(A22)

Given (A22), λ must be sufficiently high in order to deter the bL-types with low disutility from
work (a necessary condition to be in the third case of the mandatory work program). This
minimum λ solves bL = s̄(1 + λdL), so λMIN = (bL – s̄)/s̄dL > 0. By picking s̄ sufficiently close to
bL, λMIN can be made arbitrarily low. Thus, since (A21) does not depend on s̄, an example can be
constructed in which (A22) holds, the third case of the mandatory work program is preferred,
* < λ̄.
and λMIN ≤ λM
It is straightforward to see that this mandatory work program would be superior to a
voluntary work program if h is high enough because the voluntary program is incapable, given
(A22), of deterring the bL-types. The same conclusion and reason would apply to not having a
work program.

- 36 -

References
American Correctional Association, A Study of Prison Industry: History, Components, and Goals
(1986).
Avio, Kenneth L., “The Economics of Prisons,” European Journal of Law and Economics, Vol.
6 (1998), pp. 143-75.
Barnes, Harry E., “The Economics of American Penology as Illustrated by the Experience of the
State of Pennsylvania,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 29, No. 8 (1921), pp. 617-42.
Gibson, Mary, “Global Perspectives on the Birth of the Prison,” American Historical Review,
Vol. 116, No. 4 (2011), pp. 1040-63.
Henrichson, Christian, and Ruth Delaney, The Price of Prisons: What Incarceration Costs
Taxpayers (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2012).
Levitt, Steven D., and Thomas J. Miles, “Empirical Study of Criminal Punishment,” in A.
Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell (Eds.), Handbook of Law and Economics, Volume 1
(Elsevier, 2007), pp. 455-95.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, “The Theory of Public Enforcement of Law,” in A.
Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell (Eds.), Handbook of Law and Economics, Volume 1
(Elsevier, 2007), pp. 403-54.
Seiter, Richard P., Corrections: An Introduction (Pearson, Fifth edition, 2016).
Stephan, James J., “Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2005,” National Prisoner
Statistics Program, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 222182, October 2008.
United Nations, Prison Labour (New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, 1955).

- 37 -

