                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      GASOLINE PRICE UNCERTAINTY AND THE DESIGN OF FUEL ECONOMY
                              STANDARDS

                                        Ryan Kellogg

                                     Working Paper 23024
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23024


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2017




I am grateful for comments and suggestions from conference and seminar audiences at the AERE
Summer Conference, Energy Institute at Haas Energy Camp, Midwest Energy Fest, Heartland
Environmental and Resource Economics Workshop, TE3, UC Santa Barbara, and University of
Michigan. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Gasoline Price Uncertainty and the Design of Fuel Economy Standards
Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 23024
January 2017
JEL No. H23,L51,L91,Q48,Q50

                                           ABSTRACT

What are the implications of gasoline price volatility for the design of fuel economy policies? I
show that this problem has a strong parallel to Weitzman's (1974) classic model of using price or
quantity controls to regulate an externality. Changes in fuel prices act as shocks to the marginal
cost of complying with the standard. Assuming constant marginal damages from fuel
consumption, an application of Weitzman (1974) implies that a fixed fuel economy standard
reduces expected welfare relative to a “price” policy such as a feebate or, equivalently, a fuel
economy standard that is indexed to the price of gasoline. When the regulator is constrained to
use a fixed standard, I show that the usual approach to setting the standard—equate expected
marginal compliance cost to marginal damage—is likely to be sub-optimal because the standard
may not bind if the realized gasoline price is sufficiently high. Instead, the optimal fixed standard
will be relatively relaxed and may be non-binding even at the expected gasoline price. Finally, I
show that although an attribute-based standard allows vehicle choices to flexibly respond to
gasoline price shocks, the resulting distortions imply that the optimal fuel economy standard is
not attribute-based.


Ryan Kellogg
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kelloggr@uchicago.edu
1         Introduction

In October 2012, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National High-
way Transportation and Safety Administration (NHTSA) jointly issued new fuel economy
standards for U.S. light-duty vehicles. These standards are scheduled to become increasingly
stringent over time, reaching a fleet-wide average fuel economy of 55 miles per gallon in 2025.
When the standards were issued, the EPA and NHTSA scheduled a “mid-term review” in
2017–2018 to determine whether the standards for 2022–2025 should be revised. Thus, the
standards set in 2012 are locked in place through 2021—nine years after the standards were
set—and any revisions made in 2017–2018 will be locked in for seven years.
        In the lead-up to the mid-term review, there has been discussion among industry par-
ticipants and regulators of whether the standards should be loosened given the substantial
decrease in gasoline prices since the standards were set. In October 2012, the prevailing
U.S. average gasoline price was $3.45/gallon, but by January 2016 the price had fallen to
$1.51/gallon.1 Because consumers’ willingness to pay for fuel-efficient vehicles depends on
fuel prices (Allcott and Wozny 2014, Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer 2013, Sallee, West, and
Fan forthcoming), this decrease in the price of gasoline has increased the cost of complying
with the new fuel economy standards and therefore raised concerns as to whether the regu-
latory path set in 2012 should be sustained. For instance, in April 2015, a spokesperson for
the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers said that “Given the extremely long 15-year lead
time for the standards, the government set a mid-term review in 2017 as a reality check for
regulatory assumptions. One of the assumptions was that the price of gas would be much
higher than today, and that affects what consumers buy. Sales of our most fuel-efficient
vehicles go up and down with the price of gasoline. A mid-term reality check is a good idea,
especially since our compliance is based on what consumers buy, not what we offer for sale.”
(Detroit News 2015).
    1
    These prices are pre-tax and real $2016. See section 2.2 for a discussion of the gasoline price data used
in this paper.



                                                     1
       Spurred by this policy question, this paper examines the welfare economics of fuel econ-
omy standards under uncertain future gasoline prices and therefore uncertain future compli-
ance costs. I begin by framing the problem in the context of Weitzman’s (1974) “Prices vs
Quantities”, which facilitates a welfare comparison of a standard that varies with the gasoline
price versus a standard that is fixed in place. I present a model in which the private benefits
of fuel economy that accrue to vehicle producers and consumers are moderated by the price
of gasoline so that, absent regulation, private agents will choose fuel efficient vehicles when
gasoline prices are high and inefficient vehicles when gasoline prices are low. Fuel economy
policy is motivated in the model by climate change externalities that are associated with
vehicles’ fuel consumption per mile. In this framework, a fuel economy standard that varies
with the price of gasoline—allowing greater fuel use per mile when the gasoline price falls but
tightening when the gasoline price rises—can be equivalent to a revenue-neutral “feebate”
that taxes inefficient vehicles and subsidizes efficient vehicles (since under a feebate agents’
fuel economy choices would also rise and fall with the gasoline price). Thus, in the language
of Weitzman (1974), a gasoline price-indexed fuel economy standard acts as a “price” policy.
In contrast, a traditional fixed standard acts as a “quantity” policy.
       To distill intuition, I simplify the model so that, in the absence of uncertainty over
future gasoline prices, a feebate policy can achieve the first-best welfare outcome by acting
effectively as a tax on gasoline. Likewise, a fuel economy standard can achieve the first-
best by acting as a standard on the quantity of gasoline consumed. The key assumption
underpinning the paper is that the marginal external damage associated with vehicles’ fuel
use per mile is locally constant and unaffected by gasoline price shocks. Treating marginal
damage as constant in U.S. vehicle emissions is a natural consequence of the fact that CO2 —
the primary driver of the externality—is a global stock pollutant (Newell and Pizer 2003).2
       The paper’s first result has been intuited by others (Anderson and Sallee 2016) and is a
   2
     Even if marginal damage were not locally constant, setting a tax or feebate schedule would achieve the
first-best and welfare dominate a fixed standard in the presence of fuel price uncertainty, per arguments
given in Kaplow and Shavell (2002).



                                                    2
direct application of Weitzman (1974): indexing the fuel economy standard to the price of
gasoline—or, equivalently, using a revenue-neutral feebate—can achieve the first-best with
uncertain fuel prices because it can equate the marginal cost of abatement with its marginal
benefit at any fuel price. This result can also be seen as an application of Newell and Pizer’s
(2008) model of general indexed regulation, where the index variable (the gasoline price)
is perfectly correlated with marginal compliance cost. In contrast, a fixed fuel economy
standard will result in an excessive marginal abatement cost (and too much abatement)
when fuel prices are lower than what was expected when the policy was set, and too small
a marginal abatement cost (and too little abatement) when realized fuel prices are high. In
either case, there is a welfare loss relative to the first-best.
   I focus the remainder of the paper on the question of how best to set a fuel economy
standard when it cannot be indexed to the gasoline price and cannot be changed for many
years once it is set. Following a first order condition (FOC) from Weitzman (1974), the usual
rule for setting such a fixed standard is to equate the expected marginal cost of compliance,
evaluated at the standard, to the marginal external harm. I show, however, that this policy
rule ignores the non-trivial probability that if the realized gasoline price is sufficiently high,
the standard will not bind. That is, firms and consumers may, if the gasoline price is high
enough, voluntarily select a level of fuel economy that exceeds the standard. I derive a
new first order condition that accounts for this possibility and show that the optimal fixed
standard equates expected marginal compliance cost, conditional on the standard binding, to
marginal external harm. This optimal standard is more lax than that implied by the usual
Weitzman (1974) rule, and I show that given historic gasoline price uncertainty and estimates
of marginal damage from the literature, the difference between the optimal standard and the
usual Weitzman (1974) standard can be economically large. In fact, the optimal standard
may be so lax that it is non-binding even at the expected future gasoline price. I also derive
an expression for the expected welfare loss (relative to the first-best) under a fixed and
possibly non-binding standard, and I show that a standard set using the usual Weitzman


                                                 3
(1974) FOC may yield lower welfare than that obtained by not setting any standard at all.
       Brozovic, Sunding, and Zilberman (2004) also studies optimal pollution control standards
that may not bind, using a model with two discrete firm types. The results presented here
expand on this prior work by presenting intuitive formulas for the optimal standard and
expected welfare loss under a continuous distribution of abatement cost uncertainty, and by
calibrating the model to demonstrate that its implications are economically significant for
fuel economy regulation. Another related paper is Costello and Karp (2004), which examines
the merits of setting a potentially non-binding pollution standard to learn about a firm’s
marginal abatement cost.3
       Finally, I study whether basing the fuel economy standard on vehicle attributes such as
footprint or weight can mitigate the welfare losses associated with a fixed standard. The
U.S. fuel economy standards set in 2012 are in fact footprint-based: vehicles with a large
wheelbase are assigned a less stringent standard, as shown in figure 1. Ito and Sallee (2015)
shows, using a model similar to that presented here but assuming complete information,
that attribute-based regulation (ABR) reduces welfare by distorting choices of the attribute:
consumers purchase vehicles that are larger than optimal.4 When the gasoline price is
uncertain, however, ABR may confer benefits by building flexibility into the regulation,
as suggested in Anderson and Sallee (2016). For instance, if the gasoline price is lower
than expected, agents can shift to vehicles with larger footprints and lower fuel economy,
mitigating the increase in the marginal abatement cost. As noted by Lutsey (2015), this
flexibility benefit of ABR was highlighted in General Motors’ public comments (2009) on the
proposed regulation. In addition, the response of vehicle choices to fuel prices was modeled
by NHTSA in its Regulatory Impact Analysis (2012), and Leard, Linn, and McConnell (2016)
finds evidence that the recent fuel price decrease has indeed modestly affected fleet-average
footprint and fuel economy. I show here, however, that even if fuel prices are uncertain,
   3
     Costello and Karp’s (2004) model is structured so that, in the absence of an incentive to learn, the
optimal standard always binds.
   4
     Whitefoot and Skerlos (2012) and Gillingham (2013) also illustrate the incentive to increase vehicle size
under ABR, using models that allow for automakers’ market power.


                                                      4
attribute-basing reduces expected welfare relative to an optimally-set non-attribute-based
standard, since the distortions caused to the attribute and to fuel economy outweigh the
flexibility benefit.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes U.S. fuel economy standards and
characterizes U.S. gasoline price volatility, and section 3 introduces the paper’s model of the
vehicle market. Section 4 then applies Weitzman (1974) to the comparison of fixed versus
gasoline price-indexed fuel economy standards. Sections 5 and 6 then present the main results
of the paper: section 5 discusses the optimal level for a fixed fuel economy standard, and
section 6 assesses whether an attribute-based standard can be welfare-improving. Section 7
discusses the potential importance of several non-modeled factors, such as covariance between
the gasoline price and marginal damage, banking and borrowing of fuel economy credits,
under-valuation of fuel economy by consumers, and firms’ investment dynamics. Section 8
concludes.



2     Policy background and gasoline price data

2.1     2012 EPA and NHTSA fuel economy standards

This section discusses the U.S. fuel economy standards set by the EPA and NHTSA in
2012, focusing on three of their characteristics that are important for this paper: attribute-
basing, credit trading, and banking and borrowing. For additional information, see EPA
(2012) or the complete rule in the Federal Register (2012). Figure 1 shows the planned path
of the footprint-based fuel economy standard for passenger cars through 2025 (though the
standards for 2022–2025 are subject to revision in the 2017–2018 mid-term review). For
any given footprint, the required level of fuel economy increases over time as technology
is projected to advance. In addition (and not shown), light trucks are assigned a separate
set of footprint-based standards that are less stringent than those for passenger cars. This
separate treatment of passenger cars versus light trucks is essentially a different form of


                                              5
Figure 1: U.S. EPA and NHTSA fuel economy standards for passenger cars through 2025




              Source: Federal Register, Vol 77, No. 199, p. 62644 (15 Oct, 2012). For reference,
              the 2012 model year Honda Fit, Ford Fusion, and Chrysler 300 have footprints of
              40, 46, and 53 square feet, respectively.


attribute-basing, though on a discrete rather than continuous variable.
       Individual vehicle models are not required to meet their fuel economy target shown in
figure 1. Instead, each manufacturer must meet a fleet-wide standard based on the aggregated
compliance of all vehicles sold, including both passenger cars and light trucks.5 Moreover,
manufacturers can trade compliance credits with one another so that the entire industry faces
an identical marginal cost of compliance. Manufacturers may also engage in limited banking
and borrowing of fuel economy credits: unused credits may be banked for up to five years
or used to cover deficits no more than three years in the past. Ultimately, each year every
manufacturer must either produce vehicles that in aggregate comply with its fuel economy
target or cover any deficit using credits obtained via trading, banking, or borrowing.6
   5
     Any given model may exceed or fall short of its footprint-based standard, yielding the model’s manufac-
turer fuel economy credits or liabilities, respectively, proportional to the difference between the model’s fuel
use per mile and the model’s footprint-based standard.
   6
     In the original U.S. Corporate Average Fuel Economy(CAFE) standard established in 1975, manufactur-
ers could also comply by paying fines. Fines are no longer a compliance mechanism under the current EPA
standards. Also, credit trading across manufacturers was not permitted under the original CAFE standard.


                                                       6
                                                                            Figure 2: U.S. gasoline price variation

                                                            (a) Time series                                        (b) Histogram, Jan. 1990 - Jan. 2016
                                              $4.50                              Oct 2012: standard set




                                                                                                              1
                                                                                     for 2017-2025
                                              $4.00
       Gasoline price, 2016 US $ per gallon




                                                                                                              .8
                                              $3.50

                                              $3.00




                                                                                                              .6
                                              $2.50

                                              $2.00




                                                                                                              .4
                                              $1.50

                                              $1.00




                                                                                                              .2
                                              $0.50

                                              $0.00




                                                                                                              0
                                                 Jan 2000 Jan 2003 Jan 2006 Jan 2009 Jan 2012 Jan 2015             0        1            2               3   4
                                                                                                                                  2016 US $ per gallon




Note: Gasoline price data are monthly U.S. volume-weighted average refiner prices of motor gasoline for sale
to end users, obtained from the U.S. Energy Information Administration. These prices are pre-tax and are
deflated to January 2016 U.S. dollars using the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s Consumer Price Index for all
goods less energy (CPI series CUUR0000SA0LE).



2.2                                             Gasoline price variation

To motivate the problem of setting fuel economy policy under fuel price uncertainty, this
section establishes that U.S. gasoline price shocks have historically been both large and
persistent. I use data on gasoline prices obtained from the U.S. Energy Information Admin-
istration (EIA). Panel (a) of figure 2 illustrates the time path of U.S. gasoline prices before
and after the current fuel economy standards were set in October 2012. The prices shown
are monthly U.S. volume-weighted average refiner prices of motor gasoline for sale to end
users, pre-tax, and deflated to January 2016 U.S. dollars using the Bureau of Labor Statis-
tics’ Consumer Price Index for all goods less energy.7 The price of gasoline has exhibited
substantial volatility, ranging from roughly $1.00/gallon to $4.00/gallon since 2000.
       I use the historical volatility of gasoline prices to generate estimates of the variance
   7
    Gasoline price data were accessed from https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/pet pri refoth dcu nus m.htm on
11 April, 2016. The CPI used covers all urban consumers and is not seasonally adjusted. The CPI series ID
is CUUR0000SA0LE.



                                                                                                          7
of future gasoline prices that policy-makers face when setting fuel economy policy with a
long time horizon. Because the distribution of gasoline prices is right-skewed (panel (b) of
figure 2), I assume that monthly price innovations are additive in logs, so that the future
price distribution is lognormal. I therefore estimate historic gasoline price volatility by
taking the standard deviation of differenced log prices. I use long differences to capture
gasoline price uncertainty over time horizons that are similar to fuel economy policy lifetimes.
For instance, the 2012 standard is locked-in until 2021—nearly a decade—and may be in
effect through 2025 pending the outcome of the mid-term review. The volatility of ten-
year differenced log gasoline prices, estimated for January 2000 to January 2016,8 equals
0.42, equivalent to 52%.9 The 95% confidence interval for gasoline prices ten years in the
future therefore encompasses prices more than twice or less than half of the expected future
price. Volatilities estimated using shorter differences naturally result in less uncertainty.
The seven-year volatility estimate is 0.36, and the four-year estimate is 0.34. I estimate that
month-to-month volatility is 0.085.10
       Finally, the data indicate that gasoline price shocks are highly persistent. The monthly
AR1 coefficient on the logged gasoline price since 2000 is 0.97, and a unit root cannot be
rejected.11 This persistence is consistent with results on the relative accuracy of no-change
forecasts of the long-run real price of oil (Alquist, Kilian, and Vigfusson 2013) and relates
to evidence that consumers hold no-change beliefs about future gasoline prices (Anderson,
   8
     Gasoline price data are available since January 1990, so January 2000 is the first month for which
ten-year lagged prices are available.
   9
     Specifically, 0.42 is obtained by taking the standard deviation of the ten-year difference of the logged
gasoline price over January 2000 to January 2016. 52% is obtained by e0.42 − 1. The 95% confidence interval
for future prices is obtained by e0.42·1.96 and its reciprocal, yielding a range from 0.44 to 2.28 times the
expected price.
  10
     Each of these volatility estimates is a standard deviation using a sample from January 2000 to January
2016; i.e., the same sample used to√estimate the ten-year volatility. Note that as the lag length increases,
                                                                                                       √
volatility increases at less than the t rule that would hold for a geometric random walk (e.g., 0.085 · 120 =
0.93 > 0.42), suggesting that price innovations in levels do not scale fully proportionally with the current
price level.
  11
     Using the augmented Dickey-Fuller test of Elliot, Rothenberg, and Stock (1996), I obtain a test statistic
of -1.24 at the Ng and Perron (2001) optimal lag length of 10, relative to a 10% critical value of -2.567.
Similar results are obtained if the AR1 regression and unit root tests are carried out in levels rather than
logs, or if the full dataset back to 1990 is used.



                                                      8
Kellogg, and Sallee 2013).



3     Model set up

This section introduces the model of the vehicle market that I use throughout the paper. Like
the model used in Ito and Sallee (2015), I impose a number of simplifying assumptions such
that, under complete information, either a fuel economy standard or a feebate can attain the
first-best because they can mimic a quantity standard or a Pigouvian tax on gasoline. In
particular, I assume that consumers have unit demand for vehicles, fully internalize future
fuel costs when purchasing a vehicle, and do not respond to per-mile fuel costs when selecting
how many miles to drive (i.e., there is no “rebound effect”). I treat vehicle manufacturers as
perfectly competitive, and I abstract away from interactions with the used car market and
from interactions with other taxes or un-priced externalities.
    These assumptions are all strong, and their implications for the efficiency of fuel economy
standards are discussed in Ito and Sallee (2015) and many other works. However, abstracting
away from these issues conveys the substantial benefit of being able to obtain analytical
results and thereby distill intuition for the first-order implications of fuel price uncertainty
for fuel economy policy. Moreover, the fact that the model is not precisely tailored to
the features of the vehicle market facilitates linking the model to Weitzman (1974) and
enhances the generalizability of the paper’s findings to other pollution control settings in
the presence of uncertain marginal abatement costs. In section 7, I return to several of
the above assumptions, as well as other factors that are not explicitly modeled, and discuss
how relaxing them may affect the paper’s conclusions. And in appendix C, I show that the
“prices versus quantities” result holds when miles driven respond to per-mile fuel costs, so
long as the gasoline price elasticity of driving is not too large.




                                                9
3.1       Private demand and supply of vehicles

I begin with the consumer side of the market. Consider a consumer i purchasing a vehicle
with fuel consumption per mile ei and attribute ai .12 ai can represent a single attribute that
can ultimately be targeted by the regulation (i.e., the vehicle’s footprint), or more abstractly
a scalar composite of multiple attributes. The price of gasoline at the time of purchase
is given by G. I then denote consumer i’s indirect utility from this vehicle purchase by
U i (ei , ai , G) − Pi , where Pi is the price of the vehicle and U i (ei , ai , G) is a twice continuously
differentiable function. This specification implicitly assumes that consumer utility is quasi-
linear, with all other goods as a numeraire.
       Increases in ei reduce utility because increased fuel consumption per mile implies in-
creased expenditure on fuel; thus, the derivative Uei < 0. Because each consumer’s vehicle
                                                                                 i
miles travelled is exogenous and utility is quasi-linear, the second derivative Uee equals zero.13
The disutility from a vehicle’s fuel use increases in magnitude with the price of gasoline at
                                                                      i        i
the time of purchase (since gasoline prices are persistent), so that UeG < 0. UeG , moreover,
represents the consumer’s expected discounted miles travelled over the lifetime of the vehicle.
The attribute a is assumed to be desirable but with diminishing returns, so that Uai > 0 and
 i                                                i
Uaa < 0. Quasi-linearity of utility implies that UaG = 0.
       On the supply side of the market, vehicle manufacturers competitively produce vehicles
with a cost function C(ei , ai ). Reducing the fuel use of any particular vehicle is costly, so
that Ce < 0, and there are diminishing returns to fuel economy investments, so that Cee > 0.
Increasing the attribute a involves convex costs, so Ca > 0 and Caa > 0. Finally, letting
a represent attributes such as footprint, weight, or horsepower, reductions in e should be
weakly more costly for vehicles that have a large value of a. Thus, I assume Cea ≤ 0.
       As in Weitzman (1974) and Ito and Sallee (2015), I assume that the U i (ei , ai , G) and
  12
     It is convenient to model ei as fuel use rather than efficiency (= 1/ei ) because environmental damage is
(locally) linear in fuel use but not efficiency.
   13 i
     Uee = 0 also implies that consumers only value fuel efficiency for its monetary benefits, not because of
green preferences. To the extent that consumers have green preferences, fuel efficiency could also be viewed
as part of the characteristic a that consumers value with diminishing returns.


                                                     10
C(ei , ai ) functions can be approximated by second-order Taylor expansions and that all of the
U i have identical second derivatives, which substantially improves the model’s tractability.14
Under these assumptions, appendix A shows that a sufficient statistic for measuring impacts
of fuel economy policy on aggregate (utilitarian) consumer welfare is the representative
consumer’s utility U (e, a, G) obtained from the average vehicle purchased, where e is the
average of the ei , a is the average of the ai , and the first derivatives of U equal the average
of the Uei and Uai . Likewise, the cost C(e, a) of the average vehicle purchased is a sufficient
statistic for aggregate production cost.15
       Combining the two sides of the market, define B(e, a, G) ≡ U (e, a, G) − C(e, a) as the
private welfare benefit when the average vehicle purchased has fuel use per mile e and
attribute a, and the gasoline price is G. B(e, a, G) inherits the property that it can be
expressed as a second-order Taylor expansion, and its second derivatives have the properties
Bee < 0, Baa < 0, BeG < 0, Bea ≥ 0, and BaG = 0. I also naturally assume that Be (0, a, G) >
0 and Ba (e, 0, G) > 0 to allow for an interior private optimum.
       Absent regulation, private agents will choose vehicles so that e and a satisfy the private
first order conditions (FOCs): Be (e, a, G) = 0 and Ba (e, a, G) = 0. I assume that the
                                         2
second order condition (SOC), Bee Baa − Bea > 0, is satisfied, guaranteeing a unique, interior
solution.


3.2       Externalities from fuel consumption and the social optimum

Let φg denote the constant marginal damage resulting from consuming one gallon of gaso-
line.16 Then define φ ≡ −BeG φg as the marginal damage caused by an increase in a vehicle’s
  14                                                        i
     A necessary condition for the assumption that the UeG    are identical is that all consumers share the same
annual vehicle miles travelled.
  15
     The sufficient statistic claims hold for the policies considered in this paper: fuel economy feebates and
fuel economy standards that are implemented with cross-manufacturer credit trading, so that the marginal
cost of abatement is equated across all vehicle models. In the absence of trading, so that a standard can
bind against individual firms or even individual models, changes to the average vehicle sold are no longer
sufficient for understanding welfare impacts.
  16
     Per Weitzman (1974), the results of the paper are unchanged if φg is defined as the expected value of
uncertain marginal damages, so long as the stochastic component of marginal damage is uncorrelated with


                                                      11
fuel use per mile, discounted over the lifetime of the vehicle. The full-information social
planner’s problem is then given by:


                                           max B(e, a, G) − φe                                             (1)
                                            e,a



    The planner’s FOCs are then given by Be (e, a, G) = φ and Ba (e, a, G) = 0,17 and the
SOC is identical to that in the private agents’ problem. Intuitively, the planner’s solution
involves a lower e than the private optimum, but conditional on the choice of e the planner
chooses the same a as private agents, since the attribute does not create an externality on
its own.18
    For the results in sections 4 through 6, it will be useful to discuss the externalities that are
included in φg as well as estimates of their magnitudes. The median social cost of CO2 used by
the U.S. Government (Interagency Working Group 2013) for 2015 is $38 per metric ton, with
a range from $12/ton to $58/ton under alternative discount rate assumptions, and a value of
$109/ton under a “right-tail” damage assumption. These values translate to $0.30/gallon,
$0.10/gallon, $0.47/gallon, and $0.87/gallon of gasoline, respectively.19 In addition to the
climate externality, a survey by Parry, Wells, and Harrington (2007) considers externalities
from U.S. dependency on foreign oil, concluding that “a corrective tax might be anything
from roughly 8–50 cents (excluding geo-political costs); a recent panel of experts (National
Research Council 2002) recommended a value of 12 cents per gallon”. Combining these
costs with the climate externality yields a range for φg from $0.18/gallon to $1.37/gallon; I
focus below on a “median” estimate of $0.42/gallon.20 Finally, Parry et al. (2014) discusses
externalities from gasoline consumption associated with local pollutants, congestion, and
G. In this case, what the paper describes as “first-best” is first-best subject to incomplete information about
marginal damage. Section 7.1 discusses implications of a potentially non-zero correlation between marginal
damage and G.
  17
     I assume that Be (0, a, G) > φ, so that the planner’s problem has an interior solution.
  18
     I am abstracting away from effects of attributes such as footprint, size, and type (car vs. truck) on
accident risk, which are examined empirically in Jacobsen (2013) and Anderson and Auffhammer (2014),
and discussed in Ito and Sallee (2015).
  19
     Per EIA (2011), one gallon of E10 gasoline produces 17.68 pounds of CO2 .
  20
     $0.42/gallon is the sum of $0.30/gallon for climate and $0.12/gallon for foreign oil dependency.


                                                      12
accident risk.21 Because these externalities are associated with miles driven and not fuel use
per mile, I do not include them in φg for the purpose of regulating fuel economy.22



4        Prices versus quantities

This section applies Weitzman (1974) to evaluate the welfare implications of a fixed fuel
economy standard versus a feebate or, equivalently, a gasoline price-indexed standard. The
model proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, the regulator must commit to a particular
level for the standard or the feebate, without knowing what the realized gasoline price will
be in the second stage. Then in stage 2 agents choose vehicles conditional on the regulation
and the realized gasoline price. I model stage 2 as a single compliance period, though it is
straightforward to extend the model so that stage 2 involves multiple compliance periods
with different price realizations. The stage 2 gasoline price is the only source of uncertainty
in the model. In principle, the model could be extended to allow for technology shocks
by allowing the intercept of Ce (e, a) to be stochastic as well. Doing so would increase the
variance of marginal compliance cost beyond what is discussed below.
       Letting G denote the realized gasoline price in stage 2, let F (G) denote the policy-maker’s
stage 1 rational belief about the distribution of G. F (G) has support on [GL , GU ], where
GL ≥ 0 and GU is possibly infinite. The expected stage 2 price is Ḡ, and the variance of
G is σ 2 . In addition, because I do not consider an attribute-based standard until section 6,
this section and section 5 will suppress the attribute a so that the private benefit function
is simply given by B(e, G).23
       Suppose that a tax is imposed on each vehicle in proportion to its fuel use per mile.
Letting τ denote the tax rate, the tax on the representative vehicle is then given by τ e. If the
  21
     Parry et al.’s (2014) estimates for the United States are $0.09/gallon for local pollutants, $0.85/gallon
for congestion, and $0.37/gallon for accidents, all in 2010 U.S. dollars.
  22
     Fuel economy improvements will not affect emissions of local pollutants in the U.S. because these pol-
lutants are regulated under separate per-mile emission standards. Fuel economy regulation will only affect
congestion and accidents indirectly via the rebound effect and impacts on vehicles’ size and weight.
  23
     Under non-attribute based regulation, agents will always choose the socially optimal (= privately opti-
mal) level of a conditional on the regulated choice of e.


                                                     13
tax revenues are redistributed lump-sum, this tax is equivalent to a revenue-neutral feebate
that taxes inefficient vehicles and subsidizes efficient vehicles.24 It is straightforward to see
that by setting τ = φ, the regulator can achieve the full-information first-best: the feebate is a
Pigouvian tax, so it causes agents to perfectly internalize the externalities of fuel consumption
per mile at any gasoline price level. This feebate is equivalent to a fuel economy standard
that is indexed to gasoline prices so that the targeted fleet-wide average fuel consumption
rises (falls) when gasoline prices fall (rise). The feebate, however, involves a substantially
lower informational requirement for the regulator than the indexed fuel economy standard:
the latter requires information on φ and the parameters of B(e, G), while the former only
requires information on φ.
       Now suppose that the regulator instead sets a fixed fuel economy standard such that
fleet-wide average fuel use per mile cannot exceed the value µ. The “usual” FOC for the
solution to the regulator’s problem is to equate the expected marginal compliance cost at µ
to marginal damage, as discussed in Weitzman (1974):


                                          E[Be (µ, G)] − φ = 0,                                          (2)


       where E[Be (e, G)] = Be (e, Ḡ) due to the linearity of Be . I show in section 5 below that
equation (2) does not yield the optimal standard if there is a possibility that the standard
may not bind. Putting that possibility aside for now, the standard implied by equation (2)
will only yield the first-best in the event that the realized gasoline price is Ḡ. Generically,
however, the standard µ̃ (in gallons per mile) that solves (2) will either be too low (if G < Ḡ)
or too high (if G > Ḡ) relative to the first best, resulting in a marginal abatement cost that
is, respectively, either too high or too low. The resulting welfare loss is illustrated in figure
3 for the simple case where f (G) has two point masses at GL and GU . Given a standard µ̃
set to satisfy FOC (2), and under the Taylor series approximation for B(e, G), the expected
  24
    The tax or subsidy on any given vehicle is proportional to the difference between that vehicle’s fuel use
and that of the average vehicle.



                                                     14
         Figure 3: Welfare from a fixed fuel economy standard that always binds

             $/e


                                                Expected welfare loss
                                                 per vehicle given by:



            φ

                                                                            Be(e,GL)
             0                                                                    e
                                            𝜇                               Be(e,G)

                                                                            Be(e,GU)


           Note: e denotes fuel consumed per mile, and Be (e, G) is its marginal benefit. φ
           denotes marginal damage. Gasoline prices are distributed on {GL , GU }. µ̃ is the
           optimal fixed standard. See text for details.



welfare loss per vehicle ∆ is equal to a Harberger triangle with height −σBeG (the standard
                                                                                   −σ 2 BeG
                                                                                         2
deviation of marginal abatement cost) and width σBeG /Bee . Thus, ∆ =               2Bee
                                                                                            .   This result
is a direct analogue of the ∆ from Weitzman (1974) in the case where marginal damages are
constant, and its formal derivation is given in appendix B.1.
   In contrast, a feebate with τ = φ allows the chosen level of fuel use e to shift with the
gasoline price, so that the marginal abatement cost Be (e, G) is constant and always equal
to φ, and the first-best is realized. An appropriately-set gasoline price-indexed standard can
achieve the same end.




                                                  15
5     The optimal level of a fixed standard

Suppose that a feebate or gasoline price-indexed fuel economy standard is not a tool in the
regulator’s choice set. Instead, the regulator must set a fixed fuel economy standard, knowing
that whatever standard it sets will be locked in place for many years. These restrictions are
strong, but they are reflective of the way fuel economy policy has been implemented in
the United States. As discussed above, the usual, intuitive way to set the standard in this
situation, following Weitzman (1974) and expressed in equation (2), is to equate the expected
marginal compliance cost at the standard to marginal damage. Doing so is equivalent to
adding marginal damage per gallon φg to the expected future gasoline price Ḡ and setting
the standard at the level of fuel consumption per mile that private agents would voluntarily
choose at that price. Denote this standard, which solves (2), by µ̃.
    This approach to setting the standard is incorrect, however, when uncertainty about
marginal compliance cost is sufficiently large that a standard set at µ̃ may not bind. The
problem lies in that fact that, for a sufficiently negative shock to marginal compliance cost,
private agents will on their own choose to consume less fuel than what is prescribed in the
standard. To see that this possibility is non-trivial in the case of fuel economy regulation,
it is useful to compare the variance of future gasoline prices, discussed in section 2.2, to
estimates of φg , discussed in section 3.2. Looking ten years forward, the 95% confidence
interval for the future price of gasoline encapsulates a doubling or a halving of the current
price (under a no-change forecast for the expected future price). There exists, therefore, a
substantial probability that the price of gasoline may increase by more than $1.00/gallon
over a ten-year policy horizon. Such an increase exceeds most estimates of φg . Thus, the
realized future price of gasoline may exceed the sum of Ḡ and φg , so that a policy set at
µ̃ using equation (2) may not bind. Given this possibility, what then is the ex-ante welfare
maximizing level of the standard?




                                             16
5.1        First order condition for an optimal fixed standard

To optimally set the level of the fuel economy standard, it is useful to write the regulator’s
problem in a way that makes clear that there is a critical gasoline price, Ĝ(µ), such that for
G > Ĝ(µ) a given standard µ will not bind:

                   Z   Ĝ(µ)                                     Z   GU
             max               (B(µ, G) − φµ) f (G)dG +                     (B(e(G), G) − φe(G)) f (G)dG     (3)
               µ   GL                                               Ĝ(µ)



       where e(G) denotes agents’ choice of e given a gasoline price realization G. Taking the
derivative yields the first order necessary condition for an optimal standard:25

                                       Z   Ĝ(µ)
                                                   (Be (µ, G) − φ)f (G)dG = 0.                               (4)
                                          GL



       Dividing through by F (Ĝ(µ)) yields

                                               Z    Ĝ(µ)
                                      1
                                                            Be (µ, G)f (G)dG − φ = 0.                        (5)
                                   F (Ĝ(µ))       GL



       The first term of FOC (5) is the expected marginal compliance cost conditional on the
gasoline price being sufficiently low that the regulation binds. For any standard µ such that
Ĝ(µ) < GU , this conditional expected marginal compliance cost will be strictly greater than
E[Be (µ, G)] from equation (2), since BeG < 0. Thus, if the µ̃ standard that solves (2) may
be non-binding, its conditional expected marginal compliance cost will strictly exceed φ,
implying that µ̃ is not optimal. Instead, because Bee < 0, the optimal standard must be
more lax—and therefore involve greater fuel use—than the µ̃ standard.
       This principle is illustrated in figure 4, which is similar to figure 3 in that the distribution
  25
     The terms in the derivative of (3) from Leibniz’s Rule involving dĜ/dµ cancel out. Under the assumption
that Be (e, G) is continuously differentiable, this derivative is continuous if f (G) does not have any point
masses. If f (G) has point masses (as in the case presented in figures 3 and 4, for example), then the derivative
will discontinuously jump up as µ increases at each value of µ for which Ĝ(µ) falls on a point mass. Because
the derivative can only jump up but not down, the optimal standard µ∗ will never have Ĝ(µ∗ ) fall on a point
mass, so FOC(5) is still a necessary condition for an optimal standard even when f (G) has point masses.




                                                               17
Figure 4: Welfare from a fixed fuel economy standard that does not bind for a high fuel
                                         price

             $/e
                                                            Welfare loss if G = GU
                                                            and standard is greater
                                                            than 𝜇′

                                                             Welfare loss if G = GL
                                                             and standard is 𝜇

            φ
             0                                                                    e
                                                                            Be(e,GL)

                                                                            Be(e,G)
                                        𝜇′ 𝜇                𝜇∗
                                                                            Be(e,GU)


           Note: e denotes fuel consumed per mile, and Be (e, G) is its marginal benefit. φ
           denotes marginal damage. Gasoline prices are distributed on {GL , GU }. µ̃ is the
           fixed standard that solves equation (2). µ∗ is the optimal fixed standard that
           solves equation (4). See text for details.



of fuel prices is concentrated on two point masses at GL and GU . In figure 4, however, the
standard µ̃ that solves the Weitzman FOC (2) does not bind if G = GU . If the standard is
increased—i.e., shifted to the right—beyond µ̃, observe that the welfare loss under the GL
price realization decreases while the welfare loss under the GU price realization is unchanged.
Thus, expected welfare can be improved by increasing the standard (in gallons per mile).
The optimal standard is µ∗ , where expected marginal compliance cost, conditional on the
standard binding, equals marginal external harm φ, as prescribed by equation (5). For this
simple two-point distribution of G, the welfare loss from the optimal standard is actually
zero whenever G = GL .
   Under more general distributions of G, progress on characterizing the difference between



                                                  18
µ̃ and the optimal standard can be made by making use of the second order Taylor expansion
for B(e, G). Because Be (µ̃, Ḡ) = φ, we may write:


                              Be (µ, G) = φ + BeG (G − Ḡ) + Bee (µ − µ̃).                                 (6)


       Next, note that by the definition of Ĝ, Be (µ, Ĝ(µ)) = 0. Combining this fact with
equation (6) yields Bee (µ − µ̃) = −φ − BeG (Ĝ(µ) − Ḡ), so that Be (µ, G) = BeG (G − Ĝ(µ)).
We can use this result to replace Be (µ, G) in equation (5) and then divide through by −BeG
to obtain:

                                         Z   Ĝ(µ)
                                1                                    
                         −                            φg − (Ĝ(µ) − G) f (G)dG = 0                         (7)
                             F (Ĝ(µ))   GL

                                    ↔ Ĝ(µ) = E[G|G ≤ Ĝ(µ)] + φg                                          (8)


       Let µ∗ denote the solution to FOC (8). The optimal standard µ∗ has the property
that the gasoline price at which the standard binds is equal to the expected gasoline price,
conditional on the standard binding, plus the per-gallon marginal damage φg . In the event
that the standard always binds (i.e., Ĝ(µ∗ ) ≥ GU ), FOC (8) reduces to the usual condition
that the optimal standard compels agents to choose vehicles that they would have purchased
at a gasoline price equal to the unconditional expected gasoline price Ḡ plus φg .
       The value of equation (8) is that it allows a calculation of Ĝ(µ∗ )—the gasoline price
at which the optimal fuel economy standard will bind—given only a value for φg and a
distribution F (G).26 Table 1 shows the results of solving equation (8) for Ĝ(µ∗ ), using
several different values for both φg and the time horizon at which the standard is to become
effective.27 Throughout, I assume that F (G) is lognormal and that the expected price of
  26
    Obtaining µ∗ itself requires knowledge of BeG and Bee .
  27
    The results in table 1 reflect standards that are intended to take effect four years or ten years in the
future. An optimal fixed standard that is intended to hold over many periods, starting shortly after the policy
commitment date and running many years into the future, will be a compromise between the µ̃ standard
(which would be optimal immediately after the policy is committed to, when uncertainty is essentially zero)
and a lax standard (optimal at the end of the compliance period). Alternatively, the regulator could perhaps



                                                          19
gasoline, Ḡ, is $1.50/gallon (roughly the same price as that prevailing in January 2016).28
The middle two rows of table 1 use a value for φg of $0.42/gallon, the “median” externality
estimate discussed in section 3.2. Under this estimate of φg , a policy taking effect in four
years’ time—such that gasoline price volatility is 40%—has an optimal binding price Ĝ(µ∗ )
of $1.62/gallon. A policy taking effect in ten years, with price volatility equal to 52%, has
an optimal binding price of only $1.49/gallon. Intuitively, because uncertainty about G
increases with the policy horizon, the optimal standard becomes progressively more relaxed
the farther into the future it is intended to take effect.
    Under a ten year policy horizon, the optimal standard is actually non-binding even at
the expected gasoline price of $1.50/gallon. In other words, the optimal standard specifies
more gasoline consumption per mile than what private agents are expected to choose in
the absence of regulation. At either time horizon, the optimal standard binds at a gasoline
price that is substantially less than the $1.92/gallon implied by the “usual” policy of setting
Ĝ(µ̃) = Ḡ + φg .
    Table 1 also presents optimal values for Ĝ(µ∗ ) when φg equals $0.18/gallon or $1.37/gal-
lon, the lowest and highest plausible values from the estimates discussed in section 3.2. For
φg = $0.18/gallon, the reduction in Ĝ(µ∗ ) at long policy horizons is pronounced: a policy
taking effect in ten years has an optimal binding price of only $0.94/gallon. In contrast, at
φg = $1.37/gallon the optimal policy is not substantially different from setting a standard
that binds at Ḡ + φg = $2.87/gallon, even if the policy is aimed ten years into the future.
This result stems from the fact that for such a large externality, it is unlikely that gasoline
prices will be so high that the standard will not bind.
    It is important to emphasize that the optimal fixed standard µ∗ is still inferior from a
welfare perspective to a gasoline price-indexed standard or a feebate, as discussed in section
commit to a schedule under which the standard would optimally become more lax over time (in the absence
of anticipated technological progress).
  28
     For higher values of Ḡ, the variance of the future gasoline price increases, holding volatility (based on
log prices) fixed. Because price variance enters equation (8) in levels, the difference between Ĝ(µ∗ ) and Ĝ(µ̃)
increases with Ḡ.



                                                       20
Table 1: Effects of fixed fuel economy standards for various externalities and gasoline price
            volatilities. Expected future gasoline price Ḡ is $1.50 per gallon.

                                                   Gas price Ĝ at which    Expected welfare loss as %
                                                  standard binds ($/gal)     of loss from no regulation
          Externality    Policy    Gas price      “Usual”        Optimal      “Usual”        Optimal
          φg ($/gal)    horizon    volatility   standard µ̃ standard µ∗     standard µ̃ standard µ∗
                        4 years      40%            1.68           1.08        346%            90%
             0.18
                        10 years     52%            1.68           0.94        485%            91%
                        4 years      40%            1.92           1.62         83%            58%
             0.42
                        10 years     52%            1.92           1.49        110%            64%
                        4 years      40%            2.87           2.83         13%            13%
             1.37
                        10 years     52%            2.87           2.78         18%            18%

Note: Calculations assume that F (G) is lognormal. Volatilities of 40% and 52% are estimated using four-
year and ten-year gasoline price differences, respectively, per section 2.2. The gasoline price Ĝ(µ∗ ) at which
the optimal fuel economy standard binds is calculated using equation (8), assuming that the standard is
committed to either four years or ten years in advance of the compliance date. See text for details.



4. The µ∗ standard derived here is optimal only subject to the constraint that it is not
feasible for the regulator to make the standard contingent on the fuel price. The expected
welfare loss ∆ per vehicle for an optimal fixed standard µ∗ that may not bind is derived in
appendix B.1 and is given by

                                      2 
                                    BeG                                        
                            ∆=−           F (Ĝ(µ∗ ))σc2 + (1 − F (Ĝ(µ∗ )))φ2g ,                              (9)
                                    2Bee

       where σc denotes the standard deviation of fuel prices conditional on the standard bind-
ing.29 Expression (9) indicates that the expected welfare loss is given by a weighted average
of two Harberger triangles. First, with probability F (Ĝ(µ∗ )) the standard will bind, and the
expected height and width of the triangle will be proportional to σc . Second, with probabil-
ity 1 − F (Ĝ(µ∗ )) the standard will not bind, and the height and width of the triangle will be
proportional to the externality φg . Note that if the optimal standard binds for all realizations
                                                                                                  −σ 2 BeG
                                                                                                        2
of G, then equation (9) reduces to the standard Weitzman (1974) formula, ∆ =                       2Bee
                                                                                                           .
       One way to quantify the expected welfare losses ∆ for the parameters used in table
1 is to express them as a percentage of the losses that would be realized in the absence
  29
       That is, σc2 ≡ Var(G|G ≤ Ĝ(µ)).


                                                       21
                         −φ2g BeG
                               2
of any regulation:        2Bee
                                  .   This quantification does not require values for BeG or Bee .
These percentage losses are displayed in the right-most column of table 1. For optimally-set
standards, an intuitive pattern emerges that as gasoline price volatility increases relative
to the externality φg , the percentage improvement in welfare generated by the standard
is reduced. Table 1 also displays the welfare implications of setting a standard via the
“usual” policy of Ĝ(µ̃) = Ḡ + φg . If fuel price uncertainty is sufficiently large relative to the
externality, the µ̃ policy may result in a greater expected welfare loss than not imposing a
standard at all.
       Obtaining expected welfare losses in dollars per vehicle requires values for BeG and Bee .
BeG simply represents expected miles driven, discounted over the life of the vehicle. I follow
the assumptions of Ito and Sallee (2015) that new vehicles are driven 12,000 miles per year
over a lifetime of 13 years, with a 5% discount rate, yielding BeG = 118,359 miles. Bee ,
the rate at which the marginal cost of reducing e (fuel consumption per mile) increases as e
decreases, is more difficult to pin down. I use engineering estimates of the costs of fuel-saving
technologies from National Research Council (2015), which estimates “pathways” by which
fuel economy can be improved via sequential addition of fuel-saving technology to a baseline
vehicle. Fitting an affine marginal cost curve to these estimates, I obtain a value for Bee of
$1,756 per (gallon/100 miles)2 .30 Using these estimates, implementing the optimal standard
for a ten year policy horizon results in expected welfare losses, relative to the first best, of
$12 per vehicle for φg = $0.18/gallon, $45 per vehicle for φg = $0.42/gallon, and $135 per
vehicle for φg = $1.37/gallon. Under the sub-optimal µ̃ standard, the losses are $63 per
vehicle, $77 per vehicle, and $138 per vehicle, respectively.
  30
    I use the pathways presented in tables 8.4a and 8.4b of National Research Council (2015), which cor-
respond to a midsize gasoline-fueled car under the NRC’s low-cost and high-cost estimates, respectively.
These pathways account for interactions between technologies as they are added to a vehicle. Using the cost
estimates for 2017, I fit a line to the marginal cost curve for the technologies presented in each table. In each
case, I drop the highest-cost technology (cooled exhaust gas recirculation level 2) because it is an extreme
outlier (its MC is three times that of the next most costly technology) and because it is not required to meet
the 2025 standards. I obtain estimates of Bee equal to 1,474 using the low-cost estimates and 2,038 using
the high-cost estimates. The average of these two values equals the $1,756 per (gallon/100 miles)2 used in
the text. This value is similar to the $1,941 estimated in Parry, Fischer, and Harrington (2004) using data
from National Research Council (2002).


                                                       22
5.2       Second order condition for an optimal fixed standard

The results shown in table 1 assumed that satisfaction of FOC (4) was sufficient for opti-
mality.31 It is important, however, to consider the second order condition (SOC), which is
given by:
                       dĜ(µ)
                              (Be (µ, Ĝ(µ)) − φ)f (Ĝ(µ)) + Bee F (Ĝ(µ)) < 0.                        (10)
                         dµ

       We can simplify this condition by using the facts that dĜ(µ)/dµ = −Bee /BeG and
Be (µ, Ĝ(µ)) = 0, obtaining the SOC

                                                                     !
                                                         f (Ĝ(µ))
                                Bee F (Ĝ(µ)) 1 − φg                     < 0.                          (11)
                                                         F (Ĝ(µ))

       The term to the left of the parentheses in equation (11) is negative; thus, a solution µ∗
to FOC (4) is a local maximum iff φg f (Ĝ(µ∗ ))/F (Ĝ(µ∗ )) < 1. When does this inequality
hold? First, observe that a standard that never binds (Ĝ(µ) ≤ GL ) is always a solution
to FOC (4). At this degenerate standard, however, F (Ĝ) = 0, so the SOC clearly fails to
hold. A standard that never binds is, therefore, never optimal (unless φg = 0). Second,
for a lognormal distribution, as well as many other distributions including the normal and
uniform, f (G)/F (G) is decreasing in G (and strictly decreasing within the support of G),
with a limit of zero as G goes to infinity. Thus, as µ decreases and Ĝ increases, the SOC
must eventually become negative and stay negative forever.32 There can consequently be
only one non-degenerate solution to FOC (4)—the solution obtained in section 5.1—and this
solution will be the globally optimal standard.
       For other distributions—particularly cases in which f (G) is left-tailed and marginal com-
pliance cost is therefore right-tailed—f (G)/F (G) can be non-monotonic so that the unique-
ness of the non-degenerate solution to FOC (4) is not guaranteed. Because gasoline prices
  31
     In this section, I focus on FOC (4) rather than FOC (5) because the latter was obtained by dividing
through by F (Ĝ), which eliminates the fact that a degenerate standard satisfies the FOC.
  32
     This property continues to hold as Ĝ increases beyond the support of G; i.e., when the standard always
binds (as may be the case, for example, under a uniform distribution for G). Thus, the unique optimum
could be a sometimes-binding or an always-binding standard.


                                                    23
are right-tailed empirically (figure 2), this issue is likely not relevant for fuel economy reg-
ulation, but it may be important for other settings in which regulators set fixed standards
and the distribution of uncertain marginal abatement cost is right-tailed. In such cases,
solutions to (4) may be local minima or local maxima that are not globally optimal. Fur-
thermore, appendix B.2 shows that a solution to (4) that is not the optimal standard will
actually yield strictly lower expected welfare than the degenerate standard that never binds
iff φg < σc .33 This result follows from the intuition that an “interior” standard generates
welfare losses that increase with the conditional variance of gasoline prices, while the losses
from a degenerate standard increase with the size of the unpriced externality, φg .



6     Uncertainty and attribute-based regulation

A fixed fuel economy standard, even if set optimally per section 5, will be too stringent
relative to the first-best when the realized gasoline price is low and will be too lax (and may
not bind) when the gasoline price is high. This section explores whether the consequent
welfare loss can be mitigated by implementing an attribute-based regulation (ABR) that
allows vehicle choices to flexibly respond to gasoline price shocks.
    Under an affine ABR, the fuel economy standard is given by a function µ(a) = µ0 + γa.
Before formally deriving the optimal standard—which involves optimal values for µ0 and
the slope parameter γ—it is useful to build intuition for agents’ vehicle choices under ABR.
Figure 5 depicts choices of a and e both without (γ = 0) and with (γ > 0) attribute-basing.
In both panels of the figure, the steep dashed line depicts vehicle choices in the absence of
regulation, when lower gasoline prices increase the selected a and e. The slope of this line
equals −Baa /Bea . Panel (a) imposes a “flat” non-attribute-based standard of µ0 = µ∗ that
binds whenever G is less than Ĝ(µ∗ ) and is optimal conditional on γ = 0, following the
   33
      Appendix B.2 shows that this possibility extends to cases in which a standard satisfying (2) always
binds. Such a standard will always be a local optimum (since the SOC for an always-binding standard is
simply equal to Bee , which is strictly negative) but will nonetheless be inferior to the degenerate standard
iff φg < σ, where σ is the unconditional standard deviation of gasoline prices (in levels).


                                                     24
                                 Figure 5: Attribute-based fuel economy regulation

              (a) Non-attribute-based standard                                     (b) Attribute-based standard
       e                                                                 e
                                             Agents’ unconstrained                                              Agents’ unconstrained
           Level set for a particular                                         Level set for a particular
                                             choices as function of G                                           choices as function of G
           realization of G < G                                               realization of G < G
                                             (slope = -Baa / Bea)



                                               Standard = μ*                                                      Standard = μ0+ γa

   μ*                                                                    μ*
                                  Agents’ choice when                                                Agents’ choices when
                                  constraint binds (G ≤ G)                                           constraint binds (G ≤ G)
                                  Choices when constraint                μ0                          Choices when constraint
                                  doesn’t bind (G > G)                                               doesn’t bind (G > G)
                            a*                                  a                              a*                                  a



Note: e denotes fuel consumption per mile, and a denotes a vehicle attribute (e.g., footprint). When
unconstrained, agents’ choices lie on the dashed upward-sloping line, where a lower realized gasoline price G
leads to higher choices of e and a. The fuel economy standard µ(a) = µ0 + γa binds only for gasoline prices
less than Ĝ(µ0 , γ). See text for details.



discussion in section 5. When the standard binds, the agents’ choice of a always equals a∗ as
shown in the figure, since the optimal a for the agents, conditional on the choice of e, does
not depend on the realized gasoline price G.34 Equivalently, whenever G ≤ Ĝ(µ∗ ), the level
set of agents’ private welfare B(e, a, G) that corresponds to the private optimum, subject to
the standard, always has a point of tangency at a∗ .
       Panel (b) of figure 5 sets γ > 0 so that the regulation is attribute-based. The standard is
rotated so that the gasoline price Ĝ(µ0 , γ) at which the standard binds is the same as that
from panel (a), and therefore the “pivot point” (a∗ , µ∗ ) is the same as (a∗ , µ∗ ) from panel (a).
Now, as the gasoline price decreases below Ĝ(µ0 , γ), agents’ choices (corresponding to the
point of tangency of the level set) move along the standard to progressively higher levels of a
and e.35 It is in this way that ABR creates flexibility with which vehicle choices can respond
to gasoline price shocks. However, panel (b) also illustrates that ABR distorts the choice of
  34
    This result follows from the assumption that BaG = 0.
  35
    I assume that private agents’ SOC when faced with a binding attribute-based standard, Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ +
Baa < 0, holds, so that vehicle choices lie on an interior optimum.


                                                                    25
a, conditional on e, away from its optimum (which lies on the dashed line of unconstrained
choices) whenever the standard is binding. This distortion generates a welfare loss, per Ito
and Sallee (2015). Panel (b) also shows that, given the rotation of the standard about the
point (a∗ , µ∗ ), ABR increases the choice of e, relative to the case when γ = 0, whenever the
standard binds.
       I now derive the optimal µ0 and γ. The regulator’s problem is given by:

                        Z   Ĝ(µ0 ,γ)
                max                     (B(e(µ0 , γ, G), a(µ0 , γ, G), G) − φe(µ0 , γ, G)) f (G)dG
                µ0 ,γ    GL
                            Z   GU
                        +                   (B(e(G), a(G), G) − φe(G)) f (G)dG                                  (12)
                              Ĝ(µ0 ,γ)



       The first order conditions are then given by (13) and (14) below, where the notation
suppresses the dependence of Be , Ba , de/dµ0 , de/dγ, da/dµ0 , and da/dγ on µ0 , γ, and G:

                                        Z   Ĝ(µ0 ,γ)
                                                                     
                                                 de       da      de
                        FOCµ0 :              Be      + Ba     −φ        f (G)dG = 0                             (13)
                                 GL             dµ0       dµ0    dµ0
                                Z Ĝ(µ0 ,γ)                      
                                                de       da    de
                         FOCγ :              Be     + Ba    −φ       f (G)dG = 0                                (14)
                                 GL             dγ       dγ    dγ

       Addressing first FOCµ0 , appendix B.3 shows that equation (13) simplifies to:

                                                        Z   Ĝ(µ0 ,γ)
                 BeG (Bea γ + Baa )                                                             
                                                                            φg − (Ĝ(µ0 , γ) − G) f (G)dG = 0   (15)
                Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa                  GL



       Equation (15) is similar to FOC (7) for the level of the fuel economy standard under
no attribute-basing, except that (15) is pre-multiplied by a term that is constant given γ.
Intuitively, when γ = 0 this first term simply equals BeG , so that equation (7) is a special
case of equation (15).36 Equation (15) therefore implies that, conditional on γ, µ0 should
be set so that the price Ĝ at which the standard binds equals Ĝ(µ∗ , 0), the same price as
for the optimal flat standard. In terms of figure 5, this result implies that the optimal pivot
  36
    Recall that equation (7) was derived by dividing the FOC through by −BeG F (Ĝ(µ)), so the two FOCs
are identical when γ = 0.


                                                                        26
point (a∗ , µ∗ ) for an attribute-based standard is invariant to the slope γ of the standard.
Thus, as shown in figure 5, when γ increases, the expected fuel use e rises, so that the overall
stringency of the standard effectively falls.
       Why is the pivot point invariant to γ? The intuition flows from the fact that, when γ > 0,
the distortion to the attribute a increases with the stringency of the standard.37 Thus, as
γ increases, the permitted fuel consumption per mile under the optimal standard must rise
in order to mitigate the distortion to a. This outcome is accomplished by holding fixed the
optimal pivot point (a∗ , µ∗ ).
       The fixed pivot point also has implications for the optimal level of γ. One way to view
the tradeoff in setting γ is that ABR causes a distortion in a, per Ito and Sallee (2015), but
also creates flexibility for vehicle choices to respond to gasoline price shocks. Also important,
however, is the fact that ABR increases fuel use, relative to a flat standard, for any fuel price
at which the standard binds. ABR therefore does not, as one might have initially expected,
cause fuel use to decrease when the gasoline price is relatively high and increase when the
gasoline price is relatively low.
       This intuition leads to this section’s main result that the optimal fuel economy standard
has γ = 0 and is therefore not attribute-based. Formally, appendix B.3 shows that the FOC
for γ given by equation (14) simplifies to equation (16) below, where σc is the standard
deviation of gasoline prices conditional on the standard binding, and it is assumed that the
pivot point is set at (a∗ , µ∗ ) so that equation (15) is satisfied:

                                γF (Ĝ)(Baa + Bea γ)
                                                        B 2 (φ2 − σc2 ) = 0.                               (16)
                              (Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa )2 eG g

       There are only two solutions to equation (16): γ = 0 and γ = −Baa /Bea . The former cor-
  37
     To see the intuition, observe in figure 5(b) that reducing µ0 shifts the choice of a away from the dashed
line denoting agents’ unconstrained (and optimal) attribute choices, conditional on e. Formally, the effect
of changing µ0 on the distortion to a is given by da/dµ0 − (−Bea /Baa )(1 + γda/dµ0 ). Applying results
                                                      2
from appendix B.3, this expression reduces to γ(Bea      − Baa Bee )/(Baa (Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa )), which must
be strictly negative (assuming the SOCs for the private agents’ unconstrained and constrained problems are
satisfied).



                                                      27
responds to a non-attribute-based standard, while the latter is an attribute-based standard
such that the slope of the standard is the same as the rate at which unconstrained private
agents trade off a and e. Following figure 5, if the pivot point is fixed at (a∗ , µ∗ ), setting
γ = −Baa /Bea allows agents to choose the same vehicles that they would have chosen in the
absence of regulation. Optimal ABR therefore involves one of two possible corner solutions
for γ: either the standard is flat (γ = 0), or it is so heavily attribute-based (γ = −Baa /Bea )
that the standard is non-binding for any realization of G.
                                           −1        2
       At γ = 0, the SOC for γ reduces to Baa F (Ĝ)BeG (φ2g − σc2 ) < 0. Recall from section 5.2
that if the level of the standard is set so that it not only satisfies FOC (8) (equivalent to FOC
(15) when γ = 0) but is also globally optimal conditional on γ = 0, we must have φg ≥ σc .
Since Baa < 0, it then follows that if µ0 is globally optimal within the set of flat standards,
the SOC for γ is satisfied at γ = 0.38 The globally optimal fixed fuel economy standard
therefore has γ = 0 and is not attribute-based. Thus, the central insight of Ito and Sallee
(2015) that ABR reduces welfare extends to the case when gasoline prices, and therefore
marginal compliance costs, are uncertain. The intuition for this result stems from the fact
that the flexibility benefit of ABR is countered both by the distortion to the attribute and
by the increase in expected fuel consumption when the standard binds.
       Finally, the γ = −Baa /Bea solution to FOC (16) only satisfies the SOC when φg ≤ σc ,39
which per section 5.2 can only happen when µ0 is set so stringently that a flat standard at
µ0 yields lower welfare than no standard at all. In this case, setting γ = −Baa /Bea , which
is equivalent to a non-binding standard at any gasoline price, will intuitively dominate the
flat γ = 0 standard. Thus, ABR can be valuable when it is used to mitigate the effects of
setting a standard with a level µ0 that is far too stringent. If the level of the standard is set
  38                                                       −1         2
      FOC (16) and the SOC for γ at γ = 0 (given by Baa       F (Ĝ)BeG  (φ2g − σc2 ) < 0) both assume that FOC
(15) for µ0 is satisfied. Thus, if SOC (11) for µ0 , conditional on γ = 0, is satisfied, then satisfaction of the
SOC for γ at γ = 0 is sufficient for a local optimum at (µ0 , 0) (since the SOC for γ already accounts for the
cross-terms in the Hessian). Moreover, since satisfaction of the SOC for γ at γ = 0 implies that the SOC
is violated at γ = −Baa /Bea , a γ = 0 local optimum is globally optimal if the choice of µ0 , conditional on
γ = 0, is globally optimal.
   39
      At γ = −Baa /Bea , the SOC is given by −Baa F (Ĝ)Z −2 BeG  2
                                                                    (φ2g − σc2 ) < 0, where Z is the denominator
in equation (16) evaluated at γ = −Baa /Bea .


                                                       28
optimally, however, the optimal fuel economy standard is flat.



7     Additional factors affecting fuel economy feebates or

      standards under uncertainty

7.1    Covariance between gasoline prices and marginal damage

The results in sections 4 through 6 assume that marginal damage φg is locally constant and
unaffected by changes to the gasoline price G. However, if gasoline price changes are driven
by shocks to the global economy or global crude oil supply, the path of global CO2 emissions
may shift. This shift will then cause φg to change to the extent that the global marginal
damage curve for CO2 is upward-sloping. If changes in φg and G are positively (negatively)
correlated, then the first-best price-indexed fuel economy standard should be more (less)
responsive to gasoline price shocks than the price-indexed standard discussed in section 4.
For instance, if a decrease in G is associated with a decrease in φg , the optimal feebate must
decrease when G decreases, and therefore the optimal fuel use per mile increases by more
than it would have were φg constant.
    The sign of the correlation between shocks to φg and G is not obvious a priori, since it
depends on whether global demand shocks or supply shocks are dominant in determining
crude oil price movements. For instance, a persistent slowdown in the global economy will
decrease the path of global CO2 emissions and therefore decrease marginal damage φg . The
reduction in economic output will also reduce demand for crude oil, thereby reducing the
price of gasoline. φg and G are therefore positively correlated in this scenario. Shocks to
global crude oil supply, however, will drive a negative correlation.
    There exists considerable work in macroeconomics that attempts to disentangle supply
and demand shocks in the global crude oil market. See Hamilton (2013) and Kilian (2014)
for recent surveys and discussion; it is clear from this literature that the extent to which oil



                                              29
price shocks are supply versus demand-driven has varied over time. Baumeister and Kilian
(2016) attribute the recent 2014–2015 oil and gasoline price decrease primarily to demand
shocks, though positive shocks to oil production played a role as well.


7.2       Banking and borrowing of fuel economy credits

The U.S. fuel economy standards established in 2012 allow manufacturers to bank unused
fuel economy credits or borrow credits against future years. This banking and borrowing is a
flexibility that in principle can help firms smooth shocks to marginal compliance cost that are
driven by gasoline prices. Application of results from Pizer and Prest (2016)—which studies
binding dynamic quantity standards under abatement cost uncertainty—implies that even
if a fuel economy standard is fixed for many years, the first-best can be achieved if banking
and borrowing is permitted (with specific trading ratios) over time horizons that exceed the
time elapsed between the regulator’s updates to the standard.40
       In practice, however, banking and borrowing are unlikely to help vehicle manufacturers
respond to gasoline price shocks under the U.S. fuel economy standards. First, credits may
only be banked for up to five years, and they may be borrowed only to cover deficits from
no more than three years in the past. These time periods are substantially shorter than
the time between policy updates (the standards set in 2012 are locked-in through at least
2021). Second, gasoline price shocks are typically persistent, so that a negative shock this
year does not imply that the price will rebound next year. These two facts together imply
that banking and borrowing are not useful strategies by which manufacturers can cope with
gasoline price volatility.
  40
    Pizer and Prest (2016) shows that a “quantity” policy with banking and borrowing can actually improve
welfare over a “price” policy, even if marginal damage is locally constant, if: (1) there are not just shocks
to compliance costs but also to marginal damage, (2) these shocks are observable to firms, and (3) the price
policy cannot be applied retroactively.




                                                     30
7.3       Consumer valuation of fuel economy

What if consumers do not fully value future fuel costs when making a vehicle purchase?
If policy-makers have the objective of correcting for not just external damage φ but also
consumer undervaluation, then the optimal tax on fuel consumption per mile must account
for both effects. This paper’s model can be extended to accommodate standard models of
undervaluation (such as Allcott and Wozny (2014), Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013),
and Sallee, West, and Fan (forthcoming)) by replacing the BeG term in the private benefit
function with λBeG , where λ ∈ [0, 1], with λ = 1 connoting full valuation. The optimal
tax on fuel consumption per mile is then equal to φ + (1 − λ)BeG G. This tax increases
with the price of gasoline whenever λ < 1, since the magnitude of undervaluation of future
fuel costs increases with the fuel price.41 To mimic this tax with a gasoline price-indexed
fuel economy standard, the standard must be more responsive to gasoline price shocks the
greater is consumer undervaluation. Thus, when consumers undervalue fuel economy in this
way, the welfare benefit (relative to a fixed standard) of optimally indexing the fuel economy
standard to gasoline prices is enhanced relative to the full valuation baseline case presented
in section 4.


7.4       Technology, investment, and adjustment costs

Compliance with fuel economy standards requires not just shifting of the fleet-wide sales mix
but also design changes and, ultimately, technology innovation. Indeed, the “ramping up”
of U.S. fuel economy standards shown in figure 1 was designed with technological progress
in mind. Compliance costs in practice are therefore dynamic rather than static as modeled
here. How might dynamic compliance costs affect the economics of a fixed fuel economy
standard versus a feebate?
       Under perfect competition, a feebate policy will still attain the first-best with dynamic
  41
    In an alternative model in which fuel costs become more salient to consumers when the gasoline price is
high, so that λ is an increasing function of G, the optimal tax may instead be constant or decreasing in G.



                                                    31
compliance costs, while the fixed standard will not. The intuition is given in Williams (2012):
while the optimal quantity of emissions abated may phase in over time in the presence of
adjustment costs or technology investment, a Pigouvian tax that causes private actors to
equate marginal compliance cost to marginal damage at all times is still optimal. Dynamic
compliance costs do, however, complicate the equivalence between a feebate policy and a
gasoline price-indexed fuel economy standard. In the static model presented in the paper,
the price-indexed standard responds immediately to fuel price shocks. In the presence of
dynamic compliance costs, however, the optimal price-indexed standard must respond grad-
ually, mimicking how firms would respond to fuel price shocks under the feebate.
    When firms that invest in fuel efficiency technology compete imperfectly, the choice
between a price or quantity policy may affect the extent to which the level of innovation
approaches the social optimum. Montero (2011) and Scotchmer (2011), for instance, develop
models of innovation under price or quantity regulation when innovators have the ability to
extract monopoly rents by licensing the technology they develop. The extent to which
outcomes from a price or quantity policy deviate from the first-best depends on the size of
the innovation, the elasticity of demand for abatement, and the ability of the regulator to
commit to its policy.



8     Conclusion

Fuel economy policy in the United States is beset by the difficult problem that standards
enacted must remain in place for long time horizons over which the price of gasoline can
vary substantially. Gasoline price swings, such as the fall in prices experienced between
2014 and 2015, affect the marginal cost of compliance with a fixed fuel economy standard
because consumers’ valuation of fuel economy co-varies with the price of gasoline. Following
Weitzman (1974), the first-best, full information welfare outcome can be achieved by allowing
the standard (in miles per gallon) to rise and fall with the price of gasoline, mimicking



                                              32
what would happen under a feebate. In practice, however, U.S. fuel economy standards are
updated only infrequently. The standards set in 2012 are locked in place until 2021, and the
2016–2018 mid-term review will finalize standards for 2022–2025. These periodic updates
can take fuel prices at the time of the update into account, but what then is the optimal
standard to set at each update?
   The usual rule when committing to a fixed pollution control standard is to equate the
expected marginal cost of abatement at the standard to marginal external harm. This rule
ignores, however, the possibility that fuel price uncertainty (and therefore marginal cost
uncertainty) is sufficiently large, and the policy horizon sufficiently long, that the standard
set will not actually bind. I show that given historic gasoline price volatility and estimates of
marginal damage from the literature, this possibility is sufficiently likely that an optimally-
set fuel economy standard is substantially relaxed relative to that prescribed by the usual
rule. The optimal fixed standard may in fact be so lax that it is non-binding at the expected
gasoline price. Furthermore, I show that while an attribute-based standard does introduce
some flexibility by which consumers can vary their vehicle choice with gasoline prices, the
distortions caused to the attribute and to the expected level of fuel consumption are so costly
that attribute-basing reduces expected welfare.
   While this paper is focused on fuel economy regulation, the concepts and conclusions
presented are likely to be relevant for other pollution control settings in which marginal
abatement costs are uncertain and marginal damage is locally constant. For instance, the
CO2 standards under the Clean Power Plan rely in part on anticipated reductions in emissions
from switching from coal-fired to gas-fired electricity generation. However, the cost of fuel
switching, and therefore the cost of abatement, depends on the relative prices of coal and
natural gas. If natural gas becomes very cheap relative to coal, the regulation may not bind,
much like fuel economy regulations may not bind if the price of gasoline rises. As another
example, Borenstein et al. (2016) estimates substantial uncertainty in business-as-usual
emissions, and therefore marginal abatement costs, for California’s 2013–2020 greenhouse


                                               33
gas cap-and-trade market. In that market, Borenstein et al. (2016) demonstrate that the
regulation that is likely to bind is not the quantity standard itself but rather the floor or
ceiling on emission permit prices. A potential extension of the results presented here could
consider optimal fixed standards in the presence of a ceiling or a non-zero floor on the price
of emission permits and therefore marginal abatement costs.




                                             34
References

[1] Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny (2014), “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the
   Energy Paradox”, Review of Economics and Statistics 96(5), 779-795.

[2] Alquist, Ron, Lutz Kilian, and Robert J. Vigfusson (2013), “Forecasting the Price of
   Oil”, in Graham, Elliot and Allan Timmerman (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Forecast-
   ing vol.2. Amsterdam: North Holland.

[3] Anderson, Michael L. and Maximilian Auffhammer (2014), “Pounds that Kill: The
   External Costs of Vehicle Weight”, Review of Economic Studies 81(2), 535-571.

[4] Anderson, Soren T., Ryan Kellogg, and James M. Sallee (2013), “What Do Consumers
   Believe About Future Gasoline Prices?” Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
   agement 66, 383-403.

[5] Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee (2016), “Designing Policies to Make Cars
   Greener: A Review of the Literature”, Annual Review of Resource Economics, forth-
   coming.

[6] Baumeister, Christiane and Lutz Kilian (2016), “Understanding the Decline in the Price
   of Oil since June 2014”, Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
   Economists 3(1), 131-158.

[7] Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, Frank A. Wolak, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins
   (2016), “Expecting the Unexpected: Emissions Uncertainty and Environmental Market
   Design”, Energy Institute at Haas working paper #274.

[8] Brozovic, Nicholas, David L. Sunding, and David Zilberman (2004), “Prices Versus
   Quantities Reconsidered”, Urbana 51, 61801.




                                           35
 [9] Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer (2013), “Are Con-
    sumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases”, American Economic
    Review 103(1), 220-256.

[10] Costello, Christopher and Larry Karp (2004), “Dynamic Taxes and Quotas with Learn-
    ing”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 1661-1680.

[11] Detroit News (7 Apr., 2015), “54.5-mpg Rules Expected to Stick”.

[12] Elliot, Graham, Thomas J. Rothenberg, and James H. Stock (1996), “Efficient tests for
    an autoregressive unit root”, Econometrica 64(4), 813-836.

[13] Energy    Information     Administration      (2011),    “Voluntary      Reporting     of
    Greenhouse      Gases   Program:     Fuel     Emission   Coefficients”.   Accessed    from
    http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/1605/coefficients.html#tbl2 on 11 April, 2016.

[14] Environmental Protection Agency (Aug., 2012), “EPA and NHTSA Set Standards to
    Reduce Greenhouse Gases and Improve Fuel Economy for Model Years 2017–2025 Cars
    and Light Trucks”, EPA-420-F-12-051.

[15] Federal Register (15 Oct., 2012), Vol 77, No. 199, p. 62644.

[16] General Motors (20 Nov., 2009), “General Motors Comments On Proposed Rulemak-
    ing to Establish Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corpo-
    rate Average Fuel Economy Standards for 2012–2016 model years”. Accessed from
    https://www.regulations.gov/#!documentDetail D=EPA-HQ-OAR-2009-0472-6953 on
    15 May, 2016.

[17] Gillingham, Kenneth (2013), “The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards versus Fee-
    bates”, paper prepared for the National Energy Policy Institute.




                                             36
[18] Hamilton, James D. (2013), “Historical Oil Shocks”, in Randall E. Parker and Robert
    Whaples, Eds., Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History. New York:
    Routledge Taylor and Francis Group.

[19] Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon (2013), “Technical Support
    Document: Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact
    Analysis Under Executive Order 12866”. United States Government. Accessed from
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/inforeg/social cost of carbon for
     ria 2013 update.pdf on 19 May, 2016.

[20] Ito, Koichiro and James M. Sallee (2015), “The Economics of Attribute-Based Reg-
    ulation: Theory and Evidence from Fuel-Economy Standards”, NBER working paper
    #20500.

[21] Jacobsen, Mark (2013), “Fuel Economy and Safety: The Influences of Vehicle Class and
    Driver Behavior”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(3), 1-26.

[22] Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell (2002), “On the Superiority of Corrective Taxes to
    Quantity Regulation”, American Law and Economics Review 4(1), 1-17.

[23] Kilian, Lutz (2014), “Oil Price Shocks: Causes and Consequences”, Annual Review of
    Resource Economics 6, 133-154.

[24] Leard, Benjamin, Joshua Linn, and Virginia McConnell (2016), “Fuel Prices, New Vehi-
    cle Fuel Economy, and Implications for Attribute-Based Standards”, Resources for the
    Future Discussion Paper #16-04.

[25] Levin, Laurence, Matthew S. Lewis, and Frank A. Wolak (forthcoming), “High Fre-
    quency Evidence on the Demand for Gasoline”, American Economic Journal: Economic
    Policy.




                                            37
[26] Lutsey, Nic (23 Jan., 2015), “Do the automakers really need help with the U.S. effi-
    ciency standards?” International Council on Clean Transportation. Blog post. Accessed
    from http://www.theicct.org/blogs/staff/do-automakers-really-need-help-us-efficiency-
    standards on 29 Dec., 2015.

[27] Montero, Juan Pablo (2011), “A Note on Environmental Policy and Innovation When
    Governments Cannot Commit”, Energy Economics 33, 513-519.

[28] National Highway Transportation and Safety Administration (Aug., 2012), “Final Reg-
    ulatory Impact Analysis, Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY 2017–MY 2025
    Passenger Cars and Light Trucks”.

[29] National Research Council (2002), Effectiveness and Impact of Corporate Average Fuel
    Economy (CAFE) Standards. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

[30] National Research Council (2015), Cost, Effectiveness, and Deployment of Fuel Econ-
    omy Technologies for Light-Duty Vehicles. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

[31] Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer (2003), “Regulating Stock Externalities Under
    Uncertainty”, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45, 416-432.

[32] Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer (2008), “Indexed Regulation”, Journal of
    Environmental Economics and Management 56, 221-233.

[33] Ng, Serena and Pierre Perron (2001), “Lag, Length, Selection and the Construction of
    Unit Root Tests With Good Size and Power”, Econometrica 69(6), 1519-1554.

[34] Parry, Ian W.H., Carolyn Fischer, and Winston Harrington (2004), “Should Corporate
    Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards be Tightened?” Resources for the Future
    Discussion Paper #04-53.

[35] Parry, Ian W.H., Dirk Heine, Eliza Lis, and Shanjun Li (2014), Getting Energy Prices
    Right: From Principle to Practice. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

                                           38
[36] Parry, Ian W.H., Margaret Wells, and Winston Harrington (2007), “Automobile Exter-
    nalities and Policies”, Journal of Economic Literature 45(2), 373-399.

[37] Pizer, William A. and Brian Prest (2016), “Prices versus Quantities with Policy Updat-
    ing”, working paper.

[38] Sallee, James M., Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan., “Do Consumers Recognize the Value
    of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations”,
    Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.

[39] Scotchmer, Suzanne (2011), “Cap-and-Trade, Emissions Taxes, and Innovation”, in J.
    Lerner and S. Stern, Eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy vol. 11. University of
    Chicago Press.

[40] Weitzman, Martin L. (1974), “Prices vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic Studies 41(4),
    477-491.

[41] Whitefoot, Kate S. and Steven J. Skerlos (2012), “Design Incentives to Increase Vehicle
    Size Created From the U.S. Footprint-Based Fuel Economy Standards”, Energy Policy
    41, 402-411.

[42] Williams, Roberton C., III (2012), “Setting the Initial Time-Profile of Climate Policy:
    The Economics of Environmental Policy Phase-Ins”, in D. Fullerton and C. Wolfram,
    Eds. The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate Policy. University of Chicago
    Press.




                                            39
Appendix
A      Representative consumer model
Consider a unit mass of consumer types i, each of whom purchases a vehicle with fuel use per
mile ei and attribute ai , yielding private benefit B i (ei , ai , G) = U i (ei , ai , G) − C(ei , ai , G).
This section proves that a sufficient statistic for the aggregate private welfare effects of
fuel economy policies is the private benefit B(e, a, G) obtained from the average vehicle
purchased, where e is the average of the ei , a is the average of the ai , and the first derivatives
of B equal the average of the Bei and Bai .
    I begin by showing that all consumer types make identical changes to their fuel use and
attribute choices when there is a change to either G or a tax τ on fuel use per mile. Given
G and τ , consumer i’s choice of ei and ai is given by the solution to the system of FOCs

                                           Bei (ei , ai , G) = τ                                      (17)
                                           Bai (ei , ai , G) = 0.                                     (18)

    Application of the implicit function theorem yields:
                       dei     −Baa BeG         dei        Baa
                           =             2
                                           < 0;     =            2
                                                                    <0                                (19)
                       dG    Bee Baa − Bea      dτ    Bee Baa − Bea
                       dai      Bea BeG         dai       −Bea
                           =            2
                                           ≤ 0;     =            2
                                                                    ≤ 0,                              (20)
                       dG    Bee Baa − Bea      dτ    Bee Baa − Bea
                                                                                                      (21)
                                                      2
    where it is assumed that the SOC Bee Baa − Bea       > 0 holds so that the private problem
has an interior optimum. Under the second order Taylor expansion assumptions of the text,
each of the derivatives above is a constant scalar that is identical across all types i. Thus,
changes to G or to the fuel economy tax τ affect all types identically. Moreover, changes
to τ , given G, are one-to-one with changes in e and a, the average fuel use and attribute.
Thus, if a fuel economy standard (with compliance credit trading) is used in lieu of a tax,
shifts in the standard are isomorphic to shifts in the implied tax τ . Thus, it is sufficient to
show that B(e, a, G) is a sufficient statistic for welfare under a tax policy; I do not need to
explicitly model a fixed fuel economy standard.
    Using the second order Taylor expansion, let Bei and Bai be written as:

                Bei (ei , ai , G) = Be0
                                     i
                                        + Bea (ai − a∗ ) + Bee (ei − e∗ ) + BeG (G − Ḡ)              (22)
                Bai (ei , ai , G) = Ba0
                                     i
                                        + Bea (ei − e∗ ) + Baa (ai − a∗ ),                            (23)

   where e∗ and a∗ are the socially optimal fuel use and attribute, when the gasoline price
equals its expected price
                      R Ḡ, for the representative
                                         R i       consumer, who has marginal utility inter-
                          i
cepts given by Be0 = i Be0 di and Ba0 = i Ba0 di.




                                                   A-1
    Aggregate private welfare is then given by:
       Z                       Z                 Z                         Z
                                                                     1
            i                      i      ∗
           B (ei , ai , G)di = Be0 (ei − e )di + Ba0 (ai − a )di + Bee (ei − e∗ )2 di
                                                     i       ∗
         i                       i                i                  2      i
                                     Z                   Z
                               1
                             + Baa (ai − a∗ )2 di + Bea (ei − e∗ )(ai − a∗ )di
                               2
                                   Z i                    i

                             + BeG (ei − e∗ )(G − Ḡ)di.                                        (24)
                                   i

    Define e ≡ i ei di and a ≡ i ai di. Replace the (ei − e∗ ) terms in equation (24) with
                     R                   R

(ei − e + e − e∗ ), and do likewise with the (ai − a∗ ) terms. After removing terms for which
the expectation is zero, and after grouping related terms together, we obtain:
       Z
                                                                1                 1
          B i (ei , ai , G)di = [Be0 (e − e∗ ) + Ba0 (a − a∗ ) + Bee (e − e∗ )2 + Baa (a − a∗ )2
        i                                                       2                 2
                                           ∗       ∗              ∗
                              + Bea (e − e )(a − a ) + BeG (e − e )(G − Ḡ)]
                                 Z                   Z                         Z
                                                                        1
                              + [ Be0 (ei − e)di + Ba0 (ai − a)di + Bee (ei − e)2 di
                                      i                  i
                                  i                    i                2       i
                                        Z                  Z
                                1
                              + Baa (ai − a)2 di + Bea (ei − e)(ai − a)di]                       (25)
                                2        i                    i

    The first bracketed term in equation (25) is the second order Taylor expansion of B(e, a, G).
The second bracketed term is invariant to G or to fuel economy policy, since ei − e and ai − a
are constants for each i. Thus, B(e, a, G) is a sufficient statistic for the private welfare effects
of fuel economy policy.


B      Proofs and derivations
B.1     Expected welfare loss from an optimal standard
This section derives equation (9) from the main text, which gives the expected welfare loss,
relative to the first-best, for an optimal flat fuel economy standard µ∗ that may not bind.
    Define Ĝ implicitly by Be (µ∗ , Ĝ) = 0. As in the main text, define µ̃ implicitly by
E[Be (µ̃, G)] = φ. Per the second order Taylor expansion, marginal utility is given by

                             Be (e, G) = BeG (G − Ĝ) + Bee (e − µ∗ ).                          (26)

   When the standard does not bind, rearranging (26) yields the function e(G) that gives
agents’ fuel economy choice as a function of G:
                                                  BeG
                                    e(G) = µ∗ −       (G − Ĝ).                                 (27)
                                                  Bee
    If the first-best tax τ = φ is imposed instead of the fixed standard, agents’ choices are



                                                A-2
instead given by the function ẽ(G):

                                                                       φ    BeG
                                               ẽ(G) = µ∗ +               −     (G − Ĝ).                               (28)
                                                                      Bee   Bee

   Using the Taylor expansion B(e, G) = BeG (e − µ∗ )(G − Ĝ) +                                Bee
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                   (e   − µ∗ )2 , we may then
obtain an expression for B(e(G), G):
                                                                                             2
                                   −BeG              Bee                               −BeG
                  B(e(G), G) = BeG       (G − Ĝ)2 +                                               (G − Ĝ)2
                                     Bee              2                                 Bee
                                   2
                               −BeG
                             =        (G − Ĝ)2 ,                                                                       (29)
                               2Bee
      and an expression for B(ẽ(G), G):
                                                                                2
                             φ    BeG                      Bee    φ    BeG
        B(ẽ(G), G) = BeG       −      (G − Ĝ) (G − Ĝ) +           −     (G − Ĝ)
                            Bee    Bee                      2    Bee   Bee
                          2
                      −BeG               φ2
                    =       (G − Ĝ)2 +      .                                        (30)
                      2Bee              2Bee
      Define ∆ to be the expected welfare loss under µ∗ relative to the first best. ∆ is given
by:
                        Z     Ĝ
                 ∆≡                [B(ẽ(G), G) − φẽ(G) − B(µ∗ , G) + φµ∗ ] f (G)dG
                            GL
                        Z    GU
                    +               [B(ẽ(G), G) − φẽ(G) − B(e(G), G) + φe(G)] f (G)dG.                                (31)
                         Ĝ

   Let ∆1 denote the first integral in (31). Noting that B(µ∗ , G) = 0, substituting using
(28) and(30), and cancelling terms, we obtain
                                           Ĝ
                       −1
                                       Z        h                                       i
                                                      2
                 ∆1 =                                BeG (G − Ĝ)2 − 2φBeG (G − Ĝ) + φ2 f (G)dG.                       (32)
                      2Bee             GL

      Next, note that if we multiply FOC (7) by BeG , we obtain
                                           Z    Ĝ                      
                                                         BeG (G − Ĝ) − φ f (G)dG = 0.                                  (33)
                                           GL

      Substituting (33) into (32) yields:
                                                              Ĝ
                                         −1
                                                          Z        h                  i
                                                                     2          2   2
                                   ∆1 =                             BeG (G − Ĝ) − φ f (G)dG.                           (34)
                                        2Bee               GL

                      1
                             R Ĝ
      Define Ġ ≡   F (Ĝ)     GL
                                    Gf (G)dG (i.e., Ġ is the expected value of G conditional on the


                                                                       A-3
                                                          1
                                                                 R Ĝ
standard binding). Then define σc2 ≡                    F (Ĝ)    GL
                                                                        (G − Ġ)2 f (G)dG. We then have:

                    Z   Ĝ                                              Z   Ĝ
               2                             2                    2
              BeG            (G − Ĝ) f (G)dG =                  BeG             (G − Ġ + Ġ − Ĝ)2 f (G)dG
                    GL                                                 GL
                                                                         2
                                                           =     F (Ĝ)BeG   (σc2     + (Ġ − Ĝ)2 )
                                                                           2
                                                           =     F (Ĝ)(BeG   σc2     + φ2 ),                  (35)

    where the last line makes use of equation (33) and the definition of Ġ. Substituting (35)
into (34) yields:
                                                    2
                                           −F (Ĝ)BeG σc2
                                     ∆1 =                 .                               (36)
                                               2Bee
   Returning to equation (31), let ∆2 denote the second integral. Making substitutions
using equations (27)-(30), we obtain:
                                                 GU
                                                      −φ2            −φ2 (1 − F (Ĝ))
                                            Z
                              ∆2 =                         f (G)dG =                  .                        (37)
                                             Ĝ       2Bee                2Bee

   Combining terms yields expression (9) from the main text, which simplifies to the stan-
                                   −σ 2 B 2
dard Weitzman (1974) formula, ∆ = 2BeeeG , when the standard always binds:
                                          2 
                                        BeG                                        
                         ∆=−                  F (Ĝ(µ∗ ))σc2 + (1 − F (Ĝ(µ∗ )))φ2g .
                                        2Bee

B.2     Welfare from a fixed standard versus a degenerate standard
This section derives the expected welfare benefit δ of a standard µ∗ that satisfies FOC (4)
relative to imposing a degenerate standard that never binds. Reusing notation from appendix
B.1, δ is then defined by:
                        Z     Ĝ
                 δ≡                [B(µ∗ , G) − φµ∗ − B(e(G), G) + φe(G)] f (G)dG.                             (38)
                             GL

   Applying equations (27) and (29), we can simplify expression (38) to:
                                   Ĝ                         2
                                                                            
                                            −BeG
                              Z
                                                             BeG          2
                    δ≡                           (G − Ĝ)φ +      (G − Ĝ) f (G)dG.                            (39)
                               GL            Bee             2Bee

   Next, apply equations (33) and (35) to obtain

                                                   F (Ĝ)   2
                                                              σc2 + φ2 − 2φ2
                                                                             
                                             δ=           BeG
                                                   2Bee
                                                            2
                                                   −F (Ĝ)BeG
                                                 =            (φ2g − σc2 ).                                    (40)
                                                       2Bee


                                                                   A-4
    Thus, a standard µ∗ that satisfies FOC (4) improves welfare relative to a degenerate
standard iff φ2g − σc2 ≥ 0. This result can be extended to the case in which µ∗ always binds
(so that σc2 = σ 2 ) by defining f (G) = 0 between GU and Ĝ(µ∗ ).

B.3     Optimal attribute-based standard
This section derives expressions (15) and (16)—the FOC for µ0 and the FOC for γ (condi-
tional on satisfaction of (15)) from the main text. To begin, it is useful to first write down
the private agents’ vehicle choice problem subject to a binding attribute-based standard and
derive how the choices of a and e vary with µ0 , γ, and G.
    When e is constrained to lie on e = µ0 + γa, the agents’ problem can be written as:

                                        max B(µ0 + γa, a, G)                                 (41)
                                         a

   The agents’ FOC and SOC, using the notation e(a) = µ0 + γa are then:

                                Be (e(a), a, G)γ + Ba (e(a), a, G) = 0                       (42)
                                            Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa < 0                       (43)

   The solution to FOC (42), combined with the constraint e = µ0 + γa, yields agents’
choices of e and a as functions e(µ0 , γ, G) and a(µ0 , γ, G). The implicit function theorem
can then be used to establish the following useful derivatives when the standard binds (where
the notation suppresses the dependence of Ba , Be , da/dG, de/dG, da/dµ0 , de/dµ0 , da/dγ,
and de/dγ on µ0 , γ, and G):

                       da              −BeG γ
                            =                            ≤0                                  (44)
                      dG           γ2
                              Bee + 2Bea γ + Baa
                       de      da               −BeG γ 2
                            =γ       =                           ≤0                          (45)
                      dG       dG       Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa
                      da         −(Bee γ + Bea )
                            =                                                                (46)
                      dµ0     Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa
                       de             da           Bea γ + Baa
                            =1+γ          =        2
                                                                                             (47)
                      dµ0            dµ0      Bee γ + 2Bea γ + Baa
                       da     −(Be (e(a), a, G) + Bee aγ + Bea a)
                            =                                                                (48)
                       dγ             Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa
                       de            da      Bea aγ + Baa a − Be (e(a), a, G)γ
                            =a+γ         =                                                   (49)
                       dγ            dγ            Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa

    We next develop simple expressions for Be and Ba while constrained. Let (â, ê) denote
the pivot point for the standard and Ĝ denote the gasoline price at which the standard
just binds (ê, â, and Ĝ are all functions of µ0 and γ). Because Ba (ê, â, G) = 0 (recall that
BaG = 0), we may write the Taylor expansion for Ba as:

                             Ba (e, a, G) = Bea (e − ê) + Baa (a − â).                     (50)


                                                 A-5
   Along the standard, e − ê and a − â are linear functions of G − Ĝ, per the derivatives
given by equations (45) and (44), respectively. Substituting, we obtain:

                                                −γ(Bea γ + Baa )
                           Ba (e, a, G) =                            BeG (G − Ĝ).          (51)
                                              Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa

   We can then use FOC (42) to obtain Be (e, a, G):

                                                     Bea γ + Baa
                           Be (e, a, G) =                            BeG (G − Ĝ).          (52)
                                              Bee   γ2+ 2Bea γ + Baa

    We are now in position to begin working with the FOC for µ0 given by equation (13)
in the text. To simplify notation, let S = Bee γ 2 + 2Bea γ + Baa . Sequentially applying the
agents’ FOC (42) and then expressions (46), (47), and (52), we obtain:
                       Z   Ĝ
                                                   
                                  de    da       de
          FOCµ0       :     Be (     −γ     )−φ       f (G)dG = 0
                        GL       dµ0    dµ0     dµ0
                                                                    !
                      Ĝ
                      (Bea γ + Baa )BeG (G − Ĝ)S
                 Z
             1
           =                                       − φ(Bea γ + Baa ) f (G)dG = 0
             S   GL                 S
             Bea γ + Baa Ĝ
                         Z
           =                  (BeG (G − Ĝ) − φ)f (G)dG = 0                                 (53)
                  S        GL

             BeG (Bea γ + Baa ) Ĝ
                                Z
           =                        (φg − (Ĝ − G))f (G)dG = 0.                             (54)
                     S           GL

   Equation (54) matches equation (15) from the text.
   We may next turn to the FOC for γ given by equation (14). Sequentially applying the
agents’ FOC (42) and then expressions (48), (49), and (52), we obtain:
             Z  Ĝ                     
                     de      da      de
     FOCγ :      Be ( − γ ) − φ           f (G)dG = 0
             GL      dγ      dγ      dγ
                                                                       !
       1 Ĝ (Bea γ + Baa )BeG (G − Ĝ)Sa
         Z
     =                                       − φ(Bea aγ + Baa a − Be γ) f (G)dG = 0
       S GL                  S
                                                               !
       Bea γ + Baa Ĝ                          φBeG (G − Ĝ)γ
                  Z
     =                   BeG (G − Ĝ)a − φa +                    f (G)d(G) = 0
            S       GL                                S
       Bea γ + Baa Ĝ
                  Z
     =                 ((BeG (G − Ĝ)a − φa)S + φγBeG (G − Ĝ))f (G)dG = 0          (55)
            S2      GL

   Next, we can use the FOC for µ0 , equation (54), to simplify further:
                                 Z   Ĝ
               Bea γ + Baa
             =                            ((a − â)S(BeG (G − Ĝ) − φ) + φ2 γ)f (G)dG = 0   (56)
                    S2            GL




                                                         A-6
       Next apply equation (44) and then (54) again to obtain:
                            Z   Ĝ
              Bea γ + Baa                                                      
            =                            −BeG γ(G − Ĝ)(BeG (G − Ĝ) − φ) + φ2 γ f (G)dG = 0
                   S2         GL
                                 Z   Ĝ
              γ(Bea γ + Baa )             
                                                2
                                                                  
            =                                 −BeG (G − Ĝ)2 + 2φ2 f (G)dG = 0                            (57)
                    S2               GL

       Finally, apply equation (35) to obtain:

                                      γF (Ĝ)(Bea γ + Baa ) 2      2
                           FOCγ :                2
                                                           (φ − BeG  σc2 ) = 0
                                               S
                                       γF (Ĝ)(Bea γ + Baa ) 2 2
                                     =             2
                                                            BeG (φg − σc2 ) = 0                           (58)
                                                S
       Equation (58) matches equation (16) from the main text.


C         Prices versus quantities with a rebound effect
This appendix shows that the main result from section 4—a feebate delivers greater expected
welfare than a fuel economy standard—holds in the presence of a rebound effect, so long as
the gasoline price elasticity of driving is not too large. In this setting, neither instrument
achieves the first-best (a gasoline tax is required), and under complete information the
feebate and fuel economy standard are equivalent second-best policies. Throughout this
appendix, I abstract away from vehicle attributes other than fuel economy, and I assume
that all consumers are homogenous.42
    Allowing a rebound effect requires a substantial modification of the model. Let e and
C(e) denote the vehicle’s fuel use per mile and production cost, as in the main text, and let
G and φg continue to represent that gasoline price and per-gallon externality. Let Q denote
the consumer’s miles driven, and let V (Q) denote the utility from driving, where V 0 (Q) > 0,
and V 00 (Q) < 0 and is locally constant. Private indirect utility is then given by:

                                         U (Q, e) = V (Q) − C(e) − eGQ.                                   (59)

    Note that as V 00 → −∞ so that miles driven are perfectly inelastic, the model becomes
equivalent to that in the main text, where Bee = −C 00 and BeG = −Q. Because the feebate
strictly welfare dominates the fuel economy standard with perfectly inelastic demand for
miles driven (so long as f (G) is non-degenerate), it is straightforward to show that, given
f (G), φg , and C 00 , there must exist some arbitrarily small but non-zero value of −1/V 00 such
that the feebate continues to dominate the standard. That is, the result in section 4 is robust
to a small rebound effect.
  42
    Allowing for heterogeneity in the intercepts of consumers’ marginal utility functions, similar to appendix
A, will here generate heterogeneity in the responses of miles driven and fuel economy to gasoline price shocks.
Welfare can then no longer be modeled using a representative consumer.




                                                        A-7
    To make further progress, consider welfare under the fuel economy standard. For sim-
plicity, assume that the standard always binds (allowing for the possibility that the standard
may not bind will further reduce the expected welfare from the standard relative to the
feebate). Given a standard µ, the consumer’s FOCs are given by

                                              V 0 (Q) − µG = 0                           (60)
                                       −C 0 (µ) − GQ − λ = 0,                            (61)

  where λ is the shadow value of the imposed constraint. With e fixed at µ, we have
dQ/dG = µ/V 00 ≤ 0 and dQ/dµ = G/V 00 ≤ 0. The optimal standard then solves:
                            Z   GH
                     max             (V (Q) − C(µ) − µQ(G + φg )) f (G)dG.               (62)
                       µ    GL

   The FOC is given by:
            Z GH                                      
                     0   dQ    0            dQ
                   V (Q)    − C (µ) − (Q + µ )(G + φg ) f (G)dG = 0.                     (63)
             GL          dµ                 dµ

   Applying equation (60) and dQ/dµ = G/V 00 then yields that the optimal fuel economy
standard µ∗ satisfies:
                                 Z GH
                         0  ∗                             µ∗ φg Ḡ
                       −C (µ ) =      Q(G + φg )f (G)dG +          .               (64)
                                  GL                       V 00

    Note that as V 00 → −∞, equation (64) simplifies to −C 0 (µ∗ ) = Q(Ḡ + φg ), consistent
with equation (2) from the main text. Let Q∗ denote miles driven when the fuel economy
standard is µ∗ and the gasoline price is Ḡ; i.e, V 0 (Q∗ ) = µ∗ Ḡ.
    Expected welfare under the fuel economy standard can then be obtained using the Taylor
expansion for V (Q) and the fact that dQ/dG = µ∗ /V 00 . Given the standard µ∗ and a gasoline
price G, we have:

                                                                V 00
                 V (Q(µ∗ , G)) = V (Q∗ ) + µ∗ Ḡ(Q − Q∗ ) +          (Q − Q∗ )2
                                                                 2
                                               ∗2                  ∗2
                                             µ    Ḡ             µ
                                 = V (Q∗ ) +         (G − Ḡ) +       (G − Ḡ)2
                                              V 00             2V 00
                                             µ∗2
                                                                                
                                       ∗                           1          2
                                 = V (Q ) + 00 Ḡ(G − Ḡ) + (G − Ḡ) .                   (65)
                                             V                     2

   Expected social welfare E[Wµ ] under the optimal standard µ∗ is then:

                            µ∗2 GH
                               Z                             
                        ∗                          1
         E[Wµ ] = V (Q ) + 00          Ḡ(G − Ḡ) + (G − Ḡ) f (G)dG − C(µ∗ )
                                                            2
                            V   GL                 2
                     Z GH                   ∗
                                          µ
                − µ∗      (G + φg )(Q∗ + 00 (G − Ḡ))f (G)dG.                            (66)
                      GL                  V


                                                A-8
  Next consider a vehicle tax of t dollars per gallon per mile. Under this tax, the consumer’s
FOCs are given by:

                                              V 0 (Q) − eG = 0                                 (67)
                                        −C 0 (e) − GQ − t = 0.                                 (68)

   Application of the implicit function theorem yields the following derivatives:

                                          dQ     eC 00 − GQ
                                                =                                              (69)
                                          dG     V 00 C 00 + G2
                                          de     −eG − QV 00
                                                = 00 00                                        (70)
                                          dG      V C + G2
                                          dQ           −G
                                                = 00 00                                        (71)
                                          dt     V C + G2
                                           de         −V 00
                                                = 00 00         .                              (72)
                                           dt    V C + G2
    The consumer’s SOC requires that the denominator of each of the above derivatives be
strictly negative. As V 00 → −∞, the derivatives de/dG and de/dt collapse to −Q/C 00 and
−1/C 00 , consistent with the main text. Using FOCs (67) and (68), a necessary and sufficient
condition for the derivatives dQ/dG and de/dG to both be negative (consistent with empirical
observations) is that −eC 00 /(C 0 (e) + t) > 1 and −QV 00 /V 0 (Q) > 1, respectively. In other
words, the response of fuel economy to the marginal cost of fuel economy, holding Q fixed,
must be inelastic, as must be the response of miles driven to the marginal cost of driving,
holding e fixed. I adopt these assumptions on these elasticities for the remainder of the
appendix.
    The optimal fuel economy tax solves:
                            Z GH
                        max        (V (Q) − C(e) − eQ(G + φg )) f (G)dG,                   (73)
                           t    GL

   where Q and e are both functions of t and G. The FOC is given by:
          Z GH                                              
                   0   dQ      0   de      de    dQ
                 V (Q)     − C (e) − (Q + e )(G + φg ) f (G)dG = 0.                            (74)
            GL          dt         dt       dt   dt

   Using the consumer’s FOCs (67) and (68) and the derivatives (71) and (72), we obtain:
      Z   GH
                    1
                00 C 00
                               (eφg G − tV 00 + φg QV 00 ) f (G)dG = 0
       GL    V        + G2
            Z GH                               Z GH                              
                            1                                 1             eφg G
      ↔t                           f (G)dG =                         φg Q +         f (G)dG.   (75)
               GL   V 00 C 00 + G2                       00 00
                                                 GL V C + G
                                                                  2          V 00

   Note that as V 00 → −∞, equation (75) simplifies to t = φg Q = φ, consistent with the
main text. More generally, when V 00 is real valued the level of fuel economy under the optimal
tax and at the average gasoline price Ḡ will differ from the optimal fuel economy standard

                                                    A-9
µ∗ given by equation (64), since the response of Q to shocks to G differs between these two
instruments.
    The goal of this section is to compare expected welfare under the optimal tax, E[Wt ], to
expected welfare under the optimal standard, E[Wµ ]. A tractable comparison requires the
use of Taylor expansions for V (Q) and C(e) under the tax locally to µ∗ and Q∗ as defined
by equation (64) and V 0 (Q∗ ) = µ∗ Ḡ. Because the difference between µ∗ and e(Ḡ) under
the optimal tax is not tractable owing to the integrals in equation (75), I instead calculate
expected welfare for the tax assuming that the tax is set so that, at Ḡ, the realized fuel
economy is µ∗ and the realized miles driven are Q∗ . The difference in expected welfare
between the tax and standard policies that I derive will then be a lower bound on the actual
difference between the optimal tax and the optimal standard.
    For tractability, I assume that dQ/dG and de/dG are locally constant; i.e., I approximate
these derivatives at Ḡ. The Taylor expansions for V (Q) and C(e) around Q∗ and µ∗ can
then be expressed as a quadratic functions of G − Ḡ:

                                             dQ             V 00 dQ 2
                      V (Q) = V (Q∗ ) + µ∗ Ḡ    (G − Ḡ) +     ( ) (G − Ḡ)2
                                             dG              2 dG
                                                de            C 00 de 2
                       C(e) = C(µ∗ ) + C 0 (µ∗ ) (G − Ḡ) +       ( ) (G − Ḡ)2 .
                                                dG              2 dG
   Define ∆ as the difference in expected welfare between the optimal tax and the optimal
standard. Given a non-optimal tax, the Taylor approximations, and the approximations on
dQ/dG and de/dG, we have:43
                             GH
                               V 00 dQ 2    µ∗2                C 00 de 2
                         Z
                                                           2
                   ∆≥              ( ) −
                                  [(           00
                                                  )(G − Ḡ)  −     ( ) (G − Ḡ)2
                         GL     2   dG      2V                  2   dG
                           dQ                          de
                      − µ∗    (G − Ḡ)(G + φg ) − Q∗      (G − Ḡ)(G + φg )
                           dG                          dG
                        dQ de                         µ∗2
                      −        (G − Ḡ)2 (G + φg ) + 00 (G − Ḡ)(G + φg )]f (G)dG,                       (76)
                        dG dG                         V
    where all dQ/dG and de/dG terms pertain to these derivatives under the tax. Simplifying
further yields:

                       1       dQ     µ∗2      C 00 de 2 2        µ∗   dQ 2
                    ∆ ≥ (V 00 ( )2 − 00 )σ 2 −     ( ) σ + µ∗ ( 00 −      )σ
                       2       dG     V         2 dG              V    dG
                                   dQ de GH
                                          Z
                         ∗ de 2
                      −Q       σ −            (G − Ḡ)2 (G + φg )f (G)dG.                                (77)
                          dG       dG dG GL

      Next, note that:

                   V 00 dQ 2 µ∗2       ∗ µ
                                            ∗
                                                dQ     µ∗2        ∗ dQ    V 00 dQ 2
                       ( ) −       + µ  (     −    ) =        − µ       +     ( )
                    2 dG     2V 00        V 00 dG      2V 00        dG     2 dG
                                                        1               dQ 2
                                                     =    00
                                                             (µ∗ − V 00    ) ≥ 0.                        (78)
                                                       2V               dG
 43
      Equation (76) is derived by eliminating all terms involving multiplication of (G − Ḡ) by a constant.


                                                     A-10
       And further note that:
                    C 00 de         Q∗ de                         C 00 de   Q∗
                                                                              
                               de           de
                   − ( )2 − Q∗    +       =                     −         −      ≥ 0,                     (79)
                     2 dG      dG   2 dG    dG                     2 dG     2

       where the inequality comes from the fact that de/dG ≥ −Q∗ /C 00 per equation (70).
       Using equations (78) and (79), we may then write:

                        Q∗ de 2 dQ de GH
                                          Z
                    ∆≥−       σ −              (G − Ḡ)2 (G + φg )f (G)dG
                         2 dG      dG dG GL
                        de GH
                           Z               ∗                
                                        2  Q     dQ
                     ≥−         (G − Ḡ)       +    (G + φg ) f (G)dG
                        dG GL               2    dG
                        1 de GH
                             Z                              
                                          2 ∗        Q
                     ≥−          (G − Ḡ) Q 1 + 2 ∗ εG+φg f (G)dG,                                        (80)
                        2 dG GL                     Q

    where εG+φg is the gasoline price elasticity of miles driven, holding e constant, at a
gasoline price of G + φg . Equation (80) suggests that the optimal fuel economy tax will yield
greater expected welfare than the optimal fuel economy standard so long as the magnitude of
εG+φg is less than roughly 0.5. This value exceeds recent elasticity estimates with magnitudes
between 0.27 and 0.35 from Levin, Lewis, and Wolak (forthcoming), which are the highest
among recent studies. Note also that if εG+φg = 0 (i.e., V 00 → −∞), then this expression
reduces to ∆ = Q2 σ 2 /2C 00 , consistent with the main text.44
    Why does the advantage of the tax over the standard diminish with the rebound effect?
The intuition flows from the fact that, under the tax, fuel economy responds more strongly
to gasoline price shocks than what is socially optimal.45 The magnitude of this over-response
increases with the responsiveness of miles driven to the cost of driving. Eventually, if the
magnitude of εG+φg is large enough, it is better to have a fixed fuel economy standard (which
yields insufficient responsiveness of e to G) than a fuel economy tax (too much responsiveness
of e to G).




  44
     Recall that when miles driven are perfectly inelastic at Q, BeG and Bee from the model in the main text
are equivalent to −Q and −C 00 , respectively. Also, the formula for ∆ is an equality rather than an inequality
because all approximations used in deriving equation (80) become equalities when V 00 → −∞.
  45
     This effect is driven by the fact that consumers drive more miles than what is socially optimal, so that
their fuel economy choices are too sensitive to the gasoline price.


                                                    A-11
