NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF AFRICA'S ECONOMIES
Xinshen Diao
Kenneth Harttgen
Margaret McMillan
Working Paper 23021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23021

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

The research for this article was financed by the African Development Bank, CGIAR’s research
program Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM), and the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) in cooperation with the UK government’s Department for International
Development (DFID) as part of the DFID/ESRC Growth program, grant agreement ES/J00960/1,
PI Margaret McMillan. The authors thank Matthew Johnson and Inigo Verduzco-Gallo for
excellent research assistance and Doug Gollin, David Lagakos, and Michael Waugh for providing
data. The authors would also like to thank Alan Gelb, Adam Storeygard, Doug Gollin, Remi
Jedwab, William Masters, Jan Rielander, Dani Rodrik, Abebe Shimeles, Erik Thorbecke, and
Enrico Spolaore for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Xinshen Diao, Kenneth Harttgen, and Margaret McMillan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Changing Structure of Africa's Economies
Xinshen Diao, Kenneth Harttgen, and Margaret McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 23021
January 2017
JEL No. O11,O4,O55
ABSTRACT
Using data from the Groningen Growth and Development Center’s Africa Sector Database and
the Demographic and Health Surveys, we show that much of Africa’s recent growth and poverty
reduction has been associated with a substantive decline in the share of the labor force engaged in
agriculture. This decline is most pronounced for rural females over the age of 25 who have a
primary education; it has been accompanied by a systematic increase in the productivity of the
labor force, as it has moved from low productivity agriculture to higher productivity services and
manufacturing. We also show that although the employment share in manufacturing is not
expanding rapidly, in most of the low-income African countries, the employment share in
manufacturing has not peaked and is still expanding, albeit from very low levels. More work is
needed to understand the implications of these shifts in employment shares for future growth and
development in Africa south of the Sahara.
Xinshen Diao
Senior Research Fellow, IFPRI
Deputy Division Director, DSG
International Food Policy Research Institute
2033 K Street NW, Washington DC
x.diao@cgiar.org
Kenneth Harttgen
ETH Zurich NADEL
Center for Development and Cooperation
kenneth.harttgen@nadel.ethz.ch

Margaret McMillan
Tufts University
Department of Economics
114a Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
and International Food Policy Research Institute
and also NBER
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

It cannot be denied that Africa 1 has come a long way over the past 15 years. As recently as
2000, the front cover of The Economist proclaimed Africa “the hopeless continent” (The Economist
2000). Yet recent evidence suggests that the continent is anything but hopeless. Although there is
some debate as to the magnitude of the decline, it is clear that the share of the population living
below the poverty line fell significantly over the past decade and a half (Sala-i-Martin and
Pinkovskiy 2010; McKay 2013; Page and Shimeles 2014). In addition to the decline in monetary
poverty, several researchers have documented a general decline in infant mortality rates and
increased access to education (McKay 2013; Page and Shimeles 2014). Average growth rates have
been positive for the first time in decades and, in some of the fastest-growing economies, have
exceeded 6 percent per annum; moreover, these growth rates are likely to be underestimated.
Young (2012) found that since the early 1990s, real consumption in Africa has grown between 3.4
and 3.7 percent per year, or three to four times the 0.9–1.1 percent growth reported using national
accounts data; he dubbed this an “African growth miracle.” 2
The reasons behind this success are not well understood. The main contribution of this
paper is to show that there has been a substantial decline in the share of the labor force engaged in
agriculture across much of Africa south of the Sahara (SSA). Previous researchers have shown that
agriculture is by far the least productive sector in Africa (McMillan and Rodrik 2011; Gollin,
Lagakos, and Waugh 2014) and that income and consumption are lower in agriculture than in any
other sector (Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014). Researchers have also noted that real
consumption is growing in Africa (Young 2012) and that poverty is falling (McKay 2013; Page and
Shimeles 2014). To our knowledge, this paper is the first to connect these improvements in living
standards to important occupational changes.

Africa in this paper refers only to countries in Africa south of the Sahara.
Harttgen, Klasen, and Vollmer (2013) found no evidence supporting the claim of an African growth miracle that
extends beyond what has been reported in gross domestic product per capita and consumption figures. They argue
that trends in assets can provide biased proxies for trends in income or consumption growth.
1

2

3

Before proceeding further, a word about the data is in order, because much has been
written about the poor quality of statistics in Africa 3 and because the results presented in this paper
depend heavily upon the quality of the data. To be as transparent as possible, this paper only uses
publicly available data. 4 Thus, the two main data sources for this paper are the Africa Sector
Database, 5 produced by the Groningen Growth and Development Center (GGDC), and the
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) (ICF International 2016). The GGDC database, which
covers 11 African countries, was last updated in October 2014. The GGDC database includes all
the countries used in McMillan and Rodrik (2011) plus two additional countries, Botswana and
Tanzania. A big advantage of the GGDC data is that they cover employment and value-added at
the sector level going back to 1960. These data were obtained from national statistical offices as
well as from libraries across Europe (GGDC 2013). The employment data are consistent over time
and are comparable to the value added data in the national accounts calculations because they are
constructed using census data. Using the census data has the added benefit of capturing activity in
the informal sector. However, because census data are not collected on a regular basis, growth rates
in employment by sector are obtained using labor forces surveys.
Using the GGDC data to compute average labor productivity by sector raises two potential
measurement issues. The first and the one that has gotten the most attention in the literature 6 is
that the quality of the data collected by national statistical agencies in Africa has been poor. We
address this issue at least in part by cross checking our estimates of changes in employment shares
using the GGDC data with changes in employment shares computed using the DHS data. The

For recent critiques of African data, see papers by Devarajan (2013) and Jerven and Johnston (2015).
A previous version of this paper used additional data provided by researchers at the International Monetary Fund.
Because these data are not publicly available and because we do not have access to the original datasets, we decided
not to use these countries. Most, but not all, of these countries are included in the Demographic and Health Surveys.
5 This dataset can be accessed at http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/africa-sector-database and was constructed
with the financial support of the ESRC and the DFID as part of the DFID/ESRC Growth program, grant agreement
ES/J00960/1, PI Margaret McMillan.
6
See for example the special issue of the Review of Income and Wealth, Special Issue: Measuring Income, Wealth,
Inequality, and Poverty in Sub Saharan Africa: Challenges, Issues, and Findings October 2013. Volume 59, Issue
Supplement S1, Pages S1-S200.
3
4

4

DHS data are collected by enumerators working for a U.S. based consulting firm and are generally
thought to be of very high quality. A comparison of changes in employment shares across datasets
reveals remarkable consistency across the two datasets. Our confidence in the estimates of value
added at the sectoral level is bolstered by the following facts. First, the African countries included
in the GGDC database are the countries in Africa with the strongest national statistical offices and
these countries have been collecting national accounts data for some time 7. Second, researchers at
the GGDC specialize in providing consistent and harmonized measures of sectoral value added
and our view is that this expertise lends credibility to these numbers. Finally, using LSMS surveys,
researchers have shown that sectoral measures of value added based on national accounts data are
highly correlated with sectoral measures of consumption (Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014).
A second concern stems from the measurement of labor inputs. Ideally, instead of using
the measured number of workers employed in a sector, we would use the number of hours worked
in a sector. This would correct for biases associated with the seasonality of agriculture that might
lead to an underestimation of agricultural labor productivity. This is a serious issue and for the
purposes of this paper, we rely on work by Duarte and Restuccia (2010) who show that in a sample
of 29 developed and developing countries the correlation between hours worked and employment
shares is close to one and Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014) who show that correcting labor
productivity measures for hours worked does not overturn the result that labor productivity in
agriculture is significantly lower than labor productivity in the rest of the economy. Note that this
does not mean that there are not off-farm activities in rural areas that bring in less income for
example than farming. In fact, this is highly likely in very poor economies where a large share of
economic activity is of a subsistence nature. 8
The analysis begins by asking whether it is reasonable to compare structural change in
Africa to structural change in other regions during the same period. Average incomes in Africa are
Zambia appears to be an exception.
Using LSMS-ISA data McCullough (2015) finds that correcting for hours worked reduces the gap between labor
productivity in agriculture and in other activities significantly but she provides no explanation for the large difference
between her results and the results of Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014).

7
8

5

significantly lower than in East Asia, Latin America, and all other regions. If countries at different
stages of development tend to exhibit different patterns of structural change, the differences
between Africa and other developing regions may be a result of their different stages of
development. Motivated by this possibility, this paper explores how the level of employment shares
across sectors in African countries compares to the level in other countries, controlling for levels
of income. The findings show that African countries fit quite well into the pattern observed in
other countries, with some minor exceptions. In other words, given current levels of income per
capita in Africa, the share of the labor force in agriculture, services, and industry is roughly what
would be expected.
Having confirmed that, in 1990, most African countries were characterized by high
employment shares in agriculture, we turn to an investigation of changes in agricultural
employment shares. For the eight low-income countries in the GGDC dataset, the share of the
labor force engaged in agriculture from 2000 to 2010 declined by an average of 9.33 percentage
points. Over this same period and for the same countries, the employment share in manufacturing
expanded by 1.46 percentage points, and the employment share in services expanded by 6.13
percentage points. Combining these data on employment shares with data on value-added, we
show that for the period 2000–2010, labor productivity in these eight low-income African
countries grew at an unweighted annual average of 2.8 percent; 1.57 percentage points of this labor
productivity growth was attributable to structural change. We report the unweighted averages
because the weighted average is dominated by Nigeria in the low-income sample and by South
Africa in the high-income sample. By contrast, for 1990–1999, labor productivity growth was close
to zero, and structural change was growth reducing. In the three high-income countries in the
GGDC Africa Sector Database, labor productivity growth was similar to that in the eight lowincome countries, but it was entirely accounted for by within-sector productivity growth.
These results only capture the experience of 11 countries in Africa. Thus, an important
goal of this paper is to expand the sample of countries to include more of the poorer countries in
6

Africa. To this end, this paper uses the DHS, which are nationally representative surveys designed
to collect detailed information on child mortality, health, and fertility, as well as on households’
durables and quality of dwellings. In addition, the DHS include information on gender, age,
location, education, employment status, and occupation of women and their partners between the
ages of 15 and 59. Importantly, the design and coding of variables (especially variables on the type
of occupation, educational achievements, households assets, and dwelling characteristics) are
generally comparable across countries and over time. Finally, the sample includes considerable
regional variation—90 surveys are available for 31 African countries, and, for most countries,
multiple surveys (up to six) were conducted between 1993 and 2012.
Using the DHS, this paper shows that the changes in agricultural employment shares in the
sample of African countries for which there is overlap between the GGDC and the DHS are
similar. It then shows that, between 1998 and 2014, the share of the labor force employed in
agriculture for the countries in the DHS sample decreased by about 10 percentage points. In
addition, there is a significant degree of within- and cross-country heterogeneity in the changes in
agricultural employment shares. Within countries, the decline in the employment share in
agriculture is most pronounced for poor, uneducated females in rural areas. Across countries, the
most rapid decline occurred for rural females in Cameroon and Mozambique, while in Mali,
Zimbabwe, and Madagascar, there was an increase in the share of women who reported agriculture
as their primary occupation.
This work is related to work by Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014). Using contemporary
data for 151 developing countries, including several from Africa, they confirmed the persistence of
a sizable agricultural productivity gap, as well as a gap in income and consumption. Based on these
results, they concluded that there should be large economic gains associated with a reduction in
the share of employment in agriculture. Our paper differs in that it takes as given the agricultural
productivity gap and shows a significant decline in the share of employment in agriculture across
much of the continent.
7

This paper is also related to work by Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf,
Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014), who found that structural change is a fundamental feature of
economic growth. This structural transformation continues until farm and nonfarm productivity
converge, which typically occurs only at high levels of per capita income. In the United States, for
example, the exodus of labor from agriculture did not end until the mid-1990s. At lower levels of
income, countries that pull themselves out of poverty also exhibit positive structural change. 9 The
main difference between our work and these two papers is that they do not include Africa.
Most closely related to the present paper are recent studies by McMillan and Rodrik (2011)
and McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014). Like Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh (2014), these
two studies by McMillan and others document a significant gap in productivity between agriculture
and other sectors of the economy. McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014) showed that
structural change in Africa contributed negatively to growth during the 1990s and then positively
to growth during 2000–2005. However, these studies have two important limitations. First, the
sample of African countries used is not representative of the poorest African countries; rather, the
countries are, on average, richer, and the populations are more educated and healthier when
compared with the rest of Africa. Second, the data in these studies do not paint an accurate picture
of the most recent economic activity in Africa, because the samples used stop in 2005.
In summary, Section 1 of this paper describes the GGDC data. Section 2 documents a
number of stylized facts to situate Africa within the recent literature on structural change. Section
3 outlines the methodology and the data used for measuring structural change. It also describes
recent patterns of labor productivity growth across regions and countries. Section 4 describes the
DHS. It then uses these data to explore the robustness of the results presented in Section 3. Section
5 concludes.

The converse is not true, however. All countries with structural change do not also achieve poverty reduction.
Structural change into protected or subsidized sectors comes at the expense of other activities and is therefore not
associated with sustained growth out of poverty for the population as a whole. Structural change is effective at reducing
poverty only when people move from lower to higher productivity activities.

9

8

I. GRONINGEN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER DATA
To analyze the patterns of structural change and labor productivity growth in Africa
relative to the rest of the world, this paper uses the 10-sector database produced by researchers at
the Groningen Growth and Development Center (GGDC). The data were last updated in
January 2015 (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015), which is the version used here. Note that
the Africa data in the paper by McMillan and Rodrik (2011) was collected by McMillan and
helped generate interest in producing a longer time series of harmonized data for Africa. These
data consist of sectoral and aggregate employment and real value-added statistics for 39
countries, covering the period up to 2010 and, for some countries, to 2011 or 2012. Of the
countries included, 30 are developing countries, and 9 are high-income countries. The countries
and their geographical distribution are shown in Table 1, along with some summary statistics. As
Table 1 shows, labor productivity gaps between different sectors are typically large in developing
countries; this is particularly true for poor countries with mining enclaves, where few people tend
to be employed at very high labor productivity.
[Insert Table 1 near here]
The countries in our sample range from Ethiopia, with an average labor productivity over
2000–2010 of $1,400 (at 2005 purchasing power parity [PPP] dollars), to the United States, where
average labor productivity over this same period is almost 60 times as large ($83,235). The data
include 11 African countries, 9 Latin American countries, 10 Asian countries, and 9 high-income
countries. China shows the fastest overall productivity growth rate (10.38 percent per annum from
2000 to 2010). At the other extreme, Italy, Singapore, Mexico, and Venezuela experienced negative
labor productivity growth rates over this same period.
The sectoral breakdown used in the rest of this paper is shown in Table 2. Apart from
mining and utilities, which are highly capital intensive and create relatively few jobs, the sectors
with the highest average labor productivity for 2000–2010 are transport services, business services,
and manufacturing; the sector with the lowest average labor productivity is agriculture. The
9

developed countries tend to have the highest average labor productivity across all 10 sectors, while
countries in Africa have the lowest productivity levels across all 10 sectors, with the exception of
mining.
[Insert table 2 near here]
An important question regarding data of this sort is how well they account for the informal
sector. The data for value-added come from national accounts, and as mentioned by Timmer and
de Vries (2007, 2009), the coverage of such data varies from country to country. While all countries
make an effort to track the informal sector, obviously the quality of the data can vary greatly. On
employment, Timmer and de Vries (2007, 2009) relied on household surveys (namely, population
censuses) for total employment levels and their sectoral distribution; they used labor force surveys
for the growth in employment between census years. Census data and other household surveys
tend to have more complete coverage of informal employment. In short, a rough characterization
of the data would be that the employment numbers in the GGDC dataset broadly coincide with
actual employment levels, regardless of formality status, while the extent to which value-added data
include or exclude the informal sector heavily depends on the quality of national sources. For a
detailed explanation of the protocols followed to compile the GGDC 10-Sector database, refer to
Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries (2015) and “Sources and Methods” at the database’s web page:
http://www.ggdc.net/databases/10_sector.htm.
We would, of course, like to have data for more African countries. In the absence of
additional data for Africa, however, Table 3 reports the characteristics of the African countries in
the GGDC sample and compares them to the characteristics of all countries in Africa. All of the
data used for the comparisons in Table 3 come from the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators. The GGDC sample includes 11 out of 48 countries from SSA. The statistics in column
(2) of Table 3 indicate that the African countries in the GGDC sample have significantly higher
GDP per capita, lower infant mortality rates, higher years of primary and secondary schooling, and
bigger populations and are generally less reliant on agricultural raw material exports and resource
10

rents than countries SSA taken as a group. A discussion of the DHS sample appears in Section 4
of this paper, which expands on the Africa sample to include more of its poor countries.
[Insert Table 3 near here]
II. FITTING AFRICA INTO THE RECENT LITERATURE ON STRUCTURAL CHANGE
Among the earliest and most central insights of the literature on economic development is
the fact that development entails structural change (Lewis 1955). In most poor countries, large
numbers of people live in rural areas and devote most of their time to the production of food for
home consumption and local markets. In richer countries, by contrast, relatively few people work
in agriculture. This is a robust and long recognized feature of the cross-sectional data from different
countries (Chenery and Taylor 1968). It is also a feature of the historical experience of development
in almost all rich countries. For example, Duarte and Restuccia (2010) found that, over their sample
period, structural change played a substantial role in the productivity catch-up of developing
countries in their sample, relative to the United States. As predicted, the gains are particularly
dramatic in the sectors with international trade. They found in their sample that productivity
differences in agriculture and industry between the rich and developing countries have narrowed
substantially, while productivity in services has remained significantly lower in developing countries
relative to rich countries. Thus, developing countries with the most rapid growth rates have
typically reallocated the most labor into high-productivity manufacturing, allowing aggregate
productivity to catch up. 10 Duarte and Restuccia (2010) concluded that rising productivity in
industry, combined with a shift in employment shares from agriculture into industry, explains 50
percent of the catch-up in aggregate productivities among developing countries over their sample
period of 1950–2006.

Conversely, where the manufacturing sector stagnates and structural transformation primarily involves the
reallocation of workers into lower productivity sectors, aggregate productivity growth is slower, especially among
developing countries, whose productivity in services remains low relative both to agriculture in other countries and to
other sectors within the country.
10

11

Some stylized facts of the pattern of structural change over the course of development
have emerged from the literature on structural change. As countries grow, the share of economic
activity in agriculture monotonically decreases, and the share in services monotonically increases.
The share of activity in manufacturing appears to follow an inverted U-shape; it increases during
low stages of development as capital is accumulated, and then decreases for high stages of
development where higher incomes drive demand for services and labor costs make manufacturing
difficult. Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014) documented this pattern for a panel of
mostly developed countries over the past two centuries, while Duarte and Restuccia (2010)
documented a similar process of structural change among 29 countries for 1956–2004.
African countries have been largely absent from empirical analyses in this literature. Thus,
there is little evidence on how structural change has played out in African countries since
achieving independence half a century ago. A major reason for this has been absence of data, as
economic data to undertake such analysis has been largely unreliable or nonexistent for most
African countries. A deeper reason is poverty itself. Until recently, few African countries had
enjoyed the sustained economic growth needed to trace out the patterns of structural
transformation achieved in earlier decades elsewhere. The start of the 21st century saw the dawn
of a new era in which African economies grew as fast as or faster than the rest of the world’s
economies.
Examining the recent process of structural change in Africa and how it has interacted with
economic growth could yield significant benefits. For one, the theory and stylized facts of structural
change offer several predictions about the allocation of the factors of production for countries at
different stages of development. In addition, because SSA is now by far the poorest region of the
world, including African countries could enrich the current understanding of how structural change
has recently played out around the world. Perhaps more importantly, and most pertinent to this
paper, is that such an analysis could offer insight regarding the continent’s recent economic

12

performance—both its prolonged period of weak economic growth since the 1970s and its period
of stronger growth over the past decade.
This paper uses the GGDC data to study the evolution of the distribution of employment
between sectors across levels of income experienced in Africa and how it compares with the
patterns seen historically in other regions over the course of development. Using as a baseline the
patterns seen in other regions historically helps gauge the extent to which structural change in
Africa compares with what would be “expected” based on its income levels. Following Duarte and
Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014), we start by aggregating the 10
sectors in the GGDC Africa Sector Database (GGDC-ASD) into three main categories:
agriculture, industry, and services. This is accomplished as follows:
(1) Manufacturing, mining, construction, and public utilities are combined into “industry.”
(2) Wholesale and retail trade; transport and communication; finance and business services;
and community, social, personal, and government services are combined into “services.”
(3) “Agriculture” is left as-is. 11
In addition to these three sectors, we add a fourth category—manufacturing. For purposes of
comparability with the results in Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf, Rogerson, and
Valentinyi (2014), we also measure “development” using the log of GDP per capita in international
dollars from Maddison (2010).
Figure 1 plots employment shares in agriculture, services, industry, and manufacturing on
the y-axis and log GDP per capita on the x-axis for the 11 African countries in the GGDC sample
for 1960–2010. The share of employment in agriculture decreases with income, while the share of
employment in services and industry both increase in income. These patterns are consistent with
those documented by Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi
(2014) for the rest of the world. Figure 1 also indicates the inverted-U shape for industry that was

This aggregation is consistent with that used in Duarte and Restuccia (2010), who also used the pre-Africa GGDC
database (along with other sources) to construct their dataset.

11

13

documented in Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014) for
Africa, though this shape seems to be driven mostly by Botswana (green triangles), Mauritius
(purple dots), and South Africa (blue triangles). Mauritius is the only country in the Africa sample
with a log GDP per capita at or exceeding 9.0, the threshold identified by Herrendorf, Rogerson,
and Valentinyi (2014) at which deindustrialization has occurred in the rest of the world, excluding
Africa but including many other developing countries. The pattern for manufacturing appears to
be similar to the pattern for industry, though, as is discussed next, regression analysis reveals a
difference in the two patterns.
[Figure 1 near here]
Table 4 reports results of regressions that test for the shape of these relationships. All
specifications include country fixed effects and the log of GDP per capita; the regressions for
industry and manufacturing include the log of GDP squared to capture the inverted U-shape
documented for non-African countries. The results in columns (1) through (3) confirm that the
patterns uncovered in our Africa sample are similar to those uncovered for other countries—that
is, the employment share in agriculture is decreasing in the log of GDP per capita and that in
services is increasing in the log of GDP per capita. For industry, the results in column (3) are
indicative of a U-shaped relationship. However, the results in column (4) indicate that the
relationship between log GDP per capita and the employment share in manufacturing is first
decreasing and then increasing.
[Table 4 near here]
Columns (5) through (8) of Table 4 separate the “rich” African countries in the sample—
Botswana, Mauritius, and South Africa—from the “poor” African countries in the sample by
interacting log GDP per capita (and its square for industry and manufacturing) with dummy
variables for rich and poor Africa. The differences between the rich African countries and the poor
African countries in the Africa sample are visually evident in Figure 1; Table 1 also indicates the
significant gap in economywide labor productivity between the rich African countries and the rest
14

of the countries in the Africa sample. The results in columns (5) and (6) of Table 4 show very little
difference in the coefficients on log GDP per capita in the regressions of the employment share in
agriculture and services between the rich Africa sample and the poor Africa sample. For example,
in poor Africa, a 1 percent increase in log GDP per capita reduces the employment share in
agriculture by 0.20 percent, while in rich Africa, a 1 percent increase in log GDP per capita reduces
the employment share in agriculture by 0.22 percent. The results in columns (7) and (8) confirm
the differences between the rich African countries and the poor African countries that are shown
in Figure 1. In particular, the inverted U-shape for industry appears to peak earlier for poor
countries than for rich countries. In manufacturing, the signs on log GDP per capita and its square
are reversed for the rich African countries.
We also investigate the phenomenon of ‘premature deindustrialization’ in Africa, as
described by Rodrik (2016), who found that the share of employment in manufacturing in
developing countries is peaking at lower levels of GDP per capita than it did in today’s
industrialized countries. Among the 11 African countries in our sample, 8 of them have incomes
well below the level of income at which the manufacturing employment share begins to decline
as identified by Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014). 12 Also, in five countries – Ethiopia,
Kenya, Malawi, Senegal, and Tanzania - the employment share in manufacturing is still growing.
Of the high income countries in the Africa sample – Mauritius, Botswana and South Africa –
Mauritius appears to have followed a path much like the high income East Asian countries in the
sample in that manufacturing’s share of employment and value added reached very high levels
and has only recently been replaced by similarly or more productive services. In short, it seems
difficult to make the case that Africa is de-industrializing.
Thus, with the possible exceptions of Botswana and South Africa, recent patterns of
employment shares in Africa appear to fit the stylized facts of other regions’ historical

12
GDP per capita in the majority of African countries is also well below the lower threshold of around $6,000 (in
1990 US$) identified by Rodrik (2016) as the turning point for employment deindustrialization.

15

development. 13 Though Figure 1 and the results in Table 4 suggest that the patterns of employment
allocation and income for agriculture, services, industry, and manufacturing are qualitatively similar
to the stylized facts based on the experience of other regions, it may be that they differ
quantitatively. For instance, although Figure 1 confirms that the agricultural employment share and
services employment share in Africa decrease and increase, respectively, with the level of income,
it could be that the level of agricultural or services employment in Africa is higher than in other
regions, perhaps because of resource endowments or productivity levels. Directly comparing the
relationship between income levels and the distribution of employment in Africa with other regions
over the past several decades indicates whether the process of structural change in Africa is playing
out differently than we would expect given current levels of income.
Figure 2 displays employment shares in agriculture, industry, services, and manufacturing
on the y-axis and log GDP per capita on the x-axis simultaneously for our sample of African
countries and for the rest of the countries in the GGDC sample for the period 1960–2010. As
indicated by the legend, red dots in the figure denote African countries, and blue dots denote all
other countries in the sample. Two features of the data are immediately evident from the figure.
First, in recent years, per capita incomes in most African countries in our sample are among the
lowest seen in most of the world since 1960. Second, the distributions of employment among the
African countries appear to fit quite well with those seen over the past six decades in other regions.
[Insert Figure 2 near here]
To obtain a more precise measure of the differences between our Africa sample and the
rest of the world, we regress employment shares on the log of GDP per capita and its square for
industry and manufacturing, an interaction between the log of GDP per capita and an Africa
dummy and an interaction between the log GDP per capita squared and an Africa dummy for
industry and manufacturing. The results of these regressions are reported in columns (1) through
Although Ghana had an employment share in manufacturing of around 14 percent in 1978, its current level of real
GDP per capita is quite a bit lower than the income level at which manufacturing employment would be expected to
peak, regardless of whether Rodrik’s (2016) threshold or that identified by Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2014)
is used. Thus, in principle, the employment share in manufacturing should continue to grow.

13

16

(4) of Table 5. In the case of agriculture, the coefficient of –0.04 on the interaction term indicates
that the employment share in agriculture is falling faster as income increases in Africa as compared
with the rest of the world. In other words, the line is steeper, but the magnitude of the difference
is small. In the case of services, there is no statistically or economically meaningful difference
between Africa and the rest of the world, as a 1 percent increase in GDP per capita is associated
with a 0.18 percent increase in the employment share in services.
[Insert Table 5 near here]
There does appear to be a significant difference between Africa and the rest of the world
when it comes to industry and manufacturing. In particular, adding the coefficients on log GDP
per capita and its square and the interaction of log GDP per capita and its square with the Africa
dummy to the coefficients for the rest of the world—columns (3) and (4) of Table 5—we get the
results in column (3) and (4) of Table 4. The implication is that at lower levels of income, the rest
of the world has higher employment shares in industry than does Africa, and the inverted U-shape
in industry for Africa peaks at a lower employment share in industry. However, once poor Africa
is separated from rich Africa the difference persists only for rich Africa. In rich Africa—Botswana,
Mauritius, and South Africa—the inverted U-shape in industry is to the left of the inverted Ushape for the rest of the world (column (7) of Table 5). Also, in rich Africa the employment share
in manufacturing is first falling in income and then rising at an increasing rate; in other words, at
the levels of GDP per capita observed in the data over the past 50 years, the pattern follows more
or less an upward sloping line. 14 By contrast, the size and significance of the interaction terms that
include poor Africa (columns (5)–(8) of Table 5) indicate that the patterns observed in poor Africa
appear to be similar to the patterns observed in the rest of the world.
Figure 3 illustrates that, among the 11 African countries in the GGDC sample, the
productivity gaps are indeed enormous across sectors. Each bin in the figure corresponds to one

Although the coefficients in the regression suggest a U-shaped relationship, when we plug actual log GDP per capita
into the fitted equation, the relationship is more linear than U-shaped.

14

17

of the nine sectors in the dataset, 15 with the width of the bin corresponding to the sector’s share
of total employment, and the height corresponding to the sector’s labor productivity level as a
fraction of average labor productivity. Agriculture, at 35 percent of average productivity, has the
lowest productivity by far; manufacturing productivity is 1.7 times as high, and that in mining is
16.8 times as high. Furthermore, the figure makes evident that the majority of employment in the
African sample is in the most unproductive sectors, with roughly two-thirds of the labor force in
the two sectors with below-average productivity (agriculture and personal services). Based on this
figure, it appears that the potential for structural change to contribute to labor productivity growth
is still quite large.
[Insert Figure 3 near here]
The productivity gaps described here refer to differences in average labor productivity. When
markets work well and structural constraints do not bind, productivities at the margin should be
equalized. Under a Cobb-Douglas production function specification, the marginal productivity of
labor is the average productivity multiplied by the labor share. Thus, if labor shares differ greatly
across economic activities, then comparing average labor productivities can be misleading. The fact
that average productivity in mining is so high, for example, simply indicates that the labor share in
this capital-intensive sector is quite small. In the case of other sectors, however, there does not
appear to be a clearly significant bias. Once the share of land is taken into account, for example, it
is not obvious that the labor share in agriculture is significantly lower than in manufacturing
(Mundlak, Butzer, and Larson 2012). Therefore, the fourfold difference in average labor
productivity between manufacturing and agriculture does point to large gaps in marginal
productivity.
An additional concern with the data presented in Figure 3 is that the productivity gaps may
be mismeasured. For example, differences in hours worked or human capital per worker could be
driving the observed productivity gaps. However, in a recent paper, Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh

15

Figure 3 excludes government services.

18

(2014) used microdata to take into account sectoral differences in hours worked and human capital,
as well as alternative measures of sectoral income; after doing so, they still found large differences
in productivity between agriculture and other sectors of the economy. The agricultural productivity
gaps for SSA (presented by country in Appendix 3 of their paper) range from a low of 1.14 in
Lesotho all the way to 8.43 for Gabon.
Thus, our preliminary analysis reveals some important stylized facts about countries in
Africa. First, when the patterns of employment in Africa are compared to the patterns observed in
other regions across levels of development, the pattern among our sample follows that seen in
other regions for agriculture and services—that is, the agricultural employment share is decreasing
in income, while the services employment share is increasing in income. Second, when the levels of
employment shares are compared to the levels observed in other countries, the levels of employment
shares in agriculture and services approximate the levels observed in other countries at similar levels
of income. Third, all of this holds for industry and manufacturing in the eight low-income African
countries. Fourth, in Botswana, Mauritius, and South Africa, the patterns in industry are similar
but the levels differ, and in the case of manufacturing, the relationship between income and
employment shares follows more of an upward sloping line than an inverted U-shape. Fifth, Africa
is still, by far, one of the poorest regions of the world. And finally, structural change continues to
remain a potent source of labor productivity growth in much of SSA.
There are a number of reasons to believe that structural change might have been delayed
in much of Africa, and it is only relatively recently that much of Africa has begun to grow rapidly.
Part of this had to do with the rise in commodity prices that began in the early 2000s, though Africa
is also starting to reap the benefits of economic reforms and improved governance. For example,
three of the fastest-growing countries in Africa—Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Tanzania—continue to
grow rapidly despite the decline in commodity prices. In fact, according to the World Economic
Outlook 2016 published by the IMF economic growth in Africa in 2015 only slowed down in a
handful of oil exporters and is expected to rebound by 2021. To explore the nature of Africa’s
19

recent growth, we investigate structural change in Africa, including the most recent period in
history for which data are available: 2000–2010. This most recent period is important because it
was during this time that Africa experienced the strongest growth in four decades. The key question
is whether this growth was accompanied by labor productivity growth and structural change.
III. PATTERNS OF STRUCTURAL CHANGE ACROSS REGIONS AND COUNTRIES
This section begins by describing the methodology used to measure structural change. This
is followed by a description of patterns of structural change across the following country groupings
for 1990–1999 and for 2000–2010: Africa, Asia, and Latin America and the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. The section concludes with a
discussion of the heterogeneous experiences across the African continent.
Measuring Structural Change
Labor productivity growth can be achieved in one of two ways. First, productivity can grow
within existing economic activities through capital accumulation or technological change. Second,
labor can move from low-productivity to high-productivity activities, increasing overall labor
productivity in the economy. This can be expressed using the following decomposition:
∆Pt =

∑θ

i ,t − k ∆pi ,t

i =n

+

∑p

i ,t ∆θ i ,t

,

(1)

i =n

where Pt and pi ,t refer to economywide and sectoral labor productivity levels, respectively, and

θ i,t is the share of employment in sector i. The Δ operator denotes the change in productivity or
employment shares between t–k and t. The first term in the decomposition is the weighted sum of
productivity growth within individual sectors, where the weights are the employment share of each
sector at the beginning of the period. Following McMillan and Rodrik (2011), we call this the
“within” component of productivity growth. The second term captures the productivity effect of
labor reallocations across different sectors. It is essentially the inner product of productivity levels
20

(at the end of the period), with the change in employment shares across sectors. When changes in
employment shares are positively correlated with productivity levels, this term will be positive.
Structural change will increase economywide productivity growth. Also following McMillan and
Rodrik (2011), we call this second term the “structural change” term.
The second term in equation (1) could be further decomposed into a static and dynamic
component of structural change, as in de Vries, Timmer and de Vries (2015). As in McMillan and
Rodrik (2011), we choose not to do this because the dynamic structural change component of the
structural change term is often negative but difficult to interpret. For example, when agricultural
productivity growth is positive and the labor share in agriculture is falling, the term is negative,
even though, on average, the movement of workers out of agriculture to other more productive
sectors of the economy makes a positive contribution to structural change and economywide labor
productivity growth. Moreover, structural change is, by its very nature, a dynamic phenomenon;
thus, we find it counterintuitive to label a part of structural change static.
The decomposition we use clarifies how partial analyses of productivity performance
within individual sectors (for example, manufacturing) can be misleading when there are large
differences in labor productivities ( pi ,t ) across economic activities. In particular, a high rate of
productivity growth within a sector can have quite ambiguous implications for overall economic
performance if the sector’s share of employment shrinks rather than expands. If the displaced labor
ends up in activities with lower productivity, economywide growth will suffer and may even turn
negative.
This decomposition can be used to study broad patterns of structural change within a
country and across countries. An example of this type of analysis can be found in McMillan and
Rodrik (2011). Individual components of the decomposition such as labor shares and within-sector
changes in productivity can also be used at the country level to dig deeper into where structural
change is or is not taking place and to gain a deeper understanding of the country-specific factors
that drive structural change. For example, if we know that the expansion of manufacturing is a
21

characteristic of structural change in a particular country, we could use more detailed data on
manufacturing to pinpoint which specific industries expanded, how many people were employed,
and whether specific events or policies contributed to the expansion or contraction of a particular
sector. For country-specific analyses of this type, refer to Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth:
A Framework and Country Studies (forthcoming), edited by McMillan, Rodrik, and Sepulveda.
Structural Change in Africa in Comparison to Latin America and Asia
The previous discussion indicated that the distribution of employment levels across sectors
in our Africa sample are fairly similar to what would be “expected” based on current levels of
income. We now investigate the changes in employment shares within African countries and the
effect of those changes on economywide labor productivity. The analysis begins using the
GGDC sample, breaking the period into two: 1990–1999 and 2000–2010. As previously noted,
the early 1990s in Africa were still a period of adjustment. The period starting around 2000 marks
the beginning of a rapid acceleration in growth rates across much of the continent.
Table 6 presents the central findings on patterns of structural change for 1990–1999 and
2000–2010 for four groups of countries: Latin America, SSA, Asia, and high-income countries.
Results are presented by country for the Africa sample; weighted and unweighted averages for all
four groups of the countries appear in the bottom four panels of Table 6. The most striking result
is Africa’s turnaround. Between 1990 and 1999 and using the weighted average, structural change
was a drag on economywide labor productivity growth in Africa; this result is largely driven by
Nigeria and was a result of structural change in the wrong direction. From 2000 to 2010, however,
structural change contributed between 0.93 and 1.25 percentage points to economywide labor
productivity growth in Africa, depending on whether weighted or simple averages are used. If only
the eight low-income African countries are considered, structural change contributed 1.57
percentage points to economywide labor productivity growth. Moreover, overall labor productivity
growth in Africa was second only to Asia, where structural change continued to play a positive
22

role. The biggest difference between low-income Africa and Asia for 2000–2010 is that Asia
experienced significantly greater within-sector productivity growth.
[Insert Table 6 near here]
Of course, the country-specific results for Africa presented in Table 6 indicate a great deal
of heterogeneity across the countries in the sample. Between 2000 and 2010, economywide labor
productivity growth was highest in the low-income countries of Ethiopia, Nigeria, and Tanzania.
In all three of these countries, structural change was growth enhancing and was responsible for the
majority of labor productivity growth. By contrast, in the three richest countries in the Africa
sample—Botswana, South Africa, and Mauritius—labor productivity growth is almost exclusively
accounted for by within-sector productivity growth. This finding is not surprising given the
relatively low shares of agricultural employment in each of these three countries.
Like McMillan and Rodrik (2011), we find that structural change has made very little
contribution (positive or negative) to the overall growth in labor productivity in the high-income
countries in the sample. This result is as expected, because intersectoral productivity gaps tend to
diminish during the course of development. Even though many of these advanced economies have
experienced significant structural change during this period, with labor moving predominantly
from manufacturing to service industries, this (on its own) has made little difference to productivity
overall. What determines economywide performance in these economies is, by and large, how
productivity fares in each sector.
We can gain further insight into the results by looking at the sectoral details by region for
the developing countries in the sample. All numbers reported are simple averages across countries
in each of the four groups. The four panels of Figure 4 show changes in employment shares for
2000–2010, relative labor productivity for 2010, and initial employment shares by sector for 2000.
Sectors are generally ranked from highest to lowest employment share in 2000. Employment shares
in 2000 are denoted by triangles, and the value of the shares is noted on the right y-axis. Clearly,
countries in Africa started with the highest employment share in agriculture in 2000, at close to 60
23

percent for all of the African countries and 70 percent for the low-income African countries. The
next highest initial employment shares in agriculture were in Asia, at more than 40 percent, and in
Latin American, at less than 20 percent. By this measure, African countries clearly had (and still
have) the most to gain from structural change.
[Insert Figure 4 near here]
In all four country groups, the share of employment in agriculture fell, with the decline
greatest in low-income Africa, at 9.3 percent. The manufacturing employment share only increased
in the low-income African countries, while it actually fell in the developing Asian countries and in
Latin America. In all African countries, an examination of the purple diamonds indicates that
average labor productivity in the sectors where employment is expanding was higher than average
labor productivity in agriculture. Indeed, this is what drives the growth decomposition results
presented in Table 6. However, the expansion of the employment share in trade services is largest.
Although this sector’s average productivity is currently higher than that in agriculture, it is not clear
that this gap will be maintained if more and more workers shift into this sector. Also, in all African
countries, relative labor productivity in mining and utilities is extremely high. However, these
sectors are highly capital intensive and unable to absorb large numbers of workers, which can be
seen by examining the employment shares in 2000 by sector as denoted by the red diamonds.
So far, this analysis has revealed that structural change became growth enhancing in Africa during
2000–2010 and that, with the exception of manufacturing, the analysis for the other three regions
remains largely similar to results presented in McMillan and Rodrik (2011). For the 11 African
countries in the GGDC sample, annual labor productivity grew by an (unweighted) average of 2.82
percent, and structural change contributed an (unweighted) average of 1.13 percentage points to
overall labor productivity growth. Put differently, from 2000 to 2010, structural change accounted
for 40 percent of Africa’s annual labor productivity growth. This positive contribution of structural
change to economywide growth paints a somewhat more optimistic picture of growth in Africa
than did the results in McMillan and Rodrik (2011) and are more consistent with the results in
24

McMillan, Rodrik, and Verduzco-Gallo (2014). The remaining sections of this paper dig into the
robustness of these results using an alternative source of data for employment shares—the
Demographic and Health Surveys. The paper then turns to a discussion of the broader implications
of the results presented here.
IV. USING THE DHS TO UNDERSTAND STRUCTURAL CHANGE
Our first objective in this section of the paper is to use the DHS data to check the
robustness of the results we obtained on changes in employment shares in the previous section of
the paper. There are 8 countries included in both the GGDC dataset and the DHS dataset. In
addition, since structural change should be most pronounced in countries with the highest share
of the labor force in agriculture and because these are almost always the poorest countries using
the DHS has the added advantage of giving us a window into what is happening in the very poor
African countries. The statistics in Table 3 confirm that the GGDC sample is biased toward the
richer countries in Africa. Thus, to incorporate more of the poorer African countries into this
analysis, we turn to the DHS. This section explains both the advantages and the limitations of the
DHS and then provides an analysis.
The DHS Data
Although the DHS is not designed as a labor force survey, it does contain a module on
employment status and occupation for women and men between the ages of 15 and 59. Because
information on men is not provided for all DHS countries and survey rounds, this paper only uses
surveys that include both women and men. Appendix Table A.1 provides a list of the surveys, by
country, used in this analysis. In total, the sample contains information for about 750,000 women
and 250,000 men. Because the samples are nationally representative, they include employment in
both formal and informal sectors. The data do not appear to be well suited to making this
distinction because many of the questions that could be used to do this were left unanswered.

25

An advantage of the DHS for analyzing determinants and trends of occupation types across
countries and over time is that the design and coding of variables (especially those on type of
occupation, educational achievements, household assets, and dwelling characteristics) are generally
comparable across countries and survey rounds (see Appendix Table A.2 for a list of questions by
survey round). At the household level, the DHS provides information on household
socioeconomic characteristics, household structure, and family composition, enabling analysis of
the distribution and determinants of occupation types by socioeconomic characteristics and of
changes in the distribution over time. Note that this does not mean the original DHS files do not
contain “recode” errors; we corrected these kinds of errors, and details of this procedure are
available upon request.
A second and important advantage of the DHS data is that in addition to an individual’s
occupation, the data contain information on the individual’s gender, age, educational status, and
location. Thus, for example, the data enable an examination of changes in occupational status by
location, gender, age, and educational status. A disadvantage of DHS data is that household income
and expenditures are not included, though available information on household assets can be used
to construct an asset index to proxy for individual or household welfare. In addition, measures of
nutrition, health, and education can be combined with information on assets to gain a more
complete measure of well-being.
This paper restricts the sample to African countries for which at least two DHS surveys are
available, allowing us to analyze trends over time. The large coverage of countries and survey years
leaves a sample size of 24 African countries, capturing the period from 1998 to 2014. As was done
to check the representativeness of the GGDC sample in Section 2, we compare the countries in
the DHS sample to all countries in Africa to assess the bias in the DHS sample. The results of this
analysis are presented in column (3) of Table 3. A comparison of average infant mortality rates and
education levels shows no statistical difference between the countries in the DHS sample and the
rest of SSA. However, the countries in the DHS sample have an average level of GDP per capita
26

that is significantly lower than the overall average for Africa, which is not surprising in that the
DHS are funded by the United States Agency for International Development and that the mandate
is to focus on the poorest countries in the world.
As noted by Young (2012), the raw DHS files include coding errors; therefore the data need
to be examined on a country-by-country basis to ensure accuracy. The most glaring coding error
was for Mali in 2006, when agricultural workers were accidentally classified as military workers.
Coding errors such as this indicate that it is not a good idea to take the aggregate statistics provided
by DHS on the Internet at face value. It also explains why, for example, some researchers have
found the aggregate data on occupational shares published on the website to be unreliable. A
detailed description of the way in which we arrived at our final sample is available upon request.
To assign individuals to occupational categories, we rely on the question on occupation for
women and men. The DHS provides a grouped occupation variable that relies on the question that
asks what the respondent mainly does for work. 16 The DHS sorts respondent responses into one
of eight categories: (1) not working, (2) professional/technical/managerial/clerical; (3) sales, (4)
agricultural (self-employed), (5) agricultural (employee), (6) household and domestic services, (7)
skilled manual, and (8) unskilled manual. For this paper, we adjust these categories in the following
ways. We combine categories (4) and (5) are into a group called “agricultural occupation.” We
would have liked to separate these two variables but there were not enough surveys in which this
type of information was collected. We combine categories (3) and (6) into a group called “services.”
We combine categories (7) and (8) into a group called “industry.” We retain category (2) in its’
original form and rename it “professional”. Finally, we retain category (1) in its original form only
for adults 25 and older and split this category into “in school” and “not working,” for youth aged
15-24 years. Thus in total, we have five occupational categories for adults: agriculture, services,

16

Variable v717: “What is your occupation, that is, what kind of work do you mainly do?”

27

industry, professional and not working, plus a sixth category of “in school” for youth (those aged
15–24 years).
Changes in Occupational Shares over Time and across Countries in Africa
This first goal in this subsection is to check whether the changes in employment shares
reported in Section 3 are also apparent in the DHS data. To this end, we compare changes in
employment shares in agriculture as reported in the GGDC data with changes in employment
shares in agriculture in the DHS data for the eight countries for which the samples overlap. These
countries are Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, and Zambia. Because
the GGDC data are annual, the agricultural employment share from the GGDC is matched to the
exact survey year in the DHS. For example, the DHS surveys in Kenya were conducted in 1998
and 2009; the agricultural employment shares in these two years are paired with the GGDC
agricultural employment shares for 1998 and 2009. Figure 5 presents the results of this analysis.
[Insert Figure 5 near here]
Because the DHS occupational categories do not correspond directly to those reported by
the GGDC (except for agriculture), this analysis of the DHS data begins by focusing on the share
of the population engaged in agriculture. Table 7 shows, by country, period, and gender, the
percentage of the population who report that their primary occupation is agriculture. Since the
DHS were done in waves but in different years for different countries, the period is broken into
two intervals that correspond roughly to Waves 3 and 4 (1998–2005) and Waves 5 and 6 (2006–
2014). This analysis focuses on the latter period because this is when growth in Africa picked up;
therefore, we expect to see the most significant declines in agricultural employment shares during
this time. In the rare event that two surveys were conducted in one of the subperiods, the
employment shares represent a simple average across survey years. Results are broken out by
gender because women often report that they are not working. In addition, this exercise focuses
on workers age 25 and older to avoid confounding the results with children who may be in school.
[Insert Table 7 near here]
28

We begin by drawing the reader’s attention to the averages at the bottom of Table 7. Average
1 at the bottom of Table 7 is the unweighted average; Average 2 is the labor force weighted average
across countries. This discussion focuses on the labor force weighted averages, or Average 2. For
the males and females combined, the share of respondents who reported that their primary
occupation is agriculture fell from around 61 percent to 51 percent, a decline of roughly 10
percentage points. This finding is similar to the percentage point decline in the share of population
working in agriculture in the low-income African countries in the GGDC sample (9.3 percentage
points). Interestingly, this decline was more pronounced for women than for men. Thus, we can
conclude, with some degree of confidence, that there has been a significant decline in the share of
the labor force engaged in agriculture in Africa starting around 2000.
The second thing made clear by Table 7 is the enormous cross-country heterogeneity in
employment shares in agriculture and in changes in employment shares in agriculture. For example,
focusing on the most recent period (2006–2014), the share of females engaged in agriculture in
Rwanda was 80.8 percent, while the share of females engaged in agriculture in Namibia was only
3.0 percent. The differences are equally striking for males; the share of the male population working
in agriculture was 74.0 percent in Ethiopia while it was only 9.7 percent in Namibia. Although in
almost all countries the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture fell, in Madagascar, the share
of the labor force engaged in agriculture increased for both women and men. This increase in
Madagascar is consistent with the increase in poverty in Madagascar over the same period, as
pointed out by Arndt, McKay, and Tarp (2016). Although not the central focus of this paper, it is
worth noting that the cross-country heterogeneity has important policy implications, some of
which have been described in recent work by Dercon and Gollin (2014).
There is also significant heterogeneity across subgroups of the population. Figure 6 shows
the average 10-year change in employment shares in selected occupations based on the DHS data.
As previously noted, the occupations are grouped into the following categories: agriculture,
services, professional, industry, and not working. For youth, there is the additional category of “in
29

school.” Agriculture includes subsistence farmers and commercial farmers. Unfortunately, details
about occupations are not provided on a consistent enough basis to create more disaggregated
occupation codes. Services include, but are not limited to, secretaries and typists, sales clerks, street
vendors, drivers, and traditional healers. Professional occupations include, but are not limited to,
business owners, engineers, financiers, teachers, doctors, health professionals, lawyers, and civil
servants. Industry includes skilled and unskilled manual labor. Unskilled manual labor includes, but
is not limited to, garbage collectors, construction workers, and factory workers. Skilled manual
labor includes, but is not limited to, masons, mechanics, blacksmiths, telephone installers, and
tailors.
Figure 6 shows the average 10-year change in the share of the population working in each
occupation by population subgroup. Because the interval between countries varies and because
this analysis describes general trends, the following procedure is used to obtain estimates of the 10year change in employment shares: For each country and occupation, we compute the change in
the employment share between the first survey year and the last survey year. We then divide this
change by the number of years to get an annual change in the employment share for each country
and occupation subgroup. We then multiply these annual changes by 10 to get the average 10-year
change in employment shares by country and occupation subgroup. To create the average across
countries, we compute a labor force weighted average of the 10-year changes for each occupation
subgroup. The results in Figure 6 are presented separately for females and males by age group.
Within these groups, results are presented for both rural and urban dwellers. In each panel of the
figure, urban is shaded in red diagonals, rural is shaded in blue vertical lines, and the total change
in the predicted employment share is denoted with a dashed line with black diamonds.
[Insert Figure 6 near here]
The patterns that emerge are generally consistent with the patterns presented in Figure 4 (b),
with additional nuances for population subgroups. For example, there is a decline in employment
shares in agriculture for men and women age 25 and older; the decline is larger for females than
30

for males. In addition, and not surprisingly, the biggest declines occurred in rural areas. A second
pattern that emerges and that is consistent with the results in Figure 4 (b) is an overall increase in
the predicted share of employment in services, including professional services. One of the most
interesting patterns in the figure is the fairly large increase in the share of rural youth in school.
Although it is fairly well established that more children are going to school in many African
countries, as primary school enrollment rates have been going up in many countries in Africa, the
less well-known fact documented here is that this is not just an urban phenomenon.
Finally, Figure 7 shows changes in agricultural employment shares by educational status,
gender, and location for the population age 25–59. The left axis and the blue bars show changes in
employment shares, while the red dotted line and the right axis show initial employment shares.
All values reported are labor force weighted averages; the procedure for obtaining the 10-year
average is the same procedure used to obtain the results in Figure 7. All four panels show that the
employment share in agriculture is highest among the cohort of the population with no education.
Employment shares in agriculture declined the most among rural females with a primary education
(–12.11 percent). However, the decline was also pronounced for rural females with no education
(–10.34 percent). Not surprisingly, there was very little movement in employment shares in
agriculture among urban males.
[Insert Figure 7 near here]
V. CONCLUSION
Africa has been largely absent from empirical work on structural change. This paper aims
to fill that gap. It begins by documenting a number of stylized facts. First, recent patterns of
employment shares in Africa appear to fit the stylized facts of other the historical development in
other regions. In other words, controlling for income, the quantitative patterns of employment
shares in Africa are roughly what would be expected based on what has transpired elsewhere.
Second, between 2000 and 2010, structural change contributed 1.57 percentage points annual labor
31

productivity growth in Africa in low-income African countries. Moreover, overall labor
productivity growth in Africa was second only to Asia, where structural change continued to play
an important positive role. There is, however, an important difference between the two regions:
the share of employment in manufacturing in developing Asian countries is more than double the
share of employment in manufacturing in low-income African countries.
As in other developing regions, structural change in SSA has been characterized by a
significant decline in the share of the labor force engaged in agriculture. This is a positive
development, because agriculture has been, on average, the least productive sector in the economies
of Africa. However, unlike other developing regions, structural change in Africa has not yet been
accompanied by a significant expansion in the share of the labor force employed in manufacturing.
Instead, the reduction in the employment share in agriculture has been matched by a sizable
increase in the share of the labor force engaged in services and a modest increase in the
manufacturing sector employment in low-income African countries. These stylized facts are robust
to alternative data sources. In particular, data from the DHS are used to check our estimates of
changes in employment shares; similar patterns were found.
These results point to reasons for the real income growth in many African countries south
of the Sahara and for the poverty reduction documented by Sala-i-Martin and Pinkovskiy (2010),
Young (2012), McKay (2013), and Page and Shimeles (2014). However, it is important to recognize
that unlike in East Asia, the employment share in manufacturing is not expanding rapidly in Africa.
In East Asia’s economies, the rapid expansion of labor-intensive manufacturing for export
accelerated structural change–led growth. Although manufacturing has an important role to play
in the economies of Africa, it seems unlikely that it will play the same role in Africa’s economies
that it played in East Asia’s economies. This is not necessarily bad news; it simply highlights the
importance of investing in things like human capital and infrastructure, which can raise productivity
levels in all sectors of the economy.

32

REFERENCES
Arndt, C., A. McKay, and F. Tarp. 2016. “Two Cheers for the African Growth Renaissance (but
not Three).” In Growth and Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa, edited by C. Arndt, A. McKay, and
T. Finn, 11–40. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Chenery, H. B., and L. Taylor. 1968, August. “Development Patterns among Countries and Over
Time.” Review of Economics and Statistics 50 (4): 966–1006.
Devarajan, S. 2013, October. “Africa’s Statistical Tragedy.” Review of Income and Wealth 59 (special
issue): S9–S15.
Dercon, S., and D. Gollin. 2014. “Agriculture in African Development: A Review of Theories and
Strategies.” Annual Review of Resource Economics 6: 471-492
de Vries, G. J, M. P. Timmer, and K. de Vries. 2015. “Structural Transformation in Africa: Static
Gains, Dynamic Losses.” The Journal of Development Studies 51(6): 674-688.
Duarte, M., and D. Restuccia. 2010. “The Role of the Structural Transformation in Aggregate
Productivity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 129–173.
Easterly, W. 2001. The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
The Economist. “Hopeless Africa.” May 11, 2000. http://www.economist.com/node/333429.
Accessed on April 11, 2015.
Fund, International Monetary. October 2016. World economic outlook. Washington: International
Monetary Fund.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh. 2014. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129 (2): 939–993.
33

Harttgen, K., S. Klasen, and S. Vollmer. 2013. “An African Growth Miracle? Or: What Do Asset
Indices Tell Us about Trends in Economic Performance?” Review of Income and Wealth
October; 59 (Special Issue): S37:S60.
Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and Á. Valentinyi. 2014. “Growth and Structural Transformation.”
In Aghion and Durlauf (eds). Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2: 855-941, Amsterdam,
Netherlands: North-Holland.
ICF International. 2016. The DHS Program: Demographic and Health Surveys. Download of
datasets from: http://dhsprogram.com/data/. Accessed on April 11, 2016
Jerven, M., and D. Johnston. 2015. “Statistical Tragedy in Africa? Evaluating the Data Base for
African Economic Development.” Journal of Development Studies 51(2): 111–115.
Lewis, A. W. 1955. The Theory of Economic Growth. London: Allen and Unwin.
Maddison, A. 2010. Statistics on World Population, GDP, and Per Capita GDP, 1-2008 AD.
Groningen:

University

of

Groningen.

Download

of

datasets

from

http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/oriindex.htm. Accessed on June 11, 2016
McCullough, E.B., 2015. Labor productivity and employment gaps in Sub-Saharan Africa. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7234).
McKay, A. 2013. “Growth and Poverty Reduction in Africa in the Last Two Decades: Evidence
from an AERC Growth-Poverty Project and Beyond.” Journal of African Economies 22 (suppl.
1): i49–i76.
McMillan, M., and D. Rodrik. 2011. “Globalization, Structural Change, and Productivity Growth.”
In Making Globalization Socially Sustainable, edited by M. Bachetta and M. Jansen. Geneva:
International Labour Organization and World Trade Organization.

34

McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and C. Sepulveda, eds. Forthcoming. Structural Change, Fundamentals, and
Growth: A Framework and Country Studies. Washington, DC: International Food Policy
Research Institute.
McMillan M., D. Rodrik, and I. Verduzco-Gallo. 2014. “Globalization, Structural Change, and
Productivity Growth, with an Update on Africa.” World Development November; 63: 11-32.
Mundlak, Y., R. Butzer, and D. F. Larson. 2012. “Heterogeneous Technology and Panel Data: The
Case of the Agricultural Production Function.” Journal of Development Economics 99(1): 139149.
National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Finance, and Office of Chief Government Statistician,
Ministry of State, President’s Office, State House and Good Governance, Tanzania. 2014d.
“Tanzania 2012 Census: Basic Demographic and Socio-Economic Profile,” Dar es Salaam
and Zanzibar, Tanzania, April 2014.
Page, J., and A. Shimeles. 2014. Aid, Employment, and Poverty Reduction in Africa. WIDER Working
Paper 2014/043. Helsinki: UN University World Institute for Development Economics
Research.
Resnick, D., and J. Thurlow. Forthcoming. “The Political Economy of Zambia’s Recovery:
Structural Change without Transformation?” In McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and C. Sepúlveda
(eds) Structural Change, Fundamentals, and Growth, Chapter 6. Washington DC: International
Food Policy Research Institute
Rodrik, D. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth March; 21(1): 1-33
Sala-i-Martin, X., and M. Pinkovskiy. 2010. African Poverty Is Falling . . . Much Faster Than You Think!
NBER Working Paper 15775. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

35

Timmer, M. P., and G. J. de Vries. 2007. A Cross-Country Database for Sectoral Employment and
Productivity in Asia and Latin America, 1950–2005. Gronigen Growth and Development
Centre Research Memorandum 98. Gronigen, Netherlands: University of Gronigen.
———. 2009. “Structural Change and Growth Accelerations in Asia and Latin America: A New
Sectoral Data Set.” Cliometrica 3 (2): 165–190.
Timmer, M. P., G. J. de Vries, and K. de Vries. 2015. Patterns of Structural Change in Developing
Countries. . In J. Weiss, & M. Tribe (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Industry and Development.
(pp. 65-83). Routledge.
World

Bank.

2016.

World

Development

Indicators.

Download

of

dataset

from

http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=world-developmentindicators. Accessed on April 11, 2016
Young, A. 2012, August. “The African Growth Miracle.” Journal of Political Economy 120: 696–739.

36

FIGURE 1. Employment Shares by Main Economic Sector, Africa 1960-2010
Agriculture

Industry

50

90

Rest of Africa

Mauritius

80

South Africa

Botswana

40

Employment share (%)

Employment share (%)

100

70
60
50
40
30
20

Rest of Africa

Mauritius

South Africa

Botswana

30

20

10

10
0

0
6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

6.0

Services

70
Rest of Africa

Mauritius

South Africa

Botswana

7.0
8.0
9.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

50
40
30
20

10.0

Manufacturing

40

Employment share (%)

60

Employment share (%)

10.0

Rest of Africa

Mauritius

South Africa

Botswana

30

20

10

10
0

0
6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

10.0

6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

Sources: Maddison (2010) GDP version 2013; GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: For estimation results, see Table 4. GGDC Africa sample includes Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Zambia.

37

10.0

FIGURE 2. Employment Shares in Africa Compared with Non-Africa Sample, 1960-2010
Agriculture

100

Industry

60

90
Non-Africa

50

Africa

Employment share (%)

Employment share (%)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

Non-Africa

Africa

40
30
20
10

10
0

0
6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

6.0

Services

90

7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

11.0

Manufacturing

50

Non-Africa Africa

80

Non-Africa

40

70

Employment share (%)

Employment share (%)

11.0

60
50
40
30
20

Africa

30

20

10

10
0

0
6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

11.0

6.0

7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Log GDP per capita, 1990 international $

Sources: Maddison (2010) GDP version (2013); GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’
calculations.
Note: For estimation results, see Table 4. GGDC full sample includes 39 countries (see Table 1 for the list of the countries).

38

11.0

Sector-relative labor productivity, the economywide
labor productivity = 100

FIGURE 3. Labor Productivity Gaps in Africa, 2010

1,600
1,400

Agriculture

Personal services

Trade services

Construction

Manufacturing

Transport services

Business services

Utilities

Mining

1,681

1,200
1,000
800

484

600

422
325

400
200

162 171

111

69

35
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Share of total employment (%)

Source: GGDC datasets (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: The sector-relative labor productivity and sector share of employment are calculated using the weighted average for the
region; the country data is in 2005 purchasing power parity dollars. The total employment considers only the employment in
the private sector.

39

FIGURE 4. Relative labor productivity (2010), employment shares (2000), and change in employment shares (2000–2010)
(a) SSA all countries

(b) SSA low-income countries
70

70
20.0

20.0
Change in employment share in 2000-10

Change in employment share in 2000-10

Employment share in 2000
50

11.0
40

8.0
5.0

30
2.0

17.0

20

-1.0
-4.0

10
-7.0
-10.0

0

14.0

Relative Lprody
Employment share in 2000

50
11.0
40

8.0
5.0

30
2.0
20

-1.0
-4.0

10
-7.0
-10.0

(c) Asian developing countries

0

(d) Latin America
70

70

20.0

20.0

14.0

Employment share in 2000

60

50
11.0
40

5.0
30
2.0
-1.0

20

-4.0
10
-7.0
-10.0

0

17.0

Relative Lprody

14.0

Employment share in 2000

60

50
11.0
8.0

40

5.0
30
2.0
-1.0

Employment share in 2000 (%)

Relative Lprody

Change in employment share (%) & Relative Lprody
(Economywide Lprody = 1)

17.0

Change in employment share in 2000-10

Employment share in 2000 (%)

Change in employment share (%) & Relative Lprody
(Economywide Lprody = 1)

Change in employment share in 2000-10

8.0

60

Employment share in 2000 (%)

60

Change in employment share (%) & Relative Lprody
(Economywide Lprody = 1)

14.0

Relative Lprody

Employment share in 2000 (%)

Change in employment share (%) & Relative Lprody
(Economywide Lprody = 1)

17.0

20

-4.0
10
-7.0
-10.0

0

Source: GGDC datasets (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Notes: SSA = Africa south of the Sahara; Lprody = labor productivity. (1) For part (a), SSA all countries includes Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, South
Africa, Tanzania, and Zambia. For part (b), SSA low-income countries excludes Botswana, Mauritius, and South Africa. For part (c), Asian developing countries includes China, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand. For part (d), Latin America includes Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela. (2) Relative Lprody means sector

40

labor productivity divided by economywide labor productivity. (3) In 2010, the economywide labor productivity averaged $10,342 for SSA all countries, $6,006 for SSA low-income countries, $13,416
for Asian developing countries, and $28,088 for Latin American countries (all measured by 2005 purchasing power parity dollars). The simple average is used in the calculation in the figure.

41

FIGURE 5. Comparison of Changes in Agriculture Employment Shares: GGDC versus DHS

0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
-16
GGDC, post 2000
DHS, post 2000
-18
Source: GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015) and DHS datasets (ICF International 2016); authors’
calculations.
Note: Because the GGDC data are annual, the data for the survey years in the relevant DHS country are
matched to the corresponding year in the GGDC dataset.

42

FIGURE 6. Average Change in the Probability of Working in Selected Occupation Types
10-year change in occupation, Women (age 25+)

10-year change in occupation, Men (age 25+)

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.00

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06
Urban

Rural

Urban

Total

-0.08

Rural

Total

-0.08

-0.10

-0.10
Agriculture

Service

Professional

Industry

Not working

Agriculture

10-year change in occupation, Women (age 15-24)
0.10

Service

Professional

Industry

Not working

10-year change in occupation, Men (age 15-24)
0.10

0.08
0.05

0.06
0.04

0.00

0.02
0.00

-0.05

-0.02
-0.04

Urban

Rural

Total

Urban

-0.10

Rural

Total

-0.06
-0.08

-0.15
Agriculture

Service

Professional

Industry

In school

Not working

Agriculture

Service

Professional

Industry

In school

Not working

Source: DHS datasets (ICF International 2016 r); authors’ calculations.
Note: Subsample of all male and female (aged 25 plus and 15-24, respectively) agricultural workers who currently are not
attending school. Results are based on annual averages obtained from country-specific data for 1998–2005 and 2006–2014, which
are then multiplied by 10 to get the average 10-year change in employment shares.

43

FIGURE 7. Agricultural Employment Share (%) by Level of Education for Population Age 25–59,
1998–2005 and 2006–2014

80
-2.5

70
60

-5.0

50
-7.5

40
30

-10.0

20
-12.5

Ag. employment share in 1998-2005 (%)

Share in 1998-2005

0.0

10
-15.0

0
Primary

80
-2.5

70
60

-5.0

50
-7.5

40
30

-10.0

20
-12.5
10
-15.0

0
No education

Secondary or higher

80
-2.5

70
60

-5.0

50
-7.5

40
30

-10.0

20
-12.5

Ag. employment share in 1998-2005 (%)

Share in 1998-2005

10
-15.0

0
Primary

Change in employment share between 19982005 and 2006-2014 (%)

Change in employment share between 19982005 and 2006-2014 (%)

Change in share

0.0

No education

Primary

Secondary or higher

Urban male

Urban female
Change in share

Share in 1998-2005

0.0

Share in 1998-2005

0.0
80
-2.5

70
60

-5.0

50
-7.5

40
30

-10.0

20
-12.5
10
-15.0

0
No education

Secondary or higher

Primary

Secondary or higher

Source: DHS datasets (ICF International 2016); authors’ calculations.
Notes: Results are based on annual averages obtained from country-specific data for 1998–2005 and 2006–2014, which are
then multiplied by 10 to get the average 10-year change in employment shares. Weighted averages are computed using the size
of each country’s labor force.

44

Ag. employment share in 1998-2005 (%)

No education

Change in employment share between 19982005 and 2006-2014 (%)

Change in employment share between 19982005 and 2006-2014 (%)

Change in share

Change in share

Ag. employment share in 1998-2005 (%)

Rural male

Rural female

TABLE 1. Summary Statistics
Sector with highest labor productivity

High Income
United States
Netherlands
United Kingdom
Japan
France
Sweden
Italy
Denmark
Spain
Asia
Singapore
Hong Kong
Taiwan
South Korea
Malaysia
Thailand
Philippines
China
Indonesia
India
Latin America
Brazil
Chile
Venezuela
Mexico
Argentina
Costa Rica
Colombia
Peru
Bolivia
Africa
Botswana
South Africa
Mauritius
Nigeria
Ghana
Senegal
Kenya
Zambia
Tanzania
Malawi
Ethiopia

Sector with lowest labor
productivity

Code

Economywide
labor
productivity

Coef. of
variation of
log of
sectoral
productivity

Sector

Labor
productivity

Sector

Labor
productivity

Annual
growth rate of
economywide
productivity
(%)

USA
NLD
GBR
JPN
FRA
SWE
ITA
DNK
ESP

83.2
53.1
52.9
52.2
49.2
47.2
45.2
44.8
41.8

0.065
0.108
0.086
0.061
0.047
0.060
0.094
0.118
0.063

Utilities
Mining
Mining
Utilities
Utilities
Utilities
Utilities
Mining
Utilities

367.0
1745.8
603.3
197.9
157.4
223.0
220.0
1787.5
222.4

Personal services
Personal services
Agriculture
Agriculture
Business services
Business services
Business services
Business services
Business services

52.3
28.5
26.5
16.1
20.7
31.6
5.2
17.9
16.7

1.68
1.41
1.59
1.17
1.01
3.44
–0.79
0.28
0.30

SGP
HKG
TWN
KOR
MYS
THA
PHL
CHN
IDN
IND

81.3
64.3
52.0
37.7
29.2
11.8
7.8
7.4
7.0
5.1

0.090
0.084
0.092
0.085
0.125
0.155
0.115
0.127
0.118
0.107

Utilities
Utilities
Mining
Utilities
Mining
Mining
Utilities
Utilities
Mining
Utilities

274.9
465.6
473.6
304.0
1063.5
305.5
79.7
48.1
102.6
40.7

Agriculture
Agriculture
Construction
Agriculture
Construction
Agriculture
Personal services
Personal services
Agriculture
Agriculture

13.4
20.2
17.0
18.0
10.7
2.7
2.5
1.4
2.3
1.7

–0.35
3.57
1.29
2.38
2.75
2.77
2.51
10.38
2.66
6.38

BRA
CHL
VEN
MEX
ARG
CRI
COL
PER
BOL

78.2
28.5
25.9
25.1
23.5
20.5
14.1
13.7
7.5

0.100
0.094
0.114
0.119
0.100
0.029
0.111
0.107
0.126

Utilities
Mining
Mining
Mining
Mining
Transport services
Utilities
Mining
Utilities

774.6
281.5
421.3
422.2
326.3
31.2
232.8
110.7
71.8

Personal services
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Personal services
Agriculture
Agriculture
Agriculture
Construction

25.0
13.1
10.5
6.2
9.3
12.5
6.1
3.8
2.8

0.88
1.85
–0.34
–0.51
1.75
1.77
1.27
3.73
0.77

BWA
ZAF
MUS
NGA
GHA
SEN
KEN
ZMB
TZA
MWI
ETH

29.9
23.9
22.1
5.0
4.6
4.0
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.2
1.4

0.126
0.091
0.061
0.243
0.091
0.161
0.114
0.173
0.163
0.124
0.148

Mining
Utilities
Utilities
Mining
Utilities
Utilities
Utilities
Utilities
Business services
Mining
Mining

418.8
96.8
83.0
1549.5
23.6
129.8
32.7
36.3
83.0
46.4
31.2

Agriculture
Agriculture
Personal services
Personal services
Trade services
Agriculture
Agriculture
Personal services
Personal services
Agriculture
Agriculture

1.9
4.3
12.3
0.8
2.6
1.3
1.6
0.3
0.5
1.0
0.8

2.68
2.57
2.87
3.81
2.59
1.24
1.09
3.00
4.37
2.23
5.07

Source: GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: All data used in this table come from GGDC. All productivity numbers are for average 2000–2010 and are in 2005
purchasing powering parity (PPP) $1,000.

45

TABLE 2. Sector Coverage

Sector
Agriculture
Mining
Manufacturing
Utilities

Average sector labor
productivity
14.9
311.2

Maximum sector labor
productivity
Labor
Country
productivity

Minimum sector labor
productivity
Labor
Country
productivity

United States

53.7

Ethiopia

0.66

1,787.5

Ethiopia

2.27

40.4

Denmark
Brazil

121.9

Ethiopia

1.72

155.5

Brazil

774.6

Nigeria

2.61

Construction

26.7

United States

69.5

Malawi

3.64

Trade services

25.7

Singapore

95.0

Ethiopia

2.59

Transport services

43.6

Brazil

138.9

Nigeria

2.54

Business services

42.8

United States

154.2

Nigeria

6.69

Government services

24.4

Brazil

126.0

Nigeria

1.32

Personal services

23.9

Hong Kong

114.5

Tanzania

0.33

Total economy
30.0
United States
83.2
Ethiopia
1.37
Source: GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: All data used in this table come from GGDC. All numbers are for average 2000–2010 and are measured in 2005 PPP
1,000 dollars. The average sector labor productivity is a simple average over all countries covered by GGDC datasets.

46

TABLE 3. Comparing this Paper’s Africa Sample to African Countries not in Sample
All SSA
(1)

GGDC
(2)

DHS
(3)

DHS + GGDC
(4)

GDP per capita, PPP (current international $)

4459.4
(6577.8)

5428.9*
(5255.4)

2668.8**
(3277.4)

3853.0
(4625.2)

Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)

60.38
(22.09)

46.88**
(16.33)

58.18
(13.71)

55.10
(16.19)

Years of schooling

5.257
(2.100)

6.880**
(2.299)

5.092
(1.942)

5.675
(2.346)

Years of primary schooling

3.711
(1.369)

4.791**
(1.310)

3.676
(1.385)

3.965*
(1.501)

Years of secondary schooling

1.469
(0.937)

2.006*
(1.308)

1.335
(0.804)

1.624*
(1.058)

Years of tertiary schooling

0.0759
(0.0645)

0.0844
(0.0611)

0.0805
(0.0792)

0.0825
(0.0746)

Agricultural raw material exports
(% of merchandise exports)

8.561
(13.59)

4.017**
(3.834)

10.94
(14.88)

9.674
(14.29)

Natural resource rents (% of GDP)

14.43
(14.81)

9.684**
(6.903)

13.03
(9.572)

12.14
(9.471)

100

51.84

71.43

77.62

Population % of Total Reported

Number of countries
46
11
24
27
Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank 2016); GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); DHS
datasets (ICF International 2016); authors’ calculations.
Note: All data in column (1) are from the 2015 version of World Development Indicators (World Bank 2016). Means are
reported with the standard deviation for the relevant sample in parentheses. ** and * indicate a difference in means between
the sample and the sample for all of SSA at the 99% and 95% levels, respectively. Years of schooling are for age 15+. There
are 48 countries in SSA, but no data for GDP per capita are available for Angola and Somalia in 2010. Thus, the means tests
are restricted to the remaining 46 countries in SSA. GGDC sample includes Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi,
Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Zambia. DHS sample includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Coteô d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Countries excluded from both GGDC and
DHS are Angola, Burundi, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of Congo, Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Lesotho, Mauritania, São Tomé and Principe, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Swaziland.

47

TABLE 4. Regression Results for Figure 1: GDP and Employment Shares, Africa Only
(1)

lngdp

(2)

Agriculture

(3)
Africa All
Services
Industry

–0.218***
(0.017)

0.153***
(0.014)

lngdp 2

(4)

(5)

Manufacturing

Agriculture

(6)
(7)
(8)
Africa rich vs. Africa poor
Services
Industry
Manufacturing

–0.201***
(0.038)

0.133***
(0.027)

–0.222***
(0.017)

0.158***
(0.014)

512
0.517

512
0.390

0.198***
(0.054)
–0.009**
(0.003)

–0.102**
(0.038)
0.009***
(0.002)

Lngdp x PoorAfrica
lngdp2 x PoorAfrica
Lngdp x RichAfrica
lngdp2 x RichAfrica

Observations
R-squared

512
0.517

512
0.388

512
0.359

512
0.211

0.631*
(0.329)
–0.041
(0.024)
0.210***
(0.049)
–0.009***
(0.003)
512
0.368

0.375**
(0.155)
–0.026**
(0.012)
–0.120*
(0.056)
0.010**
(0.003)
512
0.229

Sources: Maddison (2010) GDP version (2013); GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Industry includes manufacturing, mining,
construction, and public utilities.

TABLE 5. Regression Results for Figure 2: GDP and Employment Shares, Full Sample
(1)

lngdp

Agriculture

(2)
(3)
Africa vs. rest of world
Services
Industry

–0.176***
(0.014)

0.175***
(0.019)

–0.042*
(0.021)

–0.022
(0.023)

lngdp 2
Lngdp x Africa
lngdp2 x Africa

0.973***
(0.187)
–0.056***
(0.011)
–0.774***
(0.194)
0.047***
(0.011)

(4)
Manufacturing
0.757***
(0.166)
–0.045***
(0.010)
–0.858***
(0.170)
0.054***
(0.010)

Lngdp x AfricaPoor

(5)

(6)
(7)
(8)
Africa (Rich & poor vs. rest of world)
Agriculture Services
Industry
Manufacturing
–0.176***
(0.014)

0.175***
(0.019)

0.973***
(0.187)
–0.056***
(0.011)

0.757***
(0.167)
–0.045***
(0.010)

–0.025
(0.039)

–0.041
(0.032)

–0.046**
(0.022)

–0.017
(0.024)

–0.341
(0.368)
0.015
(0.026)
–0.763***
(0.193)
0.047***
(0.011)

–0.382
(0.229)
0.018
(0.015)
–0.877***
(0.175)
0.055***
(0.010)

1873
0.636

1873
0.586

1873
0.474

1873
0.424

lngdp2 x AfricaPoor
lngdp x AfricaRich
lngdp 2 x AfricaRich

Observations
R-squared

1873
0.636

1873
0.585

1873
0.473

1873
0.422

Source: Maddison GDP V. (2013). GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculations.
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Industry includes manufacturing, mining,
construction and public utilities.

48

TABLE 6. Decomposition of Labor Productivity Growth, 1990–2010 (Using GGDC Data)
1990–1999
Total

Within
sector

2000–2010
Structural
change

Total

Within
sector

Structural
change

Botswana

1.58

1.82

–0.25

2.17

2.81

–0.64

Ethiopia

0.17

–0.70

0.87

4.52

2.22

2.30

Ghana

3.20

2.53

0.67

2.68

2.07

0.61

Kenya

–1.65

–4.38

2.74

0.68

0.81

–0.13

Malawi

1.53

–0.22

1.75

1.67

–1.53

3.20

Mauritius
Nigeria
Senegal

3.47

2.42

1.05

3.41

2.91

0.50

–0.23

10.68

–10.91

4.59

–0.91

5.49

0.23

–0.74

0.97

1.11

–0.03

1.14

–0.57

–0.45

–0.12

2.90

2.92

–0.02

1.07

0.49

0.58

4.03

0.31

3.72

Zambia

–3.05

–1.87

–1.19

3.24

2.71

0.54

SSA weighted average
SSA weighted ave. excluding Nigeria

–0.40
0.67

0.68
0.00

–1.08
0.67

2.54
1.79

1.60
0.54

0.93
1.25

SSA simple average

0.52

0.25

0.27

2.82

1.69

1.13

Africa low-income, simple average

0.16

–1.13

0.28

2.81

1.24

1.57

South Africa
Tanzania

Africa high-income, simple average
1.49
1.26
0.23
2.83
2.88
–0.05
Asia weighted average
4.84
3.59
1.26
6.58
5.38
1.20
Asia simple average
3.98
3.20
0.79
3.37
2.97
0.39
LA weighted average
0.76
0.87
–0.11
1.61
1.18
0.44
LA simple average
0.91
0.77
0.15
0.08
0.01
0.07
High-income countries weighted ave.
1.46
1.32
0.13
1.23
1.26
–0.04
High-income countries simple ave.
1.54
1.64
–0.10
0.84
1.09
–0.25
Sources: GGDC dataset (Timmer, de Vries, and de Vries 2015); authors’ calculation. Employment data for Tanzania are
adjusted according to the 2012 census (National Bureau of Statistics 2014); data for Zambia are adjusted according to Resnick
and Thurlow (forthcoming).
Note: SSA = Africa south of the Sahara; LA = Latin America. The regional weighted averages are calculated using the
regional data for sector value-added and sector labor employment. The sector value-added data of GGDC are converted into
2005 purchasing power parity dollars. Because of the size of Nigeria, its effect on the SSA weighted average results is large
when Nigeria’s growth rate differs from other countries. Excluding Nigeria improves the departure of the simple average
results from the weighted average. Africa low-income countries include Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Senegal,
Tanzania, and Zambia, and high-income countries include Botswana, Mauritius, and South Africa.

49

TABLE 7. Percentage of Workers (age 25+) in Agriculture, DHS Africa
Female

Male

Combined

Country

1998–
2005

2006–
2014

1998–
2005

2006–
2014

1998–2005

2006–2014

Benin
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Côte d’Ivoire
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

0.334
0.668
0.577
0.505
0.589
0.205
0.373
0.609
0.499
0.326
0.688
0.667
0.431
0.786
0.108
0.387
0.242
0.888
0.244
0.767
0.358
0.772
0.557
0.392

0.331
0.586
0.390
0.336
0.467
0.086
0.325
0.552
0.399
0.197
0.711
0.551
0.466
0.613
0.030
0.253
0.195
0.808
0.194
0.688
0.288
0.707
0.454
0.285

0.587
0.720
0.529
0.486
0.842
0.180
0.513
0.594
0.376
0.290
0.665
0.550
0.656
0.624
0.165
0.719
0.381
0.675
0.291
0.701
0.555
0.640
0.534
0.163

0.498
0.669
0.391
0.487
0.740
0.068
0.441
0.536
0.347
0.422
0.729
0.461
0.630
0.447
0.097
0.539
0.342
0.652
0.248
0.607
0.388
0.693
0.471
0.295

0.461
0.694
0.553
0.496
0.715
0.193
0.443
0.602
0.438
0.308
0.677
0.609
0.543
0.705
0.137
0.553
0.336
0.782
0.268
0.734
0.457
0.706
0.546
0.278

0.414
0.628
0.391
0.411
0.604
0.077
0.383
0.544
0.373
0.310
0.720
0.506
0.548
0.530
0.063
0.396
0.287
0.730
0.221
0.648
0.338
0.700
0.462
0.290

Average 1: Unweighted average
0.510
0.422
0.524
0.473
0.517
0.447
Average 2: Weighted by total labor
force
0.593
0.492
0.616
0.558
0.605
0.507
Source: DHS datasets (ICF International 2016); authors’ calculations.
Note: All averages at the country level are computed using survey weights. Numbers shown are for a subsample of people aged
25 or older who reported to be currently working and not attending school. Average 1 is the average for countries that have
data for both genders for all periods. Average 2 is the column average for all countries weighted by the size of the labor force
population (average of period).

50

APPENDIX: SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES

TABLE A.1 DHS Countries and Years in Africa South of the Sahara in Sample
Country name

DHS survey years

Country name

DHS survey years

Benin
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Côte d’Ivoire
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar

2001, 2006, 2012
1998, 2003, 2010
1998, 2004, 2011
1998, 2011
2000, 2005, 2011
2000, 2012
1998, 2003, 2008
1999, 2005, 2012
1998, 2003, 2009
2004, 2009
2007, 2013
2004, 2009

Mali
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2001, 2006, 2013
2003, 2009, 2011
2000, 2007, 2013
1998, 2006, 2012
2003, 2008, 2013
2000, 2005, 2010, 2014
2005, 2011, 2014
1999, 2004, 2010
1998, 2013
2000, 2006, 2011
2001, 2007, 2014
1999, 2006, 2011

Malawi

2000, 2004, 2010

Source: DSH datasets (ICF International 2016)
Note: The sample is restricted to countries and survey years for which have information on occupation is available
for both women and men.

51

TABLE A.2 Questions on Occupation in the DHS Datasets by Survey Phases
DHS phase

Question for respondent (v716)

Question for partner (mv716)

Phase 2 (1988–1993)

What is (was) your (most recent)
occupation? That is, what kind of work do
(did) you do?

What is (was) your (most recent)
occupation? That is, what kind of work do
(did) you do?

Phase 3 (1992–1997)

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

Phase 4 (1997–2003)

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

Phase 5 (2003–2008)

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

Phase 6 (2008–2013)

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

Phase 7 (2013–2018)

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

What is your occupation, that is, what kind
of work do you mainly do?

Source: DHS datasets (ICF International 2016)
Note: v716: Respondent’s occupation as collected in the country. Codes are country specific. Base: Women who are currently working
or who have worked in the past 12 months (v731 = 1 or v731 = 2). v717: Standardized respondent’s occupation groups. Agricultural
categories also include fishermen, foresters, and hunters and are not the basis for selection of agricultural/nonagricultural workers. In
countries where it is not possible to differentiate between self-employed agricultural workers and agricultural employees, no attempt has
been made to use other information, and code 4 has been used for both categories.

52

