NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY AND SUPPORT FOR REDISTRIBUTION
Alberto Alesina
Stefanie Stantcheva
Edoardo Teso
Working Paper 23027
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23027

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017, Revised June 2017

We thank Esther Duflo, Stefano DellaVigna and two anonymous referees for very useful
suggestions. For comments we are indebted to Brian Knight, Andreas Peichl, Thomas Piketty,
Andrei Shleifer, Daniel Waldenström, Matthew Weinzierl, Gabriel Zucman, and numerous
seminar participants at Berkeley, Brown, Bocconi, IGIER Conference in Capri, Harvard, PSE and
the NBER. We thank Antonio Coppola, Nina Roussille, and especially Matteo Ferroni for
outstanding research assistance. Stantcheva and Alesina are grateful to the Foundations of Human
Behavior Initiative, the Pershing Square Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation and the De
Benedetti Foundation for generous support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Alberto Alesina, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Intergenerational Mobility and Support for Redistribution
Alberto Alesina, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso
NBER Working Paper No. 23027
January 2017, Revised June 2017
JEL No. D31,D72,H21,H23,H24
ABSTRACT
Using new cross-country survey and experimental data, we investigate how beliefs about
intergenerational mobility affect preferences for redistribution in France, Italy, Sweden, the U.K.,
and the U.S.. Americans are more optimistic than Europeans about social mobility. Our
randomized treatment shows pessimistic information about mobility and increases support for
redistribution, mostly for "equality of opportunity" policies. We find a strong political
polarization. Left-wing respondents are more pessimistic about mobility, their preferences for
redistribution are correlated with their mobility perceptions, and they support more redistribution
after seeing pessimistic information. None of these apply to right-wing respondents, possibly
because they see the government as a "problem" and not as the "solution."
Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu

Edoardo Teso
Harvard University
eteso@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

John Steinbeck conjectured in 1966 that there is not much support for redistribution in America
because the working poor saw themselves as “temporarily embarrassed millionaires.”1 Are people
willing to accept high levels of inequality if they think that everyone has a shot at climbing the social
ladder? Is tolerance for inequality linked to belief in equality of opportunity? In this paper we have
two objectives. We want to, first, rigorously document what people think about intergenerational
mobility across countries using new detailed and quantitative survey data, and, second, study the
effect of social mobility perceptions on support for redistribution.
The (stereo)typical view about intergenerational mobility distinguishes between “American”
and “European” attitudes. Americans are thought to view the market system as relatively fair,
and to believe in the “American dream,” i.e., the notion that one can make it from rags to riches
thanks to sufficient effort. Thus, Americans supposedly view wealth as a reward for ability and
effort, and poverty as the result of inability to take advantage of opportunities. On the contrary,
Europeans tend to believe that the economic system is unfair, and that wealth is the result of family
history, connections, and sticky social classes. Poverty is the result of bad luck and the inability of
society to take care of the needy regardless of their effort.2
However, today, the American dream may have become more accurately described by the green
light at the end of Daisy’s dock that Gatsby in The Great Gatsby likes to contemplate and reaches
for relentlessly: the embodiment of a “dream” that seems “so close that [we] could hardly fail
to grasp it,” that provides Gatsby with profound motivation to work hard and succeed, and yet
ends up being out of reach and unattainable. Indeed, new data (Chetty et al., 2014) suggests that
intergenerational mobility in the U.S. may, in fact, on average not be higher than in Europe.
In order to document the anatomy of people’s beliefs about intergenerational mobility and the
fairness of their economic system, we collect new survey and experimental data for five countries
(France, Italy, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.). Our survey design is one of our contributions
and allows us to obtain standardized, representative data from five countries, with detailed and
quantitative questions on government, a variety of policies, and perceptions, which we believe
improve upon earlier surveys. We ask policy questions which reflect a realistic trade-off, e.g., we
avoid that respondents think that there are “free lunches.” We also randomize the order of several
questions in an informative way. The questions are designed to attract respondents’ attention, are
visually appealing, and, in some cases, interactive or animated.3
We begin by comparing people’s perceptions of mobility to recent data on actual intergenerational mobility in the five countries to assess to what extent people’s perceptions are realistic. We
1

John Steinbeck, American and Americans, 1966.
These different attitudes are deeply ingrained in the different history of the places. Europe went through centuries
of Feudalism when wealth was associated with nobility and birth, and intergenerational mobility was close to non
existent. In the U.S., the first generation of rich individuals were immigrants who had started poor and represented
the very first example of the “American Dream.”
3
The online survey tools used in this paper can be easily scaled up and modified in future research, to collect
additional data on more countries, expand the set of questions asked, or run additional experimental treatments.
2

2

then turn to the link between perceived intergenerational mobility and redistributive policies. To
get at the causal link between perceptions of mobility and redistributive preferences, we implement
a randomized perception treatment, through which we aim to make respondents’ perceptions of
mobility more pessimistic.
Our key findings are as follows. Americans are more optimistic than Europeans about intergenerational mobility, and they are too optimistic relative to actual mobility in the U.S., especially
about the probability of a child from a family in the bottom quintile making it to the top quintile–
the “American dream.” We show that, paradoxically, optimism is particularly high in U.S. states
where actual mobility is particularly low. Europeans are not only more pessimistic than Americans, they are also too pessimistic relative to the true degree of mobility, and have particularly
gloomy views about the probability of a child born poor remaining stuck in the bottom quintile.
Both Americans and Europeans believe that hard work increases the chances of making it out of
poverty and to the middle class, but few believe that individual effort can make a large difference
for reaching the very top, or that hard work can completely make up for a poor family background.
Many respondents think the government a priori has the tools necessary to make opportunities more equal, and that unequal opportunities are a significant social problem. However, even
amongst those, many do not trust the government’s ability or willingness to implement appropriate policies. Views on mobility are highly correlated with policy preferences across all countries:
more pessimistic respondents tend to favor more generous redistributive policies and higher levels
of government involvement. Interestingly the correlation is stronger for direct “equality of opportunity” policies (e.g., public education or health spending) than for equality of outcome policies
(e.g., progressive taxation or safety net policies). We also uncover very sharp differences between
left and right leaning respondents. Within left-wing respondents, those who are more pessimistic
about the level of intergenerational mobility support more aggressive government intervention and
more redistribution, while those who are more pessimistic among right-wing respondents do not,
presumably because they have very negative views of government. Those right wing respondents
who believe there are low chances for children from the bottom quintile to make it despite putting
in a lot of effort do support somewhat more redistribution.
Our experimental treatment, which is meant to make the treated group more pessimistic about
mobility, has a large and significant first stage effect on mobility perceptions and the effect persists
one week later during a follow-up survey. The treatment has a polarizing effect on policy preferences,
consistent with the descriptive correlations. Left wing respondents become even more supportive of
redistributive policies in general and especially equal opportunity policies. Right wing respondents
also change their views about social mobility, but they do not want any additional government
intervention. It thus appears that the treatment is either “preaching to the choir” or “preaching
to the deaf.”
Related literature. Our work builds on the theoretical literature on the link between intergenerational mobility and support for policies. Piketty (1995) argues that individuals’ views about
3

social mobility and their support for redistribution depend on their own personal experience of mobility and that heterogeneous beliefs can persist because of differing private experiences. Bénabou
and Ok (2001) discuss why the median voter may prefer lower redistribution if he considers the
prospects of upward mobility in the future or for future generations. Alesina and Angeletos (2005)
provide models with two equilibria. In the “American” equilibrium people believe that effort is
the main source of income, and accordingly support low redistribution and low taxes. As a result,
given the low taxes, agents do indeed work hard and the expectation on effort is self-fulfilling. The
“European” equilibrium has the opposite features.
Empirical work by Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) and Alesina and Giuliano (2011) (and the
references cited therein,) confirms that views about fairness are critical determinants of preferences
for redistribution. Alesina et al. (2001) and Alesina and Glaeser (2004) suggested the hypothesis
that Americans my be more optimistic than Europeans about social mobility. They based their
suggestion on qualitative and vastly incomplete data from the World Value Survey, and do not
investigate direct links between beliefs about mobility and policy preferences as we do here. Our
contribution relative to this earlier descriptive literature is to rigorously document actual, quantitative perceptions of mobility across five countries and compare them to actual data. We also provide
experimental (exogenous) variation in mobility perceptions. We complement those with detailed
quantitative and qualitative questions on the role of individual effort, fairness, government, and
redistributive policies.
Several papers have studied actual intergenerational mobility across or within countries, such
as Solon (2002), Björklund and Jäntti (1997), Jäntti et al. (2006), Blanden (2013), and Roine and
Waldenström (2015). Peichl and Ungerer (2016) compare intergenerational mobility in Eastern and
Western Germany. Technical work on the measurement of mobility is done by Niehues and Peichl
(2014).4 Intergenerational mobility in Sweden has been studied by Roine and Waldenström (2009),
Björklund, Roine, and Waldenström (2012), and Waldenström (2016). In the U.S., Hilger (2016a)
and Hilger (2016b) document long-run trends in intergenerational mobility, including among minorities. Recent research based on new IRS tax data has highlighted strong geographical disparities
in opportunities (Chetty et al. (2016), Chetty and Hendren (2016)). Chetty et al. (2014) provide
new local measures of mobility which we build on. Also related are papers on the effects of standard
redistributive policies on equality of opportunity such as Peichl et al. (2011), who focus on Europe,
and Gelber and Weinzierl (2016) who study optimal policy design when parents can influence their
children’s opportunities.
We most strongly connect to the literature on how people form preferences for redistribution.
Lockwood and Weinzierl (2016) and Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015) study alternative preferences
for redistribution that go beyond utilitarianism. Weinzierl (2014) and Weinzierl (2016) also use online survey tools similar to ours to elicit respondents’ social welfare judgments. Ashok, Kuziemko,
and Washington (2016), Charite, Fisman, and Kuziemko (2016), and Buell, Kuziemko, Norton,
4

See also Gottschalk and Spolaore (2002).

4

and Reich (2014) use experimental designs through online platforms to understand people’s fairness
views and redistributive preferences.5 Cruces et al. (2013) study how people form their perceptions
of the income distribution and how this shapes their support for redistribution. Ariely and Norton
(2011) also document the biased perceptions of the income distribution. Kuziemko et al. (2015)
show that shifting respondents’ perceptions of inequality only mildly increases support for redistribution.6 We complement this evidence on inequality to provide evidence on perception of mobility,
and the effect of an information intervention about mobility on opinion about government intervention. Also notable is that we introduce a broad international component into the experimental
literature, by conducting our study simultaneously in five different countries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains our survey methodology and
our data sources for actual intergenerational mobility. In Section 3, we describe the perceptions of
intergenerational mobility and turn to their correlation with redistribution in Section 4. Section 5
analyzes the perception experiment. The last section concludes.

2

Data, Survey, and Methodology

2.1

Data on Actual Intergenerational Mobility Across Countries

Our choice of countries is driven by the desire to cover a wide range of economic, social, and political
experiences. In addition to the U.S., we selected Sweden, Italy, France, and the United Kingdom.
For actual intergenerational mobility, we use what is to our knowledge the best currently available
data. To describe the data sources, we refer to the first generation as the “parents” and to the
second generation as the “children.”
U.S.: Information on intergenerational mobility for the U.S. is from Chetty et al. (2014), based on
administrative tax records covering the universe of taxpayers 1996-2012. The income of parents is
measured as average total pre-tax household income over the years 1996-2000. Children belong to
the 1980-85 cohorts and their family income is measured in 2011 and 2012.
Italy: Information on intergenerational mobility for Italy is from Acciari et al. (2016). It is based
on administrative tax records covering the universe of all taxpayers aged 35-55 in 1998-99. The
children’s income is measured in 2011-2012, when children are 37 or older.
Sweden: Information on intergenerational mobility for Sweden is from Jäntti et al. (2006). It is
based on administrative data from the Statistics Sweden Register, and consists of a 20% random
5

In the social psychology literature, Chambers and Swan (2015) confirm that perceptions of social mobility in
the U.S. are deeply divided across party lines. Davidai and Gilovich (2015) show, using survey tools, that U.S.
respondents have biased perceptions about mobility relative to reality, a finding we confirm here and extend to other
countries. None of these papers have an experimental component or study the link to redistributive preferences.
6
George (2016) studies social mobility and support for redistribution in the U.S. and finds that there is no
relationship between social mobility and redistribution preferences, but there is a significant effect on voting for the
Republican party.

5

sample of all male children born in 1962. For the parents’ generation, only fathers’ earnings are
measured in 1970, 1975 and 1980. The sons’ earnings are measured in 1996 and 2000, when the
sons are 34 and 38, and are averaged over these two years.
U.K.: Information on intergenerational mobility for the U.K. is from the British Cohort Study
on fathers and sons. The children sample is composed of 2806 males, all born in a single week in
1970. Their earnings are measured in 2004, when they are 34 years old. For fathers, income is the
average income in 1980 and 1986, when the children were 10 and 16.
France: Information on intergenerational mobility for France is based on the 1977, 1985, and
2003 waves of the survey “Formation et Qualification professionnelle.” Since the surveys do not
link individuals to their parents, we cannot directly measure parents’ income. We compute the
expected income of parents based on information on their education, profession, year of birth, and
region of residence, and we use income information from earlier waves to calculate the transition
probabilities. Appendix OA.3 provides a detailed description of this procedure.

2.2

Survey Data Collection

We collected survey data in two main waves between February and October 2016. Appendix Table
A1 reports the dates and sample sizes for all survey waves carried out. The first wave was a small
pilot survey, without any experimental treatment, of around 500 respondents per country. We
append it to the second (main) wave for the purpose of the descriptive analysis (on the control
groups only), since the questions asked were identical. The U.S. has a larger sample size because
we conducted a third wave there, for the purpose of increasing the sample size for the state-level
analysis in Section 3.4. Overall, the total sample sizes for each country are 4705 for the U.S., 2148
for the U.K., 2148 for France, 2143 for Italy, and 1494 for Sweden. We also conducted a follow-up
survey (without any randomized treatment) one week after each wave on U.S. respondents to test
for the persistence of the treatment effects.
U.S. respondents were reached through the survey company C&T Marketing and European
respondents by the survey company Respondi. These companies both maintain panels of respondents that they can email with survey links. Respondents who chose to respond are first channelled
through a few screening questions that ensure that certain quotas are met and that the final sample is nationally representative along the gender, age, and income dimensions. Respondents who
complete the survey are paid. The pay per survey completed was $2.50 in the U.S., $2.20 for Italy,
France, and the U.K., and $5.5 for Sweden. The average time of completion of the survey among
respondents was 40 minutes and the median time of completion was 15 minutes.

2.3

The Survey

The full survey in English is reported in Appendix A.5, while the questionnaires in Italian, French,
and Swedish can be seen by following the links to the survey’s web interface in the Appendix.
6

We worked with native speakers so as to get translations that fit well with the local culture and
understanding.7 All surveys had the following general structure.
Socioeconomic background and own experience of mobility: We start with questions about
individuals’ socioeconomic backgrounds, such as gender, income, education, ethnicity, state and
zip code, marital and family status, and political leanings. We also ask questions to assess a
respondent’s own experience of mobility: we ask about their parents’ education (which we can
compare to their own education), ask them to assess the level of status of their job relative to
that of their father and mother, to compare their family income when growing up to that of other
families at that time, and to compare their family income now to that of other families.
Views on fairness: Respondents are asked two similar (but intentionally not identical) questions
about their views on the fairness of the economic system, one before the treatment and one after
the treatment.8 Before the treatment, they are asked whether they perceive the economic system in
their country to be “basically fair” or “basically unfair.” After the treatment, they are asked whether
they believe that everyone in their country gets a chance to succeed (we call it the “American
dream” question). We also ask whether they believe the main reason for being poor (respectively,
rich) is the lack of effort (respectively, hard work) or rather circumstances beyond one’s control
(respectively, advantages).
Perceptions of mobility: The core part of the survey are a series of questions to elicit respondents’
beliefs about upward mobility. We ask both precise quantitative and more general qualitative
questions. The main question used to elicit respondents’ beliefs about mobility uses a picture with
two ladders (see Figure 1) that represents, to the left, the parents’ income distribution, split into
five quintiles, and, to the right, the children’s income distribution split into the same quintiles.
Respondents have to fill out the empty fields to indicate their views on how many out of 100
children from the bottom quintile can make it to each quintile when they grow up. The answers
are constrained to sum up to 100. More specifically, respondents are told:
For the following questions, we focus on 500 families that represent [THE COUNTRY’S] population. We divide them into five groups on the basis of their income, with each group containing 100
families. These groups are: the poorest 100 families, the second poorest 100 families, the middle
100 families, the second richest 100 families, and the richest 100 families.
In the following questions, we will ask you to evaluate the chances that children born in one of
the poorest 100 families, once they grow up, will belong to any of these income groups. Please fill
out the entries to the right of the figure below to tell us, in your opinion, how many out of 100
children coming from the poorest 100 families will grow up to be in each income group.
7

The authors themselves are fluent in three of the four languages and native in two.
Questions asked before the treatment can serve as covariates to study differential treatment effects. Questions
asked after the treatment serve as outcome variables, potentially affected by the treatment.
8

7

Figure 1: Ladder Question to Elicit Perceived Mobility

Respondents in the control and treatment groups are then each asked one of two additional questions
(the question is randomly assigned): the first asks about the chances of very hard-working people
making it. The second asks about very talented people. Specifically, we rephrase the above question,
replacing the first paragraph with one of the following two options:
[Perceptions conditional on “effort”:] Consider 100 children coming from the poorest 100 families. These children are very determined and put in hard work both at school and, later in life,
when finding a job and doing that job.
[Perceptions conditional on “talent”:] Consider 100 children coming from the poorest 100 families. These children are very talented.
We also ask the following qualitative versions of these questions to elicit respondents’ beliefs about
mobility. Although they are less precise and cannot be compared well to actual data (as we will do
with the quantitative answers), they serve as robustness checks on the quantitative ones.
Do you think the chances that a child from the poorest 100 families will grow up to be among
the richest 100 families are: [Close to zero, Low, Fairly Low, Fairly High, High].
and repeat this same question for the chances of growing up to be among the second richest families.
Randomized perception treatment: The treatment is described in detail in Section 5.
8

Policy preferences: To ask about policy preferences, we split questions into three groups, namely
on: 1) the overall level of government intervention that people would like (through a series of
questions presented below); 2) how a fixed level of revenues should be raised; and 3) how a fixed
amount of budget should be allocated to various categories of spending. This split is key to being
able to distinguish respondents’ preferred total size of government from who they think should bear
the costs and benefits from it.
First, respondents are asked to choose average income tax rates on four groups ranked by
income: the top 1%, the next 9%, the next 40% and the bottom 50%. They are constrained to set
taxes so as to raise the current level of revenue in their country, i.e., to split the current level of
the tax burden in their country among the four income groups in a way that they view fair (see
Appendix Figure A3).9
Second, we ask respondents to rate their support for the estate tax.

Finally, we ask them

to allocate 100% of the budget to six spending categories: 1) Defense and National Security, 2)
Public Infrastructure, 3) Spending on Schooling and Higher Education, 4) Social Security, Medicare,
Disability Insurance, and Supplementary Security Income, 5) Social Insurance and Income Support
Programs, and 6) Public Spending on Health (see Appendix Figure A4).
To get a sense of the desired level of intervention, we ask respondents whether they would be
in favor of “more policies to increase the opportunities for children born in poor families and to
foster more equality of opportunity, such as education policies,” alerting them that these policy
expansions would have to be financed through either higher taxes or reduced spending on other
policies.10
Views on government: We ask respondents about their desired scope of government intervention
on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 means “that the government should not concern itself with making
the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal,” and 7 means “that the
government should do everything in its power to reduce this inequality of opportunities.” They are
also asked whether they think that lowering taxes to stimulate growth or raising taxes to expand
programs for the poor would do more to foster equal opportunities.
We ask three additional questions in a randomized way: some respondents see these before the
treatment, while others see them after. For respondents who see them before, the responses are used
as pre-existing characteristics to study the heterogeneous effects of the treatment among groups
delimited by these characteristics. For respondents who see these after the treatment, they are
treated as outcomes potentially influenced by the treatment. These three questions are, first, about
the trust in government (“How much of the time do you think you can trust the government to do
what is right?”), how much people think that the government can do about unequal opportunities
9
To do so, while respondents choose the average tax rates on each group using sliders (see Appendix Figure A3),
a fifth slider at the bottom adjusts to show what fraction of the target revenue has been raised, and alerts the
respondents when the target revenue has been met.
10
This question hence imposes a budget constraint in a milder way than the aforementioned budget allocation
question.

9

for children from poor and rich families, and whether they believe that if opportunities are unequal
among children from poor and rich families, this is a problem. The latter question is at a general
level about whether people care about unequal opportunities and perceive them as something to
be eliminated. Importantly, it does not ask about whether people think that opportunities in their
country are currently too unequal or not.
There are therefore three randomizations in place, which create 8 treatment or control groups,
summarized in Appendix Table A2: 1) the main perception treatment (see Section 5), 2) whether
respondents are asked about the chances of very-hard working children or talented children, and
3) whether respondents are asked the three questions on government (described in the previous
paragraph) before or after the questions eliciting mobility perceptions. Table A4 shows that these
three layers of randomization were balanced along observable characteristics.
The exact definition of the variables used in the tables is in Appendix A.3.

2.4

Ensuring Data Quality

Overall, the quality of the answers in terms of consistency and internal logic was excellent. Respondents did not express unrealistic views–i.e., levels of policies that would be difficult to justify under
reasonable economic assumptions–about mobility and policies. We took several steps to ensure
the best possible data quality. First, in the first and consent page of the survey (see Appendix
Figure A5), we warn respondents that “responding without adequate effort may result in [their]
responses being flagged for low quality.” At the same time, we appeal to respondents’ sense of social
responsibility by saying that we are non-partisan researchers who seek to improve knowledge on
social issues and add that “it is very important for the success of our research that you answer
honestly and read the questions very carefully before answering.” We also keep track of the time
that respondents spend on each survey page so as to be able to flag respondents who spend an
unreasonably short amount of time on some question. We drop the few respondents (7.6% across
all waves and countries) who spend less than 5 minutes on the full survey or less than 30 seconds
on the main mobility question.
After the section with background questions and before we show the treatment, we ask respondents whether they have “devoted [their] full attention to the questions so far” and whether
they think, in their honest opinion, that we should use their responses for the study. Only 0.78%
of respondents answered that we should not use their responses for our study. The goal of this
“attention check” question has been shown by Meade and Craig (2012) to stimulate respondents to
pay extra attention for the subsequent questions (rather than to truly detect dishonest replies). We
strategically placed this question right before one of the most important questions eliciting views
on intergenerational mobility.
For the “ladder” question that elicits views on social mobility, we constrain the answers to sum
up to 100 and tell respondents that they need at least one minute to read and think through this
question. We check for careless or strange answer patterns by tabulating the response distributions
10

and flagging responses such as “0” or “100.” Appendix Table A3 reports the tabulations of these
cases of which there are, fortunately, very few. In our baseline results, we drop respondents who
entered “100” in any quintile except Q1, but adding them back does not change any of the results
in an appreciable way. We also ask about mobility in a more qualitative way as described in Section
2.3.
Finally, at the end of the survey, we ask respondents for feedback and whether they believe the
survey was politically biased. Only 17.7% of respondents say they felt that it was. 11.4% felt it
was left-wing biased, while 6.3% felt it was right-wing biased.

2.5

Sample Characteristics

Table 1 shows the characteristics of our sample in each country, alongside statistics from nationally
representative sources. Due to the quotas we impose, our samples are by construction close to
perfectly representative along the gender, age, and income dimensions. The other non-targeted
respondent characteristics shown there – namely, marital, employment, and immigrant statuses
and education are very representative as well.

3

Mobility (Mis)perceptions

3.1

Actual and Perceived Mobility

Table 2 displays actual intergenerational mobility in each country. For each country, each row
shows, in descending order, the probability of a child from the bottom quintile (Q1) of the income
distribution in the country to move to quintile Qj with j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The first column for each
country shows the actual probability, while the second shows the perceived probability. In parentheses below the perceived probabilities are the p-values for the equality test between perception
and reality. The final set of columns provide a comparison of the U.S. and Europe overall.
Social mobility is on average lower in the U.S. than in other countries.11 The probability of a
child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile is highest in the U.S. (33.1%), lower
in Continental Europe (below 30%), and lowest in Sweden (26.7%). The probabilities of moving
from the bottom to the fourth or to the fifth quintiles are also lowest in the U.S.. The probability
of moving to the top quintile is 7.8% in the U.S., but close to 11% on average in Europe. Note that
the differences between perceptions and reality are statistically highly significant in all countries.
Perceptions are also significantly different in the U.S. and Europe.
Figure 2 graphically illustrates these perceptions relative to reality. Panel A shows the average
perceived probability of remaining in the bottom quintile against the actual probability in each
country. Points above the 45 degree line indicate more pessimistic perceptions. Panel B similarly
illustrates the probability of moving from the bottom to the top quintile. In this figure, being
11
One needs to nevertheless bear in mind the large spatial heterogeneity in the U.S., as described in Chetty et al.
(2014) and that we consider in Section 3.4.

11

optimistic about mobility implies being above the 45 degree line. Finally, Panel C shows the
perceived and actual probabilities of going from the bottom quintile to quintiles Q2, Q3, and Q4.
This figure highlights one of our key results. In general, Europeans are not only more pessimistic
than Americans, they are also too pessimistic relative to reality, while Americans are too optimistic.
Three additional facts stand out. First, Americans vastly over-estimate the probability of making
it to the top of the ladder for children starting from the bottom. This is the embodiment of the
idea of the “American dream.” Second, Europeans are too pessimistic about the chances of getting
out of poverty, i.e., out of the bottom quintile. Third, Europeans are also too pessimistic about
the probability of making it to the upper middle class (the fourth quintile). The answers to the
qualitative questions are highly correlated with those to the quantitative questions and paint a very
similar picture.
The figure also shows that, despite these systematic biases, average perceptions are not unreasonably distant from reality. At the individual level there is, however, considerable dispersion in
the answers. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the negative absolute error – the absolute deviation between the actual and the perceived probability of remaining in the bottom quintile (Q1 to
Q1) and of moving to the top quintile (Q1 to Q5)– in the U.S. and European samples. This is a
measure of individual-level accuracy. The figure shows that the accuracy at the individual level is
considerably worse than the accuracy of the average. In the U.S., 99.4% (respectively, 68.1%) of
respondents have a lower accuracy than the average for the probability of remaining in the bottom
quintile (respectively, moving to the top quintile). In Europe, 85.5% (respectively, 89.4%) of respondents have a lower accuracy than the average for the probability of remaining in the bottom
quintile (respectively, moving to the top quintile). In the U.S., if we consider the probability of
moving to the top quintile, the average individual absolute error is 166% larger than the error of the
average perception (10.4 percentage points vs. 3.9 percentage points). Similarly, in Europe, if we
consider the probability of remaining in the bottom quintile, the average individual absolute error
is 211% larger than the error of the average perception (19.6 percentage points vs. 6.3 percentage
points). This “wisdom of crowds” effect is also found among expert forecasts in DellaVigna and
Pope (2016).
While it is beyond the scope of this paper to explain where these differing perceptions of mobility
come from in the different countries, we can conjecture that part of their roots lies in the vastly
contrasting histories. As explained in Cullen (2004), the U.S. was founded by poor immigrants,
who were fleeing persecution and lack of freedom, and established a new living with the idea that, in
the New World, anyone could make it if only they worked hard enough. Europe was for centuries a
feudal society in which birth irrevocably determined one’s place in society. These differing ideas are
then perpetuated by each country’s literature and art, as well as reinforced by the media. Indeed, as
shown by DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007), the media can have a strong influence on voting patterns
and political views. A strong focus in the U.S. media is on the American dream, opportunity, and
on successful people who made it. This focus is much more diluted in European media and public
discourse.
12

3.2

Heterogeneity in perceptions

We now turn to a systematic analysis of which individual characteristics are most correlated with
perceptions of mobility. Figure 4 compares the mean perceptions of mobility among respondents
with different characteristics. We defined “left-wing” respondents as those who say they are “liberal” or “very liberal” on economic issues. “Right-wing” respondents are those who report to be
“conservative” or “very conservative” on economic issues. Focusing our survey question exclusively
on economic issues allows us to better compare political orientations across countries, where different parties sometimes mix traditionally liberal and traditionally conservative elements depending
on whether one considers economic or social issues. The exact phrasing in each of the five countries
was adapted to the political spectrum in that country. The categories available were, in France,
“Extreme gauche, Gauche, Centre, Droite, Extreme droite”, and in Italy, the U.K., and Sweden
“Left, Center-Left, Center, Center-Right, Right.”
Left leaning respondents are significantly more pessimistic than right leaning ones, an important
observation for what follows below. Women, those with children, lower income respondents, those
without a college education, and African-Americans are more likely to be optimistic about mobility.
We discuss the results on African-Americans in more detail in Section 3.4. Those who believe that
being rich or being poor are mostly the result of individual effort, or who believe the economic
system is fair or that unequal opportunities are not a problem are also more optimistic. Also
significant, but less so, is whether one has experienced upward mobility during one’s life,12 and
whether one is the child of immigrants, with both of these predicting more optimism. The young
have more polarized views and tend to assign more probability to tail outcomes: they are both
more pessimistic about the likelihood of being stuck in the bottom quintile and more optimistic
about the likelihood of making it to the top quintile.13
The relation between college education (or income) and pessimism is significant even after
controlling for other personal characteristics, including political affiliation (see Appendix Table
OA3). The psychology literature emphasizes that people tend to take excessive credit for their
own success, while blaming failure on outside circumstances and luck (Frank, 2016; Gilovich et al.,
2002). On the one hand, this would lead lower income or less educated agents to “self-justify” their
bad economic outcomes by believing that mobility is low and the economic system is unfair. On
the other hand, high income and college-educated agents would assign their success mostly (and
excessively so) to their own effort, rather than to more mobility (which is not their own merit).
Consistent with this hypothesis is our finding below that college educated agents believe more in
the impact of effort on the chances of making it out of poverty and becoming rich. In addition, the
college-educated and the high-income agents are significantly more likely to reply that the main
reason for being poor is lack of effort and the main reason for being rich is individual effort, even
12

This is consistent with the idea in Piketty (1995) that a personal experience of mobility leads to an update of
one’s beliefs about the underlying social mobility mechanism.
13
Results using instead the qualitative measures of perceptions are generally consistent with these quantitative
ones.

13

after controlling for the full array of personal characteristics and political affiliation. Thus collegeeducated and high-income agents may believe that making it was very difficult, and that it was
their own individual effort that helped them succeed despite a system that features low mobility.
Inequality Perceptions and Mobility Perceptions.
One may wonder whether perceptions and misperceptions of social mobility are related to
perceptions and misperceptions of inequality. To test this, we conducted a small additional survey
on U.S. respondents in which, in addition to the aforementioned mobility perception questions, we
asked respondents about their perceived shares in total income, capital income, and net wealth,
of the top 1%, the top 10% and the bottom 50% of households, as well as the taxes paid by
different groups. Figure A8 in the Appendix shows that there are, on average, quite significant
misperceptions of inequality in the U.S.. In particular, respondents overestimate the share of
income and wealth going to the top 1%. Table A5 shows that respondents who think there is more
inequality also think there is less mobility. Those who underestimate inequality also overestimate
mobility.

3.3

Perceived Role of Individual Effort and Hard Work

Key elements in the debate about social mobility are the scope for individual responsibility and the
extent to which individual effort pays off. We explore this in Figure 5. The vertical bars in different
colors represent the different countries and the black intervals are the confidence intervals at the
95% confidence level. The bars are split in five groups representing the five quintiles. The height
of the vertical bars represents, for each country c and quintile j, the gap between the perceived
probability of a child from the bottom quintile in country c moving to quintile j from the question
that asks about very hard working children (i.e., the perception conditional on effort) minus the
perceived probability from the baseline question (i.e., the perception unconditional on effort). This
figure highlights four facts. First, respondents do not believe individual effort can make up for a
poor family background: even when thinking about very hard working people, respondents still
say that mobility is very far from perfect. This is despite the fact that we intentionally phrased
the question in a strong way to emphasize a “best case” type of scenario. Second, in all countries,
respondents believe that individual hard work greatly decreases the probability of a child from
the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile. Third, respondents in all countries also
believe that individual effort increases the chance of moving from poverty to the middle class (Q1
to Q3). Fourth, the perceived probability of moving from the bottom to the top quintile is only
very moderately affected by the consideration of effort.
We uncovered that groups which believe more in the role of effort for improving the chances of
moving out of the bottom quintile are the college-educated, and, understandably, those who believe
the reason for being poor is lack of effort. Those who believe more in the role of effort for improving
the chances of making it to the very top quintile are the young, the college educated, the right-wing,
those who believe that the main reason for being either rich or poor is effort, and those who think
14

that the system is broadly fair. Those who believe that unequal opportunities are in principle a
problem do not update their beliefs conditional on effort more or less strongly (although they are,
as with their unconditional beliefs, significantly more pessimistic about mobility conditional on
effort).
It is interesting that left and right wing respondents do not update in a significantly different
way their belief about the chances of staying stuck in the bottom quintile. This means that, across
the political spectrum, respondents agree by how much individual effort improves the chances of
escaping poverty. However, the difference lies in how left and right wing respondents update their
beliefs about making it to the top quintile conditional on effort: right-wing respondents believe
much more in the impact of effort. These results are all available in the Online Appendix.

3.4

Geography of Perceptions in the U.S.

The work by Chetty et al. (2014) has shown that the degree of actual social mobility in the
U.S. varies dramatically across regions. In our data, we can explore the geographical variation in
perceptions of mobility.14
The top left panel of Figure 6 represents actual mobility at the state level. It is here measured
by the probability of a child from a family in the bottom quintile making it to the top quintile. In
general, mobility is higher (as indicated by darker colors) in the North and North West and lower in
the South and South East. The top right panel replicates this map, but now plots the perceptions
of respondents from each state. Even a cursory look shows a negative correlation between the two
maps. The bottom left panel of Figure 6 shows the ratio of the perceived transition probability
from the bottom to the top quintile over the actual probability. Overoptimism seems higher in
places with lower mobility. Formally, the correlation between actual and perceived mobility at
the state level is -0.3 (p-value of 0.04).15 The bottom right panel of Figure 6 shows the degree of
overoptimism relative to the national average in the U.S., not relative to the mobility in the state.
The same patterns are apparent, which suggests that the same states which are more overoptimistic
relative to the state-level mobility are also more overoptimistic relative to the national mobility
level.
Are perceptions of mobility geographically correlated with other key socio-economic variables?
We explore this systematically at the commuting zone (CZ) level, assigning respondents to CZs
using their zip codes, and using actual mobility numbers and several key covariates from Chetty
et al. (2014).16 We consider the effect on perceived mobility of measures of racial segregation, income
segregation, social capital, the Gini coefficient, the share of employment in manufacturing, and the
college graduation rate controlling for the respondent’s gender, age, number of children, income,
14

Newman et al. (2015) document the link between local inequality and the belief that the U.S. is a meritocracy.
This relation is not driven by the South-Eastern states. Excluding South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, West
Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida from the calculation yields a correlation
of -0.34 with a p-value of 0.06.
16
These results are in the Online Appendix.
15

15

political affiliation, educational attainment, personal mobility experience, and immigrant status.
Perceptions are more optimistic when there is more racial segregation, less income segregation,
and more social capital. The latter two correlations are as one may expect: with a lot of income
segregation, it may harder to observe the growth out of poverty of certain families, since poor and
rich families do not live together.
The sign of the effect of racial segregation may seem odd at first. Recall from Section 3 that, although a small share of our sample, African-Americans were more optimistic about mobility. There
are at least two possible explanations for this fact. First, it may be due to “system justification,”
an idea support by a large body of evidence from the social psychology literature (see the survey
paper by Jost et al. (2004)) that emphasizes, somewhat paradoxically, that particularly bad social
and economic situations tend to be self-justified by respondents to avoid cognitive dissonance and
to lend some legitimacy to the suffering caused. Second, it could be that minorities use their own
racial group as a reference point when there is more racial segregation, which could inflate their
perceived mobility relative to true mobility (although we are not aware of studies that establish
this rigorously). These are points which deserve future research, with surveys better equipped (and
larger) to address these issues.
Another interesting pattern is that the presence of more minorities and immigrants in a respondent’s commuting zone leads to significantly less support for redistribution, especially among
right-wing respondents.17 It may be that right-wing respondents believe that redistributive policies
will mostly benefit immigrants or minorities, something they may not want.
More generally the geographical patterns in perceptions, and their correlations with other key
socio-economic variables deserve further attention.

4

Perceptions of Mobility and Policy Preferences

We now investigate more broadly views about fairness and the government, before moving to the
link between mobility perceptions and policy preferences.

4.1

Views on Fairness

Figure 7 shows respondents’ views on fairness and the role of government, by country (in Panel
A) and by political affiliation (in Panel B). The first row shows the fraction of respondents who
think the system is “basically fair, since all [members of country X] have an equal opportunity to
succeed.” The second row shows the fraction of respondents who agree with the statement that “in
[country X] everybody has a chance to make it and be economically successful.” This is the idea
of the “American Dream.” The next two rows focus on the roles of effort and luck. Row 3 shows
the fraction of respondents who believe that a person is poor because of a lack of effort rather than
due to “circumstances beyond his or her control,” while row 4 shows the fraction of respondents
17

This is shown in Online Appendix Table OA8.

16

who believe that a person becomes rich mostly because she “worked harder than others” and not
because she “had more advantages than others.”
There are several noteworthy findings. First, on average, U.S. respondents have a much higher
tendency than European respondents to agree that the system is fair (50% believe so) and that
everyone has a chance of making it (53% agree). Italian and French responders are extremely
skeptical about the fairness of the system (only 10% and 19%, respectively, agree that the system
is basically fair). Swedish respondents are also positively inclined on fairness issues – 65% believe
in the fairness of the Swedish economic system. It is possible – although purely conjectural – that
Swedish respondents believe that it is their welfare state that delivers this perceived fairness, while
Americans may believe that the market does. Second, U.S. respondents believe more strongly in
the role of effort, both in getting out of poverty and in becoming rich. Italians believe the least in
the effect of effort on economic outcomes.18
Third, as shown in Panel B, left-wing respondents hold more pessimistic views on fairness. Only
26% of them (as opposed to 49% of right wing respondents) think that the system is “basically
fair,” and only 24% (as opposed to 46% of right wing respondents) think that everybody gets a fair
shot. Similarly, just about 19% and 18% respectively think that effort or lack thereof is the main
reason for being poor or rich (as opposed to 46% and 46% respectively for right-wing respondents).
The political polarization of views on fairness is most prevalent in the U.S. and the U.K., but it is
present in all countries.19

4.2

Views of Government

Views of government are complex and multi-faceted. This is why our survey asked five different
questions on government, the answers to which are shown in the last rows of Figure 7. We show the
responses by country (in Panel A) or by political affiliation (in Panel B). We seek to understand
whether respondents think that their government can be trusted to perform well, whether it has the
capacity and tools to reduce unequal opportunities, whether government intervention is desirable
to reduce unequal opportunities, and whether, starting from the status quo, the right way to go
is towards more government intervention, i.e., “raising taxes”or less government intervention with
lower taxes. Finally, we inquire about whether people perceive unequal opportunities to be a
problem to start with, and, hence, a potential area for government intervention.
Across countries, many respondents are reluctant to say that they trust the government. The
fraction of people who feel they can never trust the government is high overall, particularly in
France and Italy. The exception is Sweden. At the same time, when asked whether in principle the
government has “the ability and tools” to “reduce the inequality of opportunities between children
born in poor and rich families”, most respondents answer that the government can do “some” or
“a lot.”
18

These differing perceptions in the role of effort versus luck are at the core of the multiple equilibria (called the
“U.S.” and the “European” equilibria) in Alesina and Angeletos (2005).
19
Except perhaps in Italy where pessimism seems to reign across the political spectrum.

17

When asked to designate the optimal scope of government intervention to reduce unequal opportunities on a scale of 1 to 7 (increasing in the desired strength of intervention), U.S. respondents
express a wish for lower government intervention intensity than European countries. This does
not mean that respondents support further expansions of the role of government starting from
their current status quo. Indeed, when respondents are asked about “what [they] think would do
more to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal” the fraction
of respondents who think that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage
more investment in economic growth” would be better than “raising taxes on wealthy people and
corporations to expand programs for the poor” is 32% in the U.S. but even higher in France and
Italy. Given that the answer to this question depends on the starting level of taxes in a country,
this may not be surprising, as the U.S. has lower taxes than either of the European countries.
In Panel B, left-wing respondents are significantly more likely to trust the government, to believe
that the government has the tools and capacity to address unequal opportunities, and to think that
unequal opportunities are a problem.20 They support significantly higher levels of government
intervention than right wing respondents. The starkest contrast is that right-wing respondents
are much more likely to think that scaling back the involvement of government in the economy is
the better way to improve unequal opportunities. Overall, close to 60% of right-wing respondents
believe that less government involvement, and freeing the economy is the key to addressing unequal
opportunities, as opposed to just 20% of left-wing respondents.
A particularly striking agreement across countries and political orientations is on the view that
unequal opportunities for children from poor and rich families – should they exist – would be
a problem.21 We could, hence, in principle, expect that more pessimism about the fairness of
opportunities would be correlated with support for policies to equalize opportunities.
A respondent may oppose more redistribution if he has a negative view of the government on
any of the dimensions we ask about. The last row shows the fraction of respondents who answer
that they can “never” trust the government, or that, to reduce the inequality of opportunities
between children born in poor and rich families, the government has the ability and the tools to do
“nothing at all” or “not much,” that they support little government intervention (less than 4 on
the scale of 1 to 7), or that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage more
investment in economic growth” would be the better way to equalize opportunities.
The polarization between left-wing and right-wing respondents and its consistency across all
countries is striking. The fraction of right-wing respondents who hold a negative view of the
20
The U.K. is an exception in that right-wing respondents are more likely to say that they trust the government.
We believe this is because “Brexit” was very salient at the time of the survey, and the right-wing government had
successfully pushed through the referendum and gained a lot of popularity with the winning “leave” vote, which was
the privileged vote of the right-wing. We believe this is what inflated the perceptions of right-wing respondents in
favor of that particular government, and, conversely, strongly reduced them among left-wing respondents. However,
even in the U.K., the views of left and right wing respondents on the other dimensions of governments are in line
with those in other countries.
21
Recall that this question is about respondents’ general attitude towards unequal opportunities and does not
specifically ask about their perceptions of the extent of mobility in their own country.

18

government along at least one of the dimensions we ask about is staggeringly high at 80%. On the
other hand, left-wing respondents have a much more favorable opinion of government, its role, its
desirability, and its capacities.

4.3

Policy Preferences and Views on Mobility

Let us use the word “pessimism” to designate a higher perceived probability of a child from a family
in the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile and “optimism” to designate a higher perceived probability of moving to the top quintile. We regress respondents’ policy preferences on their
perceived transition probabilities, including all individual level controls and country fixed effects.
Hence, we capture the residual effect of pessimism or optimism on policy preferences, conditional
on many individual characteristics, including political views. Table 3 shows the coefficients from
these regressions.
Columns 1 and 6 focus on how respondents want to allocate the budget to two different spending
categories: “Opportunities” includes spending on schooling and higher education, as well as public
spending on health (categories 3 and 6),22 while “Safety Net” includes social insurance and income
support programs (category 5 in the survey question, as described in Section 2). Column 2 shows
the support for the estate tax. In column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to
1 if the respondent supports increasing government spending on equality of opportunity policies,
while in column 4, the dependent variable is the preferred level of government intervention against
unequal opportunities on a scale of 1 to 7. In column 5, the dependent variable is a dummy equal
to one if the respondent believes that unequal opportunities are a very serious problem. Columns
7 and 8 report respondents’ preferred tax rate on the top 1% and on the bottom 50% respectively.
In column 9 the dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the respondent says that to “reduce
the inequality of opportunities between children born in poor and rich families,”the government
can do “some” or “a lot.”
Among left-wing respondents, pessimism is significantly positively correlated with support for
redistribution along all of these dimensions. Optimism is significantly correlated with these same
policies in the opposite way, except for the estate tax, overall government intervention and the
budget spent on the safety net. Overall, support for equality of opportunity policies is much more
sensitive to pessimism and optimism than support for equality of outcome policies such as safety
net policies. For instance, an increase in the perceived probability of remaining in the bottom
quintile of 10 percentage points increases desired spending on equality of opportunity policies by
0.3 percentage points, but increases spending on the safety net by only 0.2 percentage points. When
asked to think conditional on effort, left-wing respondents do not change drastically their policy
support.
On the other hand, right-wing respondents are less sensitive to either optimism or pessimism.
22
We grouped these two categories in this way for the analysis, but respondents only saw the six categories as
described in Section 2 and in Appendix A.5.

19

It appears as if right-wing respondents simply do not want much redistribution, regardless of
their views on mobility. Their policy preferences do seem to be more significantly correlated with
their beliefs conditional on effort. To sum up, right-wing respondents not only do not want much
redistribution to start with, they do not want more redistribution even if they are more pessimistic
or optimistic, unless they think that despite the maximal effort, a poor kid is doomed to not make
it out of the bottom quintile.

5

Randomized Perception Experiment

In this section, we turn to experimental evidence on the causal effect of perceptions on preferences
for redistribution.

5.1

The Experiment

The treatment’s goal is to shift people’s perceptions of mobility. While designing it, several important constraints had to be taken into account.
First, the perceptions of all respondents had to be shifted monotonically in the same direction,
i.e., either in the direction of more pessimism or more optimism. We chose to make people more
“pessimistic.” Second, mobility perceptions needed to be shifted without changing the respondents’
perceptions of policies or the government. Otherwise we may mechanically prime people to respond
in a certain way to the policy questions. Third, the treatment had to be homogeneous across
countries and show all respondents identical information. This precluded showing actual data
about mobility per country (since they are heterogeneous). As we saw in Figure 2, respondents
in different countries are overly pessimistic or overly optimistic to varying degrees about different
quintiles. For instance, Europeans are too pessimistic about the chance of staying stuck in poverty
(not so much about the chance of moving to the other quintiles), while Americans are especially
optimistic about making it to the very top. Changing each of these quintiles separately in a different
direction (e.g., towards the actual one) would be both very difficult and probably very confusing to
respondents. Even within the same country, left wing and right wing respondents start from quite
different baseline beliefs.
In that sense, we differ from the “informational” treatments in Kuziemko et al. (2015), who
provide information on actual inequality in the U.S.. It would similarly be interesting to explore
a treatment that shows people data on actual mobility in each country, but this would not be
interpretable as the causal effect of more (or less) pessimistic views on mobility.
Fourth, we did not want to give actual and precise numbers in order to limit experimenter induced demand and the temptation for treated respondents to simply repeat those numbers without
really thinking about the message they convey. As a result, we only used qualitative statements in
the treatment. How different groups would translate those qualitative statements into quantitative
facts was not clear ex ante (but the direction was clear). The goal is to prompt people to think
20

about low mobility in a salient way rather than to target a given perception.
Fifth, the treatment had to be truthful and not provide any misleading information. Therefore
we made general, high-level qualitative statements instead of precise quantitative ones. Some
perceptions, namely those that are relatively optimistic (for instance, the perceived Q1 to Q3
mobility in most countries, or the perceptions of right-wing respondents, or the perceptions of U.S.
respondents) are moved in the direction of reality.
The treatment is animated and appears as a “movie” to respondents, so as to better attract and
maintain their attention.23 It consists of two animations, one related to the chances of children from
low income families, the other related to children from high income families. They are introduced
by a page that tells respondents that they are about to see two short animations that summarize
two key findings of recent academic studies on the link between one’s family background and one’s
chances of making it in life (see the screenshot in Appendix Figure A6). On the first animation
(see the screenshots in Appendix Figure A7), respondents are told that:
“The chances of a poor kid staying poor as an adult are extremely large. Only very few kids
from poor families will ever make it and become rich.”
On the second animation, respondents are told that:
“Children born in rich families are extremely likely to remain rich themselves when they grow
up, like their parents. It is extremely rare for a child from a rich family to become poor later in
life.”

5.2

First Stage: Treatment Effects on Perceptions

The “first-stage” of our treatment worked well. The treatment has a large and statistically significant effect on perceptions of social mobility. Table 4 shows that the perceived probability of
remaining in the bottom quintile increases by 10 percentage points, and the probability of moving
up to the third and fourth quintiles decreases significantly by around 6 and 2 percentage points,
respectively. The order of magnitude of these changes across different countries is very similar.24
While there is no significant effect on the reported perceived probability of making it from the
bottom to the very top quintile according to the quantitative question, the qualitative questions do
show significant effects of making it both to the fourth and fifth quintile. The last column shows
that there is a marked decrease of 3 percentage points in the fraction of people who say that they
believe that “everybody has a fair chance of making it,” (our so called “American dream” question).
There are large and significant effects on the perceived mobility conditional on effort as well. The
table also shows that the treatment effects on mobility perceptions are equally strong for left-wing
and right-wing respondents (we cannot reject the hypothesis that the effects on left and right wing
are the same).
23

See the animated U.S. version of the treatment here: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_
5dxninfErZ246X3. All other survey links are available for the reader to see in Appendix .
24
Results are available form the authors.

21

In order to test for the persistence of the treatment effects, we ran the survey again for the
U.S. one week later to check whether people who had been treated still maintained different views
relative to the control group. Table 5 reports the results from this follow-up survey. Overall, the
originally treated individuals still exhibit increased pessimism relative to the control group one week
later. For instance, the treatment effect on the probability of remaining in the first quintile in the
subset of treated respondents who took both the main survey and the follow-up was 9 percentage
points and persists significantly at 6 percentage points. The effects on the probability of moving to
the third, fourth, and fifth quintiles are also very close in magnitude and significance between the
original and the follow up rounds. In the Online Appendix, we show that the effect decays faster
for right-wing respondents.

5.3

Treatment Effects on Policy Preferences

Table 6 reports the treatment effects on taxes and spending in the same format as the crosssectional relations from Table 3. The top panel presents the reduced form treatment effects. There
is again a striking differences between right-wing and left-wing respondents. Amongst the latter,
more pessimism about mobility leads to more support for equality of opportunity policies. Treated
respondents on average support more spending on equality of opportunity policies and are more
likely to perceive unequal opportunities as a major problem. They also support the estate tax.
There is no effect on support for equality of outcome policies, such as the budget allocated to the
Safety Net or the income tax rates. This pattern is consistent with the cross-sectional relations from
Section 4.3, where equality of opportunity policies exhibited a stronger correlation with mobility
perceptions.
On the contrary, the treatment has virtually no effect on policy preferences for right-wing
respondents. Despite having become significantly more pessimistic about mobility, treated rightwing respondents are not more likely to think that unequal opportunities are a problem. In fact,
they are more likely to reduce their belief that the government has tools to act against unequal
opportunities (see column 9).
We can rescale the treatment effects on policy preferences by the first-stage effect of the treatment on mobility perceptions, i.e., we can use our treatment as an instrument for mobility perceptions. This estimates the causal effect of mobility perceptions on support for policies only if
we assume that the treatment had no direct effect on policy preferences except through mobility
perceptions. We did design the treatment with this criterion in mind and, except for the aforementioned effect on the perceptions about the government’s tools of right-wing respondents, there is
no effect of the treatment on views of government. Nevertheless, the rescaled estimates reported
in the bottom panel of Table 6 are only suggestive of a potential IV estimate and mainly meant to
facilitate the comparison to the correlations in Table 3.
When comparing the rescaled treatment effects to the correlations in Table 3, we can see an
interesting pattern. Equality of opportunity policies show an even stronger treatment effect than
22

the descriptive cross-sectional relations in Section 4.3. This supports the idea that equality of
opportunity policies are causally linked to views on mobility. Equality of outcome policies, such as
the budget spent on the Safety Net and the income tax, showed an effect only in the cross-section,
but not in the experiment. This indicates that the relation between pessimism and support for expost redistribution is in fact driven by other respondent characteristics, such as views of government,
and is not causal.

5.4

Polarization: Left versus Right

Yet the message of the right is increasingly: It’s not your fault that you’re a loser; it’s the government’s fault.
J.D. Vance, Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis
Why do right-wing respondents react so differently than left-wing respondents to the same
information about mobility? We can rule out that the information in the treatment was not believed
by right-wing respondents, given their equally strong first-stage effects on mobility perceptions.25
Also recall from Section 4.3 that for right-wing respondents pessimism and optimism were not
correlated with more support for redistributive policies, except if it was conditional on effort. Here,
right-wing respondents’ perceptions conditional on effort are also strongly affected by the treatment,
and yet there is still no causal effect on support for redistribution.
The explanation probably lies in the polarized attitudes towards the government already documented in Section 4. The treatment is either “preaching to the choir” or “preaching to the deaf.”
Section 4 described how right-wing respondents have much worse views of government and are more
averse to government intervention. In fact, the treatment itself may have further deteriorated the
negative views of right-wing respondents about the government, as there is a significant treatment
effect on the belief that the government does not have the tools to resolve unequal opportunities
(column 9 of Table 6). In other words, the treatment does make respondents think there is low
social mobility, but only left-wing respondents believe that the government should do something
about it. If anything, right-wing respondents may think the government is the cause of the problem,
not a solution. The treatment has polarizing effects on respondents.

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we explore the anatomy of perceptions of intergenerational mobility and fairness of
opportunity, and how they shape preferences for redistribution. We develop detailed, quantitative
survey questions and a randomized perception treatment to collect information on perceptions of
25

It is worth noting that, although right-wing respondents are slightly more likely to say that they perceived the
survey as being left-wing biased relative to left-wing respondents, there is no difference in the perceived bias of the
survey between right-wing respondents in the control and treatment groups.

23

mobility, fairness, government, and support for redistributive policies for five countries on both
sides of the Atlantic.
Respondents seem to have inaccurate perceptions of actual intergenerational mobility: Americans are too optimistic relative to the actual mobility in the U.S., while Europeans are too pessimistic. There is a lot of heterogeneity in perceptions based on individual characteristics, and
wide geographical variation in perceptions across the U.S.. Pessimism and optimism about social
mobility are significantly correlated with policy preferences: across all countries, more pessimistic
respondents tend to favor more generous redistributive policies, especially equality of opportunity
policies. These correlations are confirmed by the exogenous treatment, which increases support for
redistribution through equality of opportunity policies.
We uncovered a stark political polarization which manifests itself not only in very different
baseline views of mobility, government, and redistribution, but also in divergent responses to the
same exogenously provided information. When treated with pessimistic information about mobility,
only left-wing respondents want significantly more redistribution. On the contrary, and although
the treatment shifts right-wing respondents’ perceptions of mobility, it has no effect on their support
for redistribution. This is likely due to their negative views of government; they may see the latter
as the cause of the problem not the solution.
There are three directions which we believe are promising for future work using such largescale cross-country survey tools and experimental treatments. First, the geographical disparities in
perceptions in the U.S. raise the question of where people draw their information about mobility
or inequality from: is it the media, interactions with their neighbors, or other sources? Second, it
would be very fruitful to understand how the existence of racial inequality in the U.S. affects the
link between mobility and support for redistribution. Third, one could explore how immigration
(and the more or less accurate perceptions about immigrants) affect preferences for redistributions
and the welfare state in Europe and the U.S..

References
Acciari, P., A. Polo, and G. Violante (2016). And yet, it moves: Intergenerational economic mobility
in italy. Unpublished .
Alesina, A. and G.-M. Angeletos (2005). Fairness and redistribution. The American Economic
Review 95 (4), 960–980.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011). Preferences for redistribution. Handbook of Social Economics,
93–132.
24

Alesina, A. and E. L. Glaeser (2004). Fighting poverty in the US and Europe: A world of difference.
Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.
Alesina, A., E. L. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote (2001). Why doesn’t the united states have a europeanstyle welfare state? Brookings Paper on Economics Activity Fall, 187–278.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005). Preferences for redistribution in the land of opportunities.
Journal of public Economics 89 (5), 897–931.
Ariely, D. and M. I. Norton (2011). Building a better america - one wealth quintile at a time.
Perspectives on Psychological Science 6 (1), 9–12.
Ashok, V., I. Kuziemko, and E. Washington (2015). Preferences for redistribution in an era of rising
inequality: Some new stylized facts and tentative explanations. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (Spring), 367–405.
Bénabou, R. and E. A. Ok (2001). Mobility as progressivity: Ranking income processes according
to equality of opportunity. Nber working paper w8431.
Björklund, A. and M. Jäntti (1997). Intergenerational income mobility in sweden compared to the
united states. The American Economic Review 87 (5), 1009–1018.
Björklund, A., J. Roine, and D. Waldenström (2012). Intergenerational top income mobility in
sweden: Capitalist dynasties in the land of equal opportunity. Journal of Public Economics 96,
474–484.
Blanden, J. (2013). Cross-country rankings in intergenerational mobility: a comparison of approaches from economics and sociology. Journal of Economic Surveys 27 (1), 38–73.
Chambers, J. and L. Swan (2015). Perceptions of u.s. social mobility are divided (and distorted)
along ideological lines. Psychological Science 26 (4), 413–423.
Charite, J., R. Fisman, and I. Kuziemko (2016). Reference points and redistributive preferences:
Experiment evidence. NBER Working Paper 21009.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2016). The effects of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility ii:
County level estimates. Stanford University Working Paper .
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. Katz (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods
on children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. American Economic
Review 106(4), 855–902.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the
geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1553–1623.
25

Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013). Biased perceptions of income distribution
and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment. Journal of Public Economics 98, 100–112.
Cullen, J. (2004). The American Dream: A Short History of an Idea that Shaped a Nation. Oxford
University Press.
Davidai, S. and T. Gilovich (2015). Building a more mobile america - one income quintile at a
time. Perspectives on Psychological Science 10 (1), 60–71.
DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007). The fox news effect: Media bias and voting. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122, 1187–1234.
DellaVigna, S. and D. Pope (2016). Predicting experimental results: Who knows what?

Nber

working paper no. 22566.
Frank, R. H. (2016). Success and luck: Good fortune and the myth of meritocracy. Princeton
University Press.
Gelber, A. and M. Weinzierl (2016). Optimal taxation when children’s abilities depend on parents’
resources. National Tax Journal 69 (1), 11–40.
George, M. (2016). Social mobility and support for redistribution from 1980-2016: Separating the
american dream from policy preferences. Working paper University of Oxford.
Gilovich, T., D. Griffin, and D. Kahneman (2002). Heuristics and Biases The Psychology of Intuitive
Judgment. Cambridge University Press.
Gottschalk, P. and E. Spolaore (2002). On the evaluation of economic mobility. Review of Economic
Studies 69 (1), 191–208.
Hilger, N. (2016a). The great escape: Intergenerational mobility in the united states since 1940.
Working paper.
Hilger, N. (2016b). Upward mobility and discrimination: the case of asian-americans. Working
paper.
Jäntti, M., B. Bratsberg, K. Roed, O. Raaum, R. Naylor, E. Osterbacka, A. Bjorklund, and T. Eriksson (2006). American exceptionalism in a new light: A comparison of intergenerational earnings
mobility in the nordic countries, the united kingdom and the united states.
Jost, J., M. Banaji, and B. Nosek (2004). A decade of system justification theory: Accumulated
evidence of conscious and unconscious bolstering of the status quo. Political Psychology 25 (6),
881–919.
26

Kuziemko, I., R. Buell, T. Reich, and M. Norton (2014). Last-place aversion: Evidence and
redistributive implications. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1).
Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How elastic are preferences for
redistribution? evidence from randomized survey experiments. The American Economic Review 105 (4), 1478–1508.
Lockwood, B. and M. Weinzierl (2015). De gustibus non est taxandum: Theory and evidence on
preference heterogeneity and redistribution. Journal of Public Economics 124, 74–80.
Lockwood, B. and M. Weinzierl (2016). Positive and normative judgments implicit in us tax policy,
and the costs of unequal growth and recessions. Journal of Monetary Economics 77, 30–47.
Meade, A. W. and S. B. Craig (2012). Identifying careless responses in survey data. Psychological
methods 17 (3), 437.
Newman, B., C. Johnston, and P. Lown (2015). False consciousness or class awareness? local
income inequality, personal economic position, and belief in american meritocracy. American
Journal of Political Science 59 (2), 326–340.
Niehues, J. and A. Peichl (2014). Lower and upper bounds of unfair inequality: Theory and evidence
for germany and the u.s. Social Choice and Welfare 43, 73–99.
Peichl, A., L. Dunnzlaff, D. Neumann, and J. Niehues (2011). Equality of opportunity and redistribution in europe. Bulletin of Economic Inequality 19, 99–129.
Peichl, A. and M. Ungerer (2016). Equality of opportunity: East vs. west germany. Bulletin of
Economic Research.
Piketty, T. (1995). Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3), 551–584.
Roine, J. and D. Waldenström (2009). Wealth concentration over the path of development: Sweden,
1873?2006. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111 (1), 151–187.
Roine, J. and D. Waldenström (2015). Long run trends in the distribution of income and wealth. In
F. B. A Atkinson (Ed.), Handbook in Income Distribution, vol 2A. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Solon, G. (2002). Cross-country differences in intergenerational earnings mobility. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 16 (3), 59–66.
Waldenström, D. (2016). Wealth-income ratios in a small, developing economy: Sweden, 1810–2010.
Journal of Economic History, forthcoming.
Weinzierl, M. (2014). The promise of positive optimal taxation: Normative diversity and a role for
equal sacrifice. Journal of Public Economics 118, 128–142.
27

Weinzierl, M. (2016). Revisiting the classical view of benefit-based taxation. Economic Journal,
forthcoming.

28

TABLES AND FIGURES
Table 1: Sample Characteristics
US
Sample
Pop
(1)
(2)
Male
18-29 y.o.
30-39 y.o.
40-49 y.o.
50-59 y.o.
60-69 y.o.
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Income Bracket
Married
Native
Employed
Unemployed
College

1
2
3
4

0.48
0.26
0.18
0.19
0.21
0.16
0.16
0.22
0.23
0.39
0.51
0.94
0.62
0.08
0.42

0.48
0.27
0.19
0.21
0.20
0.14
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.39
0.49
0.85
0.58
0.08
0.28

UK
Sample
Pop
(3)
(4)
0.48
0.26
0.18
0.21
0.18
0.16
0.31
0.35
0.11
0.23
0.47
0.89
0.65
0.05
0.37

France
Sample
Pop
(5)
(6)

0.49
0.24
0.20
0.21
0.20
0.16
0.31
0.35
0.11
0.23
0.41
0.87
0.61
0.03
0.42

0.50
0.23
0.20
0.21
0.20
0.16
0.31
0.30
0.14
0.25
0.44
0.94
0.63
0.12
0.30

0.48
0.21
0.19
0.20
0.20
0.19
0.32
0.30
0.14
0.24
0.46
0.85
0.47
0.05
0.25

Italy
Sample
Pop
(7)
(8)
0.50
0.19
0.22
0.23
0.20
0.17
0.27
0.28
0.18
0.27
0.55
0.97
0.64
0.11
0.38

0.48
0.19
0.21
0.24
0.20
0.17
0.27
0.28
0.19
0.26
0.46
0.92
0.45
0.06
0.15

Sweden
Sample
Pop
(9)
(10)
0.47
0.21
0.18
0.19
0.21
0.21
0.33
0.26
0.22
0.18
0.41
0.91
0.66
0.07
0.33

0.50
0.24
0.19
0.21
0.18
0.18
0.33
0.29
0.22
0.17
0.33
0.82
0.67
0.05
0.36

Notes: This table displays summary statistics from our surveys (in odd columns) alongside nationally representative
statistics (in even columns). Detailed sources for each variable and country are listed in the Online Appendix and
briefly summarized here. The sources are: 1) for the U.S.: The Census Bureau and Current Population Survey.
Income brackets (annual gross household income) are defined as less than $20,000; $20,000-$40,000; $40,000-$70,000;
more than $70,000. 2) for the U.K.: Eurostat Census Data and Office of National Statistics. Income brackets
(monthly net household income) are: less than £1,500; £1,500-£2,500; £2,500-£3,000; more than £3,000, 3) for
France: Eurostat Census Data and INSEE. Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are: less
than 1,500; 1,500-2,500; 2,500-2,000; more than 3,000; 4) for Italy: Eurostat Census Data, Bank of Italy and ISTAT.
Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are: less than 1,500; 1,500-,2450; 2,450-3,350; more than
3,350; 5) for Sweden: Eurostat Census Data and Statistics Sweden. Income brackets (monthly gross household
income, in SEK) are: less than 33,000; 33,000-42,000; 42,000-58,000; more than 58,000.

29

Table 2: Perceived and Actual Transition Probabilities Across Countries
Actual
(1)
Q1 to Q5

7.8

Q1 to Q4

12.7

Q1 to Q3

18.7

Q1 to Q2

27.7

Q1 to Q1

33.1

Observations
P-value from Joint Test

US
Perceived
(2)
11.7
(0.00)
12.0
(0.00)
22.3
(0.00)
21.8
(0.00)
32.2
(0.07)
2,170
0.00

Actual
(3)
11.4
12.9
19.9
25.1
30.6

UK
Perceived
(4)
10.0
(0.00)
10.6
(0.00)
19.4
(0.13)
22.2
(0.00)
37.8
(0.00)

France
Actual
Perceived
(5)
(6)
11.2
12.8
23.0
23.8
29.2

1,290
0.00

9.1
(0.00)
10.5
(0.00)
21.5
(0.00)
23.6
(0.55)
35.3
(0.00)
1,297
0.00

Actual
(7)
10.4
15.6
21.0
25.8
27.3

Italy
Perceived
(8)
10.1
(0.48)
11.2
(0.00)
21.9
(0.03)
23.1
(0.00)
33.6
(0.00)
1,242
0.00

Sweden
Actual Perceived
(9)
(10)
11.1
17.3
21.0
23.8
26.7

US vs EU
Perceived US
Perceived EU
(11)
(12)

9.2
(0.00)
11.2
(0.00)
24.5
(0.00)
23.1
(0.09)
32.0
(0.00)

11.7

881
0.00

2,170

12.0
22.3
21.8
32.2

Notes: The first five rows of the table report the average perceived probabilities (in odd columns) and actual probabilities (in even columns) that a child born
to parents in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in quintiles 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 respectively, when adult. Columns 11 and 12 show the perceived

30

probabilities for the US and the four European countries. P-values for tests of equality of the average perceived probability to the actual probability, or of the
average perceived probability in the U.S. to the one in Europe are in parentheses. The last row shows the p-value from the joint test that the average perceived
probabilities are jointly different from the actual probabilities, and, in Column 12, that the average perceptions in the U.S. are jointly different from those in
Europe. See Section 2.1 for a description of the data sources on actual mobility.

9.6
(0.00)
10.9
(0.00)
21.6
(0.06)
23.0
(0.00)
34.9
(0.00)
4,710
0.00

Table 3: Cross-sectional Relation between Perceptions and Policy Preferences
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

0.030***
(0.011)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.006***
(0.001)

0.004***
(0.001)

0.002***
(0.000)

0.020***
(0.008)

0.069***
(0.020)

-0.041***
(0.011)

0.001
(0.000)

0.019
(0.012)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.003**
(0.001)

0.003**
(0.002)

0.001**
(0.000)

0.003
(0.008)

0.039*
(0.021)

-0.033***
(0.012)

-0.000
(0.000)

0.506

0.026

0.082

0.659

0.024

0.140

0.288

0.598

0.172

-0.080***
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.006***
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.002***
(0.001)

-0.013
(0.013)

-0.054*
(0.032)

0.060***
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.009
(0.019)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.002
(0.003)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.003
(0.013)

-0.001
(0.034)

0.039**
(0.019)

0.000
(0.001)

0.007
4290

0.094
4289

0.153
4290

0.142
4290

0.003
4290

0.582
4290

0.258
3442

0.418
3442

0.141
4290

A. Unconditional Beliefs
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing
Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

p-value diff.
Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing
Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

31

p-value diff.
Observations

B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.007
(0.016)

0.001*
(0.001)

0.004**
(0.002)

0.003
(0.002)

0.002***
(0.001)

0.033***
(0.011)

0.052**
(0.026)

-0.002
(0.016)

-0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.041**
(0.019)

0.001
(0.001)

0.005***
(0.002)

0.006**
(0.003)

0.002**
(0.001)

0.029**
(0.013)

0.041
(0.031)

0.007
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.165

0.608

0.711

0.520

0.396

0.818

0.781

0.714

0.651

-0.071***
(0.027)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.010***
(0.003)

-0.010**
(0.004)

-0.003***
(0.001)

-0.012
(0.019)

-0.083*
(0.045)

0.063**
(0.026)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.032
(0.027)

-0.000
(0.001)

-0.008***
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.004)

0.000
(0.001)

-0.036*
(0.018)

-0.028
(0.045)

0.075***
(0.027)

0.001
(0.001)

0.306
2543

0.111
2542

0.664
2543

0.126
2543

0.029
2543

0.366
2543

0.382
2112

0.756
2112

0.197
2543

p-value diff.
Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing
Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for political affiliation. Interaction of mobility
perceptions and “Moderate” is not reported. Outcome variables are defined in Appendix A.3. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and
right-wing respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think about very hard
working individuals. The mobility perceptions Q1 to Q1 and Q1 to Q5 are expressed as the number of children out of 100 from the bottom quintile. Example of how to read
the coefficients: If a respondent thinks 10 more children out of 100 from the bottom quintile will remain in the bottom quintile, their preferred spending on opportunities
(education and health) as a share of the total budget increases by 0.3 percentage points. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than
45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having
at least one of the parents not born in the country, and country times survey wave fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses.

∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 4: First Stage Treatment Effects on Mobility Perceptions
Q1 to
Q1
(1)

Q1 to
Q2
(2)

Q1 to
Q3
(3)

Q1 to
Q4
(4)

Q1 to
Q5
(5)

Q1 to
Q4 (Qual.)
(6)

Q1 to
Q5 (Qual.)
(7)

American Dream
Alive
(8)

Treated × Left-Wing

10.209***
(0.980)

-2.126***
(0.488)

-6.093***
(0.532)

-2.053***
(0.353)

0.063
(0.603)

-0.189***
(0.032)

-0.180***
(0.035)

-0.010
(0.016)

Treated × Right-Wing

11.145***
(0.979)

-2.181***
(0.487)

-6.139***
(0.531)

-2.236***
(0.352)

-0.589
(0.602)

-0.225***
(0.032)

-0.236***
(0.035)

-0.045***
(0.016)

0.499
37.476
32.387
8585

0.937
23.005
22.843
8585

0.951
20.713
23.374
8585

0.713
9.700
11.156
8585

0.445
9.105
10.240
8585

0.422
2.183
2.409
8585

0.248
1.747
1.999
8585

0.140
0.238
0.459
8585

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.
Dep. Var. Mean (Left-wing)
Dep. Var. Mean (Right-wing)
Observations

B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Treated × Left-Wing

8.342***
(1.191)

0.837
(0.671)

-5.101***
(0.944)

-3.064***
(0.552)

-1.013
(0.749)

-0.172***
(0.049)

-0.172***
(0.054)

Treated × Right-Wing

8.816***
(1.158)

0.819
(0.653)

-5.383***
(0.918)

-3.309***
(0.537)

-0.943
(0.728)

-0.209***
(0.048)

-0.151***
(0.052)

0.775
27.044
21.007
5118

0.985
22.368
20.905
5118

0.831
27.885
31.275
5118

0.751
12.925
15.391
5118

0.947
9.777
11.422
5118

0.592
2.743
3.066
5117

0.779
2.304
2.640
5117

p-value diff.
Dep. Var. Mean (Left-wing)
Dep. Var. Mean (Right-wing)
Observations

Notes: The table reports treatment effects on mobility perceptions. The dependent variable in Column j for j =
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 is the perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile moving to quintile j. The dependent variable
in Column 6 (respectively, 7) measures qualitatively on a scale from 1 to 5 the respondent’s perceived probability of
moving from the first to the fourth (respectively, to the fifth) quintile for a child from the bottom quintile, where 1
means “Close to zero” and 5 means “High”. Panel A studies the effect on unconditional probabilities, while panel
B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual effort. The dependent variable
in Column 8 is a dummy equal to one if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the statement that in her
country “everybody has a chance to make it and be economically successful.” “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test
of equality of the effects among left- and right-wing respondents. “Dep. Var. Mean (Left-wing)” and “Dep. Var.
Mean (Right-wing)” are the means of the dependent variable for respondents in the control group who are left-wing
or right-wing, respectively. All regressions include the same controls as Table 3. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗

p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

32

Table 5: Persistence of Treatment Effects on Mobility Perceptions
First Survey
All Respondents
(1)

First Survey
Who Took Follow Up
(2)

Follow up
Respondents
(3)

8.308***
(0.899)

9.254***
(1.748)

5.671***
(1.675)

-1.731***
(0.444)

-1.428
(0.920)

-0.968
(0.943)

-5.479***
(0.491)

-6.676***
(1.019)

-3.945***
(1.013)

-1.733***
(0.335)

-1.879***
(0.642)

-1.417**
(0.688)

0.636
(0.582)

0.729
(1.243)

0.659
(1.069)

-0.140**
(0.062)

-0.110*
(0.066)

-0.245***
(0.034)

-0.116*
(0.070)

-0.044
(0.071)

3354

815

815

Q1 to Q1
Treated
Q1 to Q2
Treated
Q1 to Q3
Treated
Q1 to Q4
Treated
Q1 to Q5
Treated

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
Treated

-0.230***
(0.030)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
Treated
Obs.

Notes: The coefficients and standard errors in row j refer to a regression of the variable listed in row j on a dummy
for being in the treatment group. Column 1 shows the effects on the full sample of respondents in the first survey,
while column 2 shows the effects in the first survey, but only for respondents who also took the follow up survey.
Column 3 shows the effects in the follow up survey. All regressions include the same controls as Table 3. Standard
errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

33

Table 6: Treatment Effects on Policy Preferences
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

39.1
35.8

0.4
0.2

4.1
3.4

5.8
4.8

0.3
0.2

15.2
12.7

40.6
36.3

8.9
11.9

0.8
0.7

Treated X Left-Wing

0.823**
(0.398)

0.032*
(0.017)

0.078**
(0.039)

0.124**
(0.053)

0.103***
(0.022)

0.111
(0.281)

0.551
(0.686)

0.257
(0.389)

-0.008
(0.023)

Treated X Right-Wing

0.031
(0.397)

-0.001
(0.017)

-0.025
(0.039)

-0.020
(0.053)

0.018
(0.022)

0.200
(0.281)

0.661
(0.691)

-0.386
(0.392)

-0.049**
(0.023)

0.159
8585

0.164
8584

0.061
8585

0.056
8585

0.007
4281

0.823
8585

0.910
6851

0.245
6851

0.211
4281

Q1 to Q1 X Left-Wing

0.082**
(0.040)

0.003*
(0.002)

0.008**
(0.004)

0.012**
(0.005)

0.011***
(0.002)

0.011
(0.028)

0.052
(0.065)

0.024
(0.038)

-0.001
(0.002)

Q1 to Q1 X Right-Wing

0.003
(0.036)

-0.000
(0.002)

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.005)

0.002
(0.002)

0.018
(0.025)

0.059
(0.062)

-0.034
(0.035)

-0.004**
(0.002)

0.143
8585

0.149
8584

0.056
8585

0.053
8585

0.004
4281

0.848
8585

0.938
6851

0.257
6851

0.276
4281

Dep. Var. Mean (Left-wing)
Dep. Var. Mean (Right-wing)
A. Treatment Effects

p-value diff.
Observations

B. IV Estimates

34
p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: Panel A reports the treatment effects, while Panel B scales the effect of the treatment on the policy in each column by the first stage effect of the treatment
on the perceived probability of remaining in the first quintile, by regressing the policy listed in the column on the perceived probability of remaining in the first
quintile, instrumented by a dummy for being in the treatment group. See the notes to Table 3. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Figure 2: Actual and Perceived Mobility Across Countries
A: Q1 to Q1 probability
38

12

UK

US

Pessimistic

36

11

FR
34

Average Perceived Probability

Average Perceived Probability

B: Q1 to Q5 probability

IT
US

SE

32

30

28

Optimistic

IT

Optimistic

10

9

FR

8

Pessimistic

7

26

24

UK
SE

6
24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

6

7

8

Actual Probability

9

10

11

12

Actual Probability

C: Q1 to Q2, Q1 to Q3 and Q1 to Q4 probabilities
30

Average Perceived Probability

28
26
SE

24
US

22
20

FR
SE

IT
UK

IT

FR

US

UK

18
16
14
12

US
FR

10
10

12

UK
14

IT
16

SE
18

20

22

24

26

28

30

Actual Probability
Q1 to Q2

Q1 to Q3

Q1 to Q4

Notes: The figures shows the average perceived probability in each country (y axis) of a child from the bottom quintile
remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A), moving to the top quintile (Panel B), or moving to the second, third, or
fourth quintile (Panel C) against the actual probability in the country (x axis). The dotted line is the 45 degree line.

35

Figure 3: Accuracy of Individual Level Perceptions
B: Europe

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

CDF

CDF

.6

.6

.8

.8

1

1

A: United States

-80

-60

-40
Negative Absolute Error
Q1 to Q1

-20

0

Q1 to Q5

-80

-60

-40
Negative Absolute Error
Q1 to Q1

-20

0

Q1 to Q5

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of the negative absolute error – the absolute deviation between the actual
and the perceived probability of remaining in the bottom quintile (Q1 to Q1) and of moving to the top quintile
(Q1 to Q5)– in the U.S. (panel A) and European samples (panel B). The dotted red (respectively, blue) line is the
negative absolute error of the average perception for the Q1 to Q5 (respectively, Q1 to Q1) transition probability.
The accuracy at the individual level is considerably worse than the accuracy of the average perception.

36

Figure 4: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions
A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

B: Probability of moving to the top quintile

Male

13

Children

12

Young

11

African-American

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

37
25

30
35
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

No

40

8

10

12
14
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

16

18

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the
top quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals around the average response. See Appendix A.3 for
a definition of the groups.

Conditional Minus Unconditional Probability
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10

Figure 5: The Perceived Role of Effort

Q1 to Q1

US

Q1 to Q2

Q1 to Q3

UK

France

Q1 to Q4

Italy

Q1 to Q5

Sweden

Notes: The figure shows, for each country and each quintile i, the means and 95% confidence intervals for the
difference between the perceived probability that a child born in a family from the bottom quintile will be in quintile
i in the question that asks respondents to think about a very hard working person (i.e., mobility conditional on effort)
and the perceived probability in the baseline question (i.e., unconditional on effort).

38

Figure 6: Actual and perceived probability of moving from the bottom to
the top quintile across U.S. states
Panel A:

Average Perceived Probability

Average Actual Probability

> 14.74
12.63 - 14.74
10.52 - 12.63
9.14 - 10.52
8.06 - 9.14
6.44 - 8.06
<6.44
No data

Panel B:
Ratio of Perceived to Actual State-Level Probability

Ratio of Perceived to Actual National Probability

>2.17
1.55 - 2.17
1.28 - 1.55
0.96 - 1.28
<0.96
No data

>1.73
1.58 - 1.73
1.39 - 1.58
1.21 - 1.39
<1.21
No data

Notes: The top left panel shows the actual probability of a person born in a family in the bottom quintile moving
to the top quintile in each state. The top right panel shows the corresponding average perceived probability among
respondents in our survey who live in that state. The bottom left panel shows the ratio of the average state-level
perceived probability to the actual state-level probability. The bottom right panel shows the ratio of average statelevel perceived probability to the average real national probability. The average real national probability of moving
from the bottom to the top quintile in the United States is 7.8%. Data on actual transition probabilities is from
Chetty et al. (2014).

39

Figure 7: Perceptions of Government and Fairness
A: By Country

B: By Political Affiliation

Economic System Fair

10

American Dream Alive

9

Effort Reason Poor

8

Effort Reason Rich

7

Never Trust Government

6

Government Has No Tools

5

Prefer Low Govt. Intervention

4

Lowering Taxes Better

3

Unequal Opp. No Problem

2

Negative View of Government

1

40
0

.2
US

UK

.4
.6
Share Answering Yes
France

Italy

.8
Sweden

0

.2

.4
.6
Share Answering Yes
Left-Wing

.8

1

Right-Wing

Notes: The figure shows the share of respondents answering “Yes” to the questions listed on the vertical axis. Panel A shows shares by country, while Panel B
shows shares by political affiliation. Economic System Fair, American Dream Alive, Effort Reason Poor, Effort Reason Rich are dummies equal to one if the
respondent says that the economic system in her country is “basically fair,” she agrees or strongly agrees with the statement that in her country “everybody
has a chance to make it and be economically successful,” “lack of effort on his or her own part” is the most important reason for a person being poor, and
“she or he worked harder than others” is the most important reason for a person being rich. Never Trust Government, Government Has No Tools, Prefer Low
Govt. Intervention, Lowering Taxes Better, Unequal Opp. No Problem are dummies equal to one if the respondent says that the government can never be
trusted to do what is right, thinks that the government has the ability and the tools to do nothing or not much to improve mobility, supports little government
intervention (less than 5 on a scale from 1 to 7), thinks that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage more investment in economic
growth” is better than “raising taxes [...] to expand programs for the poor” to improve mobility, perceive unequal opportunities to be “Not a problem” or “A
small problem,” respectively. Negative View of Government is a dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that she can “never” trust the government, or
that to reduce the inequality of opportunities between children born in poor and rich families the government has the ability and the tools to do “nothing at
all” or “not much,” or that she supports little government intervention (less than 5 on the scale from 1 to 7), or that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and
corporations to encourage more investment in economic growth” would be the better way to equalize opportunities.

APPENDIX
A.1

Survey Information

We collected data in three waves. The first smaller pilot wave (Wave A) consisted of only the survey
part (without a treatment) of about 500 respondents in February 2016. We append this wave to
the main wave for the descriptive analysis of perceptions in Section 326 The second and main
wave (Wave B) with the perception treatment was conducted in September 2016. We conducted
a third wave (Wave C) in the United States in October 2016 to ensure robustness and increase
sample size in the U.S. The only difference between Wave B and Wave C was that in the latter all
respondents were asked the questions on mobility for very hard-working people. Follow-up surveys
were conducted in the US about one week after wave B and wave C, respectively.
We report the full text of the U.S. version of the survey in Section A.5, and the links to the
survey in each country in Section A.4.
Table A1 reports the number of respondents for each survey wave and country. Table A2
summarizes the 8 randomization groups of Wave B. Wave C had only 4 randomization groups
(Group 1-Group 4). Table A3 reports the share of respondents with strange answer patterns in the
“ladder” mobility question. Table A4 shows that respondents assigned to different randomization
groups are not different in terms of baseline demographic characteristics.

Table A1: Survey waves, Dates and Sample Sizes
Sample size

Date

Wave A - US

499

February 2016

Wave A - US Extra

204

April 2016

Wave A - UK

550

February 2016

Wave A - France

550

February 2016

Wave A - Italy

548

February 2016

Wave A - Sweden

495

February 2016

Wave B - US

2002

September 2016

Wave B - Follow Up

423

September 2016

Wave B - UK

1598

September 2016

Wave B - France

1598

September 2016

Wave B - Italy

1595

September 2016

Wave B - Sweden

999

September 2016

Wave C - US

2000

October 2016

Wave C - Follow Up

586

October 2016

26
We conducted a small additional survey in the US in April 2016, in order to collect additional responses from
the less populous states. We use responses from this additional wave in section 3.4.

41

Table A2: Randomization Groups

Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group
Group

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Treatment/Control

Saw govt. block before/after
mobility questions

Effort/talent

Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment

Before
Before
After
After
Before
Before
After
After

Effort
Effort
Effort
Effort
Talent
Talent
Talent
Talent

Notes: “Before” and “After” refer to whether the block was seen before or after main perception treatment (or the
equivalent place in the survey for the control group).

Table A3: Response Patterns
100 in any quintile
100 in quintile Q2 or Q3 or Q4 or Q5
0 in quintile Q1 or Q2 or Q3
20 in each quintile

Wave A

Waves B and C

0.05
0.03
0.12
0.06

0.04
0.02
0.12
0.06

Notes: The table shows the share of respondents whose responses to the ladder question on perceptions exhibits any
of the patterns described, namely: whether the respondent puts the number 100 in any of the quintiles, puts the
number 100 in any of the quintiles except Q1, puts the number 0 in the quintiles Q1, Q2, or Q3, and finally, puts the
same number (20) in all of the quintiles.

42

Table A4: Covariates Balance Across Groups
Government

Effort

Treated

Questions

Questions

(1)

(2)

(3)

Male

0.99

0.51

0.70

Age

0.45

0.42

0.58

Married

0.35

0.70

0.45

Has children

0.60

0.13

0.33

Native

0.17

0.73

0.84

Employed

0.92

0.73

0.58

Unemployed

0.23

0.59

0.41

Not in labor force

0.79

0.86

0.79

Has university degree

0.61

0.42

0.00

Left-wing

0.91

0.98

0.12

Notes: The table shows the p-value from a series of regressions of the form yic = α + βCovariatei + γc + ic , where
Covariatei is the variable listed in the row and γc are country fixed effects. In the column “Treated”, yic is a dummy
equal to one if the respondent was in the treatment group and zero if she was in the control group. In column (2),
yic is a dummy equal to one if the respondent saw the three survey questions on fairness and government whose
order was randomized (described in the text) before the main perception treatment (or the equivalent place in the
survey for those not treated by the main perception treatment). In column (3), yic is a dummy equal to one if the
respondent was asked about the mobility prospects of very hard-working children, and equal to zero is she was asked
about the mobility prospects of very talented children.

43

A.2

Additional Results

Figure A1: Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects By Political Affiliation

-.1

0

.1

.2

Panel A:

Government Interv.

Support Estate Tax
Support Equal. Opp. Pol.

Govt. Tools
Unequal Opp. Very Serious Prob.

Left-Wing

Right-Wing

-1

0

1

2

Panel B:

Budget Opp.

Tax Rate Top 1
Budget Safety Net

Tax Rate Bottom 50

Left-Wing

Right-Wing

Notes: The figures shows the treatment effects for left-wing and right-wing respondents from Panel A of Table 6,
together with 90% confidence intervals. See the notes to Table 6.

44

Figure A2:
States

Actual and Perceived Transition Probabilities Across U.S.

Perceived and actual Q1 to Q5: All states (Left panel) and Omitting South-Eastern

20

20

States (Right Panel)

AR

AR

18
VA
DE
MI
FL
TN
IN
KY
LA

GA
SC
NC
MS

OH

-0.303**
(0.145)

CO
NJ
OR
VT
NE
KS
PA
TX NY
WA
MT

CA
MA
NHMN

MD
CT
MO
ILAZ

WY

OH

-0.338*
(0.172)

CO
NJ
OR
VT
NE
KS
PA
TX NY
WA

DE
MI
IN
LA

CA
MA
NHMN

MD
CT
MO
ILAZ
WI
ME
ID
NM

MT

SD

UT
IA
WY

ND

4

4

6

ND

6

8

SD

UT
IA

WI
ME
ID
NM

NV
OK

Perceived Probability
10
12
14
16

NV
OK

AL

8

Perceived Probability
10
12
14
16

18

WV

RI

4

6

8

10
12
14
Actual Probability

16

18

20

RI

4

6

8

10
12
14
Actual Probability

16

18

20

20

-0.293***
(0.100)

RI

ND

VT

Perceived Probability
30
35
40

WY

CT

AR

-0.517***
(0.190)

OR
NE
UT
IA

NM
LA

NH

CO
SD
ID MN
MT
TX CA
KS

Perceived Probability
10
15

45

50

Perceived and actual Q1 to Q1 (Left panel) and Q1 to Q4 (Right panel)

MO
IN

WI WA

MD

TN
ME IL MS
PAWV
AZ
GA MI
FL NY AL
SC
NJ
MA
NV

OH

DE
NC

WVNJ MA
FL KY
NY
KS
AL MIVA
GA
NV
NC TN
NMTX
WA
OK
SC LA MD IL
CO CAMT
MS
DE
AZ
PA
OR
CT
MN
OH
MO IN
WI

KY

VT
ME
NH

NE

ID
IA

SD

UT

ND

25

WY
VA
OK
AR

5

20

RI

20

25

30

35
Actual Probability

40

45

50

5

10

15

20

Actual Probability

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability in each state (y axis) against the actual probability in the
state (x axis), together with the best-fit line and the coefficient and standard error of the slope. The dotted line is
the 45 degree line. See the notes to Figure 6.

45

A.3

Variable Definitions

Demographic variables:
Male: respondent is male.
Young: respondent is younger than 45 years old.
African-American: respondent is African-American (asked in the U.S. only).
Children: respondent has at least one child.
Rich: respondent’s household income is above the 75th percentile of the respondents’ household
income distribution in the country.
College: respondent has college degree.
Left-wing: respondent’s views on economic issues are liberal or very liberal.
Right-wing: respondent’s views on economic issues are conservatives or very conservatives.
Moved up: dummy equal to one if the level of status of the respondent’s job is higher than his
father’s one.
Immigrant: dummy equal to one if at least one of the respondent’s parents is not born in the country.
Mobility Perceptions:
Q1 to Q[X] : perceived probability of being in the Xth quintile as an adult for a child with parents
in the first quintile.
Q1 to Q[X] Effort: perceived probability of being in the Xth quintile as an adult for a hard-working
child with parents in the first quintile.
Q1 to Q4 (Qual.): qualitative question on perceived chances, on a scale from 1 to 5, of moving
from the first to the fourth quintile, where 1 is “Close to zero”, 2 is “Low”, 3 is “Fairly low”, 4 is
“Fairly high” and 5 is “High”.
Q1 to Q5 (Qual.): qualitative question on perceived chances, on a scale from 1 to 5, of moving
from the first to the fifth quintile, where 1 is “Close to zero”, 2 is “Low”, 3 is “Fairly low”, 4 is
“Fairly high” and 5 is “High”.
Perceptions of Fairness:
Economic System Fair : dummy equal to one if respondent believes that the economic system in
her country is basically fair, since all have an equal opportunity to succeed.
American Dream Alive: dummy equal to one if respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the statement “In [country] everybody has a chance to make it and be economically successful” (equal to
zero if neither agrees nor disagrees, disagrees, or strongly disagrees).
Effort Reason Poor : dummy equal to one if respondent believes that “Lack of effort on his or her
own part” is a more important determinant of why a person is poor than “Circumstances beyond
his or her control”.
Effort Reason Rich: dummy equal to one if respondent believes that “Because she or he worked
harder than others” is a more important determinant of why a person is poor than “Because she
46

or he had more advantages than others”.
Unequal Opp. Problem: dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that if children from poor
and rich backgrounds have unequal opportunities in life this is “A problem” or “A serious problem”
or “A very serious problem” (equal to zero if it is “Not a problem” or “A small problem”).
Unequal Opp. No Problem: dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that if children from
poor and rich backgrounds have unequal opportunities in life this is “Not a problem” or “A small
problem”.
Unequal Opp. Very Serious Problem: dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that if children
from poor and rich backgrounds have unequal opportunities in life this is “A very serious problem”.
Policy Preferences and Role of Government:
Tax Rate Top 1 : Average income tax rate for households in the top 1% of the income distribution.
Tax Rate Bottom 50 : Average income tax rate for households in the bottom 50% of the income
distribution.
Support Estate Tax : Dummy equal to one if respondent is in favor of the estate tax (defined as
answering 4 or 5 on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 means “do not support at all” and 5 means
“strongly support”).
Budget Safety Net: share of current government budget that should be allocated to safety net
policies.
Budget Opp.: share of current government budget that should be allocated to education and health.
Support Equality Opp. Policies: respondent’s support, on a scale from 1 to 5, for policies to increase
the opportunities for children born in poor families and to foster more equality of opportunity. The
respondent was told that “to finance an expansion of policies promoting equal opportunity, it would
have to be the case that either other policies are scaled down or taxes are raised”.
Government Interv.: respondent’s support, on a scale from 1 to 7, for government intervention to
make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal.
Lowering Taxes Better : dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that “lowering taxes on
wealthy people and corporations to encourage more investment in economic growth” would do more
to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal than “raising taxes
on wealthy people and corporations to expand programs for the poor”.
Trust Govt.: dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that she can trust the government to
do what is right “Most of the time” or “Always” (it takes value zero if the answer is “Never” or
“Only some of the time”).
Never trust government: dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that she can never trust
the government to do what is right.
Govt. Tools: dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that to reduce the inequality of opportunities between children born in poor and rich families the government has the ability and the
tools to do “Some” or “A lot” (it takes value zero if the answer is “Nothing at all” or “Not much”).
Government has no tools: dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that to reduce the in47

equality of opportunities between children born in poor and rich families the government has the
ability and the tools to do “Nothing at all” or “Not much.”
Prefer Low Govt. Intervention: dummy equal to one if the respondent prefers a low degree of
government intervention to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less
unequal (at point 4 or below on the scale from 1 to 7).
Negative View of Government: dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that she can “never”
trust the government, or that to reduce the inequality of opportunities between children born in
poor and rich families the government has the ability and the tools to do “Nothing at all” or “Not
much,” or that she supports little government intervention (less than 5 on the scale from 1 to 7 of
the variable Government Interv.), or that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to
encourage more investment in economic growth” would be the better way to equalize opportunities.

48

A.4

Links to surveys

• Survey U.S.: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_5dxninfErZ246X3
• Survey U.K.: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_7TCttX32sJZGUnP
• Survey France: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_55Nxjd0VSEVnHBb
• Survey Italy: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_ezmyMMB2lTJgoeh
• Survey Sweden: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_cZxXzaGNNjn6w5L

A.5

Detailed Survey Questionnaires

Answer options are in italic, separated by a semicolon.
1. See Figure A5
Yes, I would like to take part in this study, and confirm that I AM A U.S. RESIDENT and
am 18 or older; No, I would not like to participate.
2. What is your gender?
Male; Female
3. What is your age?
4. What was your TOTAL household income, before taxes, last year (2015)?
$0 - $9,999; $10,000 - $14,999; $15,000 - $19,999; $20,000 - $29,999; $30,000 - $39,999;
$40,000 - $49,999; $50,000 - $69,999; $70,000 - $89,999; $90,000 - $109,999; $110,000 $149,999; $150,000 - $199,999; $200,000 +
5. Please indicate your marital status
Single; Married; Other
6. How many children do you have?
I do not have children; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5 or more
7. How would you describe your ethnicity/race?
European American/White; African American/Black; Hispanic/Latino; Asian/Asian American; Other
8. Were you born in the United States?
Yes; No
49

9. Were both of your parents born in the United States?
Yes; No
10. Where was your father born?
Unites States; South or Central America, or Mexico; Canada; Europe; Asia; Africa; Oceania
11. In which state do you live?
12. In which ZIP code do you live?
13. Which category best describes your highest level of education?
Eighth Grade or less; Some High School; High School degree / GED; Some College; 2-year
College Degree; 4-year College Degree; Master’s Degree; Doctoral Degree; Professional Degree
(JD, MD, MBA)
14. Which category best describes your father’s highest level of education?
Eighth Grade or less; Some High School; High School degree / GED; Some College; 2-year
College Degree; 4-year College Degree; Master’s Degree; Doctoral Degree; Professional Degree
(JD, MD, MBA); I come from a single-parent family and my father was not present
15. Which category best describes your mother’s highest level of education?
Eighth Grade or less; Some High School; High School degree / GED; Some College; 2-year
College Degree; 4-year College Degree; Master’s Degree; Doctoral Degree; Professional Degree
(JD, MD, MBA); I come from a single-parent family and my mother was not present
16. What is your current employment status?
Full-time employee; Part-time employee; Self-employed or small business owner; Unemployed
and looking for work; Student; Not in labor force (for example: retired, or full-time parent)
17. If you compare your job (or your last job if you currently don’t have a job) with the job your
father had while you were growing up, would you say that the level of status of your job is:
Much higher than my father’s; Higher than my father’s; About equal to my father’s; Lower
than my father’s; Much lower than my father’s; My father did not have a job while I was
growing up OR I come from a single-parent family
18. If you compare your job (or your last job if you currently don’t have a job) with the job your
mother had while you were growing up, would you say that the level of status of your job is:
Much higher than my mother’s; Higher than my mother’s; About equal to my mother’s; Lower
than my mother’s; Much lower than my mother’s; My mother did not have a job while I was
growing up OR I come from a single-parent family
50

19. When you were growing up, compared with American families back then, would you say your
family income was:
Far below average; Below average; Average; Above average; Far above average
20. Right now, compared with American families, would you say your own household income is:
Far below average; Below average; Average; Above average; Far above average
21. On economic policy matters, where do you see yourself on the liberal/conservative spectrum?
Very liberal; Liberal; Moderate; Conservative; Very conservative
22. Before proceeding to the next set of questions, we want to ask for your feedback about the
responses you provided so far. It is vital to our study that we only include responses from
people who devoted their full attention to this study. This will not affect in any way the
payment you will receive for taking this survey. In your honest opinion, should we use your
responses, or should we discard your responses since you did not devote your full attention
to the questions so far?
Yes, I have devoted full attention to the questions so far and I think you should use my
responses for your study; No, I have not devoted full attention to the questions so far and I
think you should not use my responses for your study.
23. Do you think the economic system in the United States is:
Basically fair, since all Americans have an equal opportunity to succeed; Basically unfair,
since all Americans do not have an equal opportunity to succeed
24. Which has more to do with why a person is poor?
Lack of effort on his or her own part; Circumstances beyond his or her control
25. Which has more to do with why a person is rich?
Because she or he worked harder than others; Because she or he had more advantages than
others
26. How much of the time do you think you can trust the government to do what is right?
Never; Only some of the time; Most of the time; Always
27. If children from poor and rich backgrounds have unequal opportunities in life, do you think
this is:
Not a problem at all; A small problem; A problem; A serious problem; A very serious problem
28. To reduce the inequality of opportunities between children born in poor and rich families, the
government has the ability and the tools to do:
Nothing at all; Not much; Some; A lot
51

29. We would now like to ask you what you think about the life opportunities of children from
very poor families.
For the following questions, we focus on 500 families that represent the U.S. population. We
divide them into five groups on the basis of their income, with each group containing 100
families. These groups are: the poorest 100 families, the second poorest 100 families, the
middle 100 families, the second richest 100 families, and the richest 100 families.
In the following questions, we will ask you to evaluate the chances that children born in one
of the poorest 100 families, once they grow up, will belong to any of these income groups.
Please fill out the entries to the right of the figure below to tell us, in your opinion, how many
out of 100 children coming from the poorest 100 families will grow up to be in each income
group.
From our experience, this question will take you at the very least 1 minute to answer.
Please note that your entries need to add up to 100 or you will not be able to move on to the
next page.
Figure 1 here.
30. Do you think the chances that a child from the poorest 100 families will grow up to be among
the richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
31. Do you think the chances that a child from the poorest 100 families will grow up to be among
the second richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
32. We are still interested in the life opportunities of children from very poor families, but we
now focus on a different group of poor children.
From our experience, this question will take you at the very least 45 seconds to answer.
Consider 100 children coming from the poorest 100 families.
These children are very determined and put in hard work both at school and, later in life,
when finding a job and doing that job.
Please fill out the entries to the right of the figure below to tell us, in your opinion, how many
out of these 100 children will grow up to be in each income group.
Please note that your entries need to add up to 100 or you will not be able to move on to the
next page.
Figure 1 here.
52

33. Do you think the chances that one of these hard working children will grow up to be among
the richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
34. Do you think the chances that one of these hard working children will grow up to be among
the second richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
35. We are still interested in the life opportunities of children from very poor families, but we
now focus on a different group of poor children.
From our experience, this question will take you at the very least 45 seconds to answer.
Consider 100 children coming from the poorest 100 families.
These children are very talented.
Please fill out the entries to the right of the figure below to tell us, in your opinion, how many
out of these 100 children will grow up to be in each income group.
Please note that your entries need to add up to 100 or you will not be able to move on to the
next page.
Figure 1 here.
36. Do you think the chances that one of these talented children will grow up to be among the
richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
37. Do you think the chances that one of these talented children will grow up to be among the
second richest 100 families are:
Close to zero; Low; Fairly low; Fairly high; High
38. How do you feel about the following statement?
”In the United States everybody has a chance to make it and be economically successful.”
Strongly agree; Agree; Neither agree nor disagree; Disagree; Strongly disagree
39. Some people think that the government should not concern itself with making the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal. Others think that the government
should do everything in its power to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich
families less unequal. Think of a score of 1 as meaning that the government should not concern itself with making the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal,
and a score of 7 meaning that the government should do everything in its power to reduce
this inequality of opportunities.
53

What score between 1 and 7 comes closest to the way you feel?
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7
40. What do you think would do more to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich
families less unequal?
Lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage more investment in economic
growth; Raising taxes on wealthy people and corporations to expand programs for the poor.
41. Do you support more policies to increase the opportunities for children born in poor families
and to foster more equality of opportunity, such as education policies? Naturally, to finance
an expansion of policies promoting equal opportunity, it would have to be the case that either
other policies are scaled down or taxes are raised.
I very strongly oppose more policies promoting equality of opportunity; I oppose more policies
promoting equality of opportunity; I am indifferent; I support more policies promoting equality
of opportunity; I very strongly support more policies promoting equality of opportunity.
42. In the next two questions, we ask you to think about the total level of funds that the government raises and spends today on various policies. For the purpose of these questions, suppose
that the level of government spending is fixed at its current level and cannot be changed. We
will ask about your views on two aspects:
• First, on the fair split of the tax burden to raise this level of funds.
• Second, on how you think the government should spend this level of funds.
43. See Figure A3
44. We now ask you how you would like to spend the total government budget. Suppose that
you are the person deciding on the U.S. budget for the next year. You can choose how you
want to divide the budget (in percent) between the following 6 categories:
See Figure A4
45. The estate tax is a tax on the transfer of wealth from a deceased person to her heirs. This
tax applies only to individuals with wealth above a certain threshold. On a scale from 1 to
5, how would you rate your support for the estate tax, where 1 means do not support at all
and 5 means strongly support?
1; 2; 3; 4; 5
46. Do you feel that this survey was biased?
Yes, left-wing bias; Yes, right-wing bias; No, it did not feel bias
47. Please feel free to give us any feedback or impression regarding this survey.

54

Figure A3: Question on preferred income tax rates for various income
groups

55

Figure A4: Question on preferred allocation of government budget

56

Figure A5: First page of the survey (English version)

Figure A6: Treatment animation - introduction

57

Figure A7: Treatment animation
(a) First screen

(b) Second screen

58

A.6

(Mis)perceptions of inequality

We conducted an additional, small survey in the U.S. (484 respondents) to elicit respondents’
perceptions of inequality. The survey had no treatment component, and asked the same questions
on perceptions of mobility as our main surveys.
We asked questions about inequality in i) income, ii) capital income more specifically, and iii)
wealth. For each of these three variables, we asked respondents about their perceived shares of
the top 1%, the top 10%, and the bottom 50%. We also asked respondents about their perceived
income tax rates for different groups of taxpayers. The additional questions are reported below.
New Questionnaire Questions:
1. What percent of total national income in the United States do you think goes to the top 1%
richest households? (Please enter a number between 0 and 100 to indicate the percent (%)).
2. What percent of total national income do you think goes to the top 10% richest households?
3. Finally, what percent of total national income do you think goes to the bottom 50% (poorest)
households?
4. Now think about total income coming from capital in the United States. This is income that
comes for instance from interest on savings in your bank account or mutual fund, in the form
of capital gains or dividends from holding stock in companies, or from investing in a business.
Take the top 1% richest households by capital income (the 1% of households with the most
capital income). What percent of total capital income in the United States do you think goes
to these households? (Please enter a number between 0 and 100 to indicate the percent (%)).
5. What percent of total capital income do you think goes to the top 10% richest households?
6. Finally, what percent of total capital income do you think goes to the bottom 50% (poorest)
households?
7. Now think about the total wealth in the United States.
Take the top 1% wealthiest households (the 1% of households with the most wealth). What
percent of total wealth in the United States do you think goes to these households? (Please
enter a number between 0 and 100 to indicate the percent (%)).
8. What percent of total wealth do you think goes to the top 10% wealthiest households?
9. Finally, what percent of total wealth do you think goes to the bottom 50% (least wealthy)
households?
10. Please use the sliders below to tell us how much you think each of the following groups
currently pays in income tax as a percentage of their total income.
59

• The top 1% (Richest)
• The next 9% (Only 1% of households earn more, 90% earn less)
• The next 40% (Only 10% earn more, 50% earn less)
• The bottom 50% (Poorest)

60

Table A5: Correlation between perceptions of mobility and perceptions of inequality and taxes
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Panel A:

Perceived
Share
Income
Top 1

Perceived
Share
Income
Top 10

Perceived
Share
Capital
Top 1

Perceived
Share
Capital
Top 10

Perceived
Share
Wealth
Top 1

Perceived
Share
Wealth
Top 10

Perceived
Average
Tax Rate
Top 1

Q1 to Q1

0.115**
(0.054)

0.189***
(0.054)

0.146***
(0.056)

0.179***
(0.056)

0.179***
(0.055)

0.192***
(0.056)

-0.103**
(0.042)

Panel B:

Overestimate
Share
Income
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Income
Top 10

Overestimate
Share
Capital
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Capital
Top 10

Overestimate
Share
Wealth
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Wealth
Top 10

Overestimate
Average
Tax Rate
Top 1

0.062
(0.044)

0.160***
(0.046)

0.173***
(0.047)

0.157***
(0.041)

0.139***
(0.045)

0.051**
(0.023)

-0.078*
(0.047)

Overestimate
Share
Income
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Income
Top 10

Overestimate
Share
Capital
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Capital
Top 10

Overestimate
Share
Wealth
Top 1

Overestimate
Share
Wealth
Top 10

Overestimate
Average
Tax Rate
Top 1

0.024
(0.043)

-0.127***
(0.045)

-0.109**
(0.046)

-0.157***
(0.040)

-0.122***
(0.044)

-0.037
(0.023)

0.093**
(0.045)

484

484

484

484

484

484

484

Overestimate Q1 to Q1

Panel C:

61
Overestimate Q1 to Q5

Observations

Notes: Regression results from the variables in the columns on the variables in the rows. The dependent variables are: columns 1 and 2: the perceived share of national
income of the top 1% and top 10%. Columns 3 and 4: the perceived share of capital income of the top 1% and top 10%. Columns 5 and 6: the perceived share of wealth of
the top 1% and top 10%. Column 7: perceived average income tax rate for the top 1%. In Panel A the dependent variables are the perceived shares of income/capital/wealth
going to the group or the perceived average tax rate. In Panel B and C the dependent variables are dummies equal to one if the perceived share (or perceived tax rate) is
higher than reality. Q1 to Q1 is the perceived probability that a child born to parents in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in quintile 1 when adult.
Overestimate Q1 to Q1 (respectively, Overestimate Q1 to Q5 ) is a dummy equal to one if the perceived probability that a child born to parents in the bottom quintile of
the income distribution will be in quintile 1 (respectively, 5) when adult is higher than reality. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age
less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a college degree, political affiliation, having at least one of the parents not born in
the country. Standard errors in parentheses.

∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Figure A8: Actual and Perceived Inequality
B: Shares to the top 10%

100

100

90

90

80

80

Average Perceived Share

Average Perceived Share

A: Shares to the top 1%

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

0

10

20

30

40

Actual Share
Income
Capital

50

60

70

80

90

100

Actual Share

Wealth

Income
Capital

Wealth

C: Shares to the bottom 50%
100

Average Perceived Share

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Actual Share
Income
Capital

Wealth

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived share (y axis) of total income, capital income, and wealth going to
the top 1% of households (Panel A), to the top 10% of households (Panel B) and to the bottom 50% of households
(Panel C) against the actual shares (x axis). The dotted line is the 45 degree line. Data on actual shares of capital
income is from Saez and Zucman (2015). Data on actual shares of national income and wealth is from the World
Wealth and Income Database.

62

ONLINE APPENDIX – NOT FOR PUBLICATION
for “Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for
Redistribution”
by Alberto Alesina, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso
OA.1

Additional Tables and Figures
Table OA1: Detailed perceived transition probabilities

All Countries
All
Left
Right
US
All
Left
Right
UK
All
Left
Right
France
All
Left
Right
Italy
All
Left
Right
Sweden
All
Left
Right

Q1 to
Q1
(1)

Q1 to
Q2
(2)

Q1 to
Q3
(3)

Q1 to
Q4
(4)

Q1 to
Q5
(5)

Q1 to Q4
(Qual.)
(6)

Q1 to Q5
(Qual.)
(7)

Obs.

34.04
37.55
32.25

22.64
23.00
22.67

21.82
20.27
22.91

11.21
10.06
11.70

10.29
9.12
10.47

0.43
0.35
0.46

0.31
0.23
0.32

6,880
2,276
2,206

32.16
37.37
29.45

21.83
21.67
21.96

22.32
19.33
24.14

11.98
11.10
12.49

11.72
10.53
11.96

0.46
0.35
0.53

0.34
0.25
0.38

2,170
577
652

37.77
42.88
36.20

22.25
23.20
22.00

19.39
16.85
19.71

10.62
8.63
11.52

9.97
8.44
10.57

0.37
0.23
0.41

0.27
0.14
0.26

1,290
406
304

35.26
38.36
32.70

23.60
23.07
23.76

21.51
20.48
22.59

10.53
9.56
11.47

9.10
8.54
9.47

0.42
0.40
0.46

0.29
0.26
0.31

1,297
451
501

33.61
34.77
33.55

23.13
23.54
22.85

21.87
21.80
22.13

11.25
10.51
11.18

10.14
9.38
10.29

0.40
0.34
0.41

0.29
0.25
0.31

1,242
554
402

32.00
34.51
31.88

23.10
24.22
22.79

24.52
23.66
24.79

11.16
9.95
11.31

9.21
7.66
9.24

0.47
0.43
0.45

0.33
0.27
0.29

881
288
347

(8)

Notes: The table reports mobility perceptions. Respondents are split according to their self-reported political affiliation. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative
(5).” “All” refers to the average across all respondents. Left-wing respondents have views on economic issues that
are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative” or
“Very conservative.” Column j for j = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} shows the perceived probability of a child from from the bottom
quintile to move to quintile j. Columns 6 (respectively, 7) shows the proportion of respondents who believe that
the chance of moving from the first to the fourth (respectively, to the fifth) quintile is “fairly low,” “fairly high,” or
“high.” Column 8 reports the number of observations for each row.

1

Table OA2: The perceived role of effort
Panel A: Perceived Transition
Probabilities Conditional on Effort

Q1 to Q5
Q1 to Q4
Q1 to Q3
Q1 to Q2
Q1 to Q1
Obs.

US
(1)

UK
(2)

France
(3)

Italy
(4)

Sweden
(5)

12.47

12.54

11.39

10.86

12.57

14.83
29.33
21.14
22.23
1,735

15.20
26.38
22.09
23.79
900

15.03
29.39
20.91
23.28
908

14.22
27.61
22.53
24.78
872

17.96
31.82
19.72
17.93
656

Panel B: % Difference Between
Perceived Transition Probabilities
Conditional and Unconditional on Effort
US
(1)

UK
(2)

France
(3)

Italy
(4)

Sweden
(5)

0.06

0.26

0.25

0.07

0.36

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.24

0.43

0.43

0.26

0.61

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.31

0.36

0.37

0.26

0.30

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

-0.03

-0.01

-0.11

-0.03

-0.15

(0.01)

(0.58)

(0.00)

(0.27)

(0.00)

-0.31

-0.37

-0.34

-0.26

-0.44

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

1,735

900

908

872

656

Notes: The five rows of Panel A of the table report the average perceived probability that a child born to parents
in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in quintile 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 respectively, when adult if that
child “works very hard,” i.e., based on our survey question that asks respondents to think conditional on individual
hard work. The five rows of Panel B of the table report the percent change in the perceived probability of a child
born in a family from the bottom quintile to be in quintile 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 respectively, when adult conditional on
effort relative to the unconditional case. P-values in parentheses.

2

Table OA3: Heterogeneity in perceptions: partial effects

Male
Young
Has Children
Rich
College
Right
Moved up
Immigrant
Obs.
Country-wave FE
Mean Dep. Var.

Q1 to Q1
(1)

Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(2)

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
(3)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
(4)

2.090***

-1.034

-0.026*

-0.048***

(0.741)

(0.669)

(0.015)

(0.014)

1.858**

-0.387

0.073***

0.095***

(0.769)

(0.693)

(0.016)

(0.014)

-2.328***

1.749**

0.027*

0.049***

(0.776)

(0.700)

(0.016)

(0.014)

1.694*

-0.661

-0.013

-0.032*

(0.966)

(0.871)

(0.020)

(0.018)

4.843***

-4.444***

-0.034**

-0.058***

(0.780)

(0.704)

(0.016)

(0.014)

-2.468***

0.960

0.080***

0.041***

(0.789)

(0.711)

(0.016)

(0.015)

-1.890**

0.861

0.021

0.011

(0.767)

(0.692)

(0.016)

(0.014)

-1.819*

1.249

0.044**

0.049**

(1.028)

(0.927)

(0.021)

(0.019)

4,290
Yes
34.17

4,290
Yes
20.97

4,290
Yes
0.38

4,290
Yes
0.27

Notes: The dependent variable in column 1 (respectively, column 2) is the perceived probability that a child born to
parents in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in the bottom quintile (respectively, in the fourth or
fifth quintile) when adult. The dependent variables in columns 3 and 4 are defined as in Table OA1. Regressors are
indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution,
having a college degree, right-wing political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least
one of the parents not born in the country. “Mean Dep. Var” is the mean of the dependent variable. Standard errors
in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

3

Table OA4: The perceived role of talent
Panel A: Perceived Transition
Probabilities Conditional on Talent

Q1 to Q5
Q1 to Q4
Q1 to Q3
Q1 to Q2
Q1 to Q1
Obs.

US
(1)

UK
(2)

France
(3)

Italy
(4)

Sweden
(5)

14.03

9.59

11.83

12.25

10.70

14.59
26.96
21.08
23.34
435

13.37
26.84
22.74
27.45
390

15.06
30.83
20.58
21.70
389

13.77
27.82
22.91
23.25
370

14.49
32.02
21.58
21.22
225

Panel B: % Difference Between
Perceived Transition Probabilities
Conditional and Unconditional on Talent
US
(1)

UK
(2)

France
(3)

Italy
(4)

Sweden
(5)

0.20

-0.04

0.30

0.21

0.16

(0.00)

(0.09)

(0.00)

(0.05)

(0.31)

0.22

0.26

0.43

0.22

0.30

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

0.21

0.38

0.43

0.27

0.31

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

-0.03

0.02

-0.13

-0.01

-0.07

(0.96)

(0.35)

(0.00)

(0.61)

(0.14)

-0.27

-0.27

-0.38

-0.31

-0.34

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

435

390

389

370

225

Notes: The five rows of Panel A of the table report the average perceived probability that a child born to parents
in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in quintile 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 respectively, when adult if that
child is very talented, i.e., based on our survey question that asks respondents to think conditional on individual
talent. The five rows of Panel B of the table report the percent change in the perceived probability of a child born
in a family from the bottom quintile to be in quintile 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 respectively, when adult conditional on talent
relative to the unconditional case. P-values in parentheses.

4

Table OA5: Heterogeneity in perceptions conditional on effort: partial
effects
Q1 to Q1
(1)

Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(2)

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
(3)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
(4)

Diff
Q1 to Q1
(5)

Diff
Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(6)

Male

1.800**
(0.863)

-1.215
(0.861)

-0.023
(0.019)

-0.037*
(0.020)

0.894
(0.805)

-0.661
(0.692)

Young

1.999**
(0.890)

2.358***
(0.888)

0.060***
(0.020)

0.098***
(0.021)

1.608*
(0.830)

1.716**
(0.714)

Has Children

-0.307
(0.899)

0.610
(0.896)

0.031
(0.020)

0.074***
(0.021)

1.790**
(0.838)

-0.972
(0.721)

Rich

1.344
(1.127)

0.532
(1.124)

-0.005
(0.025)

-0.023
(0.026)

-0.358
(1.051)

0.660
(0.904)

College

-0.816
(0.905)

-2.584***
(0.903)

-0.015
(0.020)

-0.076***
(0.021)

-5.422***
(0.844)

2.146***
(0.726)

-3.496***
(0.913)

2.785***
(0.911)

0.057***
(0.020)

0.069***
(0.021)

-0.625
(0.852)

1.981***
(0.733)

Moved up

-1.601*
(0.890)

1.188
(0.888)

0.023
(0.020)

0.014
(0.021)

0.779
(0.830)

-0.382
(0.714)

Immigrant

-0.918
(1.197)

0.684
(1.193)

0.028
(0.027)

0.066**
(0.028)

1.146
(1.116)

-0.138
(0.960)

2,543
Yes
23.48

2,543
Yes
25.19

2,543
Yes
0.66

2,543
Yes
0.51

2,543
Yes
-10.24

2,543
Yes
3.83

Right

Obs.
Country-wave FE
Mean Dep. Var.

Notes: The dependent variables in columns 1-4 are defined as in Table OA3 but conditional on effort. The dependent
variable in column 5 (respectively, 6) is the difference between the perceived probability conditional on effort and the
unconditional probability that a child born to parents in the bottom quintile of the income distribution will be in
the bottom quintile (respectively, in the fourth or fifth quintile) when adult. Regressors are defined as in Table OA3.
“Mean Dep. Var” is the mean of the dependent variable. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p <
0.01

5

Table OA6: Heterogeneity in perceptions conditional on talent: partial
effects
Q1 to Q1
(1)

Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(2)

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
(3)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
(4)

Diff
Q1 to Q1
(5)

Diff
Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(6)

Male

2.793***
(1.039)

-2.440**
(1.015)

-0.030
(0.023)

-0.068***
(0.024)

-1.081
(0.946)

-0.622
(0.862)

Young

3.253***
(1.085)

-0.576
(1.060)

0.044*
(0.024)

0.056**
(0.025)

-0.758
(0.988)

1.372
(0.900)

Has Children

-1.741
(1.103)

1.106
(1.078)

0.031
(0.024)

0.019
(0.025)

0.932
(1.005)

-0.708
(0.916)

Rich

0.441
(1.349)

-1.797
(1.318)

0.027
(0.030)

0.032
(0.031)

-1.120
(1.228)

-0.531
(1.119)

College

2.560**
(1.103)

-3.169***
(1.078)

-0.027
(0.024)

-0.087***
(0.025)

-2.501**
(1.004)

0.903
(0.915)

-2.957***
(1.112)

3.483***
(1.086)

0.072***
(0.025)

0.085***
(0.026)

-1.144
(1.012)

2.262**
(0.922)

Moved up

-1.174
(1.080)

-0.363
(1.055)

-0.011
(0.024)

0.001
(0.025)

-0.163
(0.983)

-0.126
(0.896)

Immigrant

-2.703*
(1.443)

3.571**
(1.410)

0.069**
(0.032)

0.075**
(0.033)

-1.282
(1.313)

1.859
(1.197)

1,747
Yes
23.53

1,747
Yes
26.18

1,747
Yes
0.66

1,747
Yes
0.52

1,747
Yes
-11.31

1,747
Yes
5.78

Right

Obs.
Country-wave FE
Mean Dep. Var.

Notes: Notes: The dependent variables in columns 1-4 are defined as in Table OA3 but conditional on talent.
The dependent variable in column 5 (respectively, 6) is the difference between the perceived probability conditional
on talent and the unconditional probability that a child born to parents in the bottom quintile of the income
distribution will be in the bottom quintile (respectively, in the fourth or fifth quintile) when adult. Regressors are
defined as in Table OA3. “Mean Dep. Var” is the mean of the dependent variable. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗

p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

6

Table OA7: Commuting Zone Characteristics and Mobility Perceptions:
Partial Effects
Q1 to Q1
(1)
Racial Segregation
Income Segregation
Social Capital Index
Gini
Manufacturing Share
College Grad Rate
Obs.

Q1 to Q4 or Q5
(2)

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
(3)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
(4)

-0.075**

0.035

0.089**

0.080**

(0.037)

(0.035)

(0.044)

(0.038)

0.076**

-0.046

-0.068*

-0.077*

(0.036)

(0.035)

(0.039)

(0.041)

0.050

-0.060*

-0.092***

-0.075**

(0.037)

(0.033)

(0.032)

(0.037)

-0.025

0.052

-0.041

0.038

(0.035)

(0.036)

(0.038)

(0.037)

-0.010

0.039

-0.034

-0.001

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.028)

(0.031)

-0.006

-0.011

-0.007

0.014

(0.026)

(0.025)

(0.029)

(0.031)

1,635

1,635

1,635

1,635

Notes: “Racial Segregation” is a Multi-group Theil Index calculated at the census-tract level over four groups (White
alone, Black alone, Hispanic, and Other) and aggregated at the commuting zone level, “Income Segregation” is
measured by a weighted average of two-group Theil indices, as in Reardon (2011), at the commuting zone level,
“Social Capital Index” is the social capital index from Rupasingha and Goetz (2008) at the commuting zone-level,
“Gini” is the commuting zone-level Gini coefficient, “Manufacturing Share” is the share of employed persons 16
and older working in manufacturing from the 2000 census at the commuting zone-level, “College Grad Rate” is the
residual from a regression of graduation rate (the share of undergraduate students that complete their degree in 150%
of normal time) on household income per capita in 2000, aggregated at the commuting zone level. The regressors
are from Chetty et al. (2014). Please refer to Chetty et al. (2014) for a detailed explanation of the construction of
the commuting zone-level regressors. All regressions control for survey wave fixed effects and include all covariates
in Table OA3. The dependent variables are defined as in Table OA3. All variables normalized to have mean 0 and
standard deviation 1 in the estimation sample. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the commuting zone
level.∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

7

Table OA8: Minorities, Immigrants, and Redistributive Preferences

8

Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Racial Segregation × Right

-0.091**
(0.045)

0.037
(0.047)

-0.020
(0.050)

0.015
(0.056)

0.026
(0.036)

-0.015
(0.050)

-0.010
(0.084)

0.247**
(0.114)

0.097
(0.062)

Frac. Black × Right

0.130***
(0.047)

0.064
(0.042)

-0.005
(0.051)

0.073
(0.055)

0.027
(0.038)

0.082*
(0.042)

0.045
(0.088)

-0.034
(0.096)

-0.105**
(0.053)

Frac. Foreign Born × Right

0.039
(0.052)

-0.004
(0.044)

0.037
(0.064)

0.009
(0.054)

-0.074**
(0.031)

0.073*
(0.039)

0.027
(0.068)

-0.026
(0.082)

0.058
(0.047)

Racial Segregation × Left

0.055
(0.052)

-0.005
(0.053)

0.132***
(0.046)

0.053
(0.046)

0.077
(0.074)

0.120*
(0.066)

0.000
(0.093)

0.050
(0.061)

0.044
(0.045)

Frac. Black × Left

-0.065
(0.050)

0.022
(0.060)

-0.057
(0.058)

0.013
(0.047)

-0.030
(0.060)

-0.025
(0.067)

-0.073
(0.113)

0.084
(0.069)

-0.014
(0.052)

Frac. Foreign Born × Left

-0.073*
(0.038)

-0.060
(0.058)

-0.093**
(0.040)

-0.035
(0.037)

-0.115*
(0.059)

-0.026
(0.046)

0.010
(0.073)

0.020
(0.056)

-0.018
(0.046)

1655

1655

1655

1655

1655

1655

811

811

1655

Obs.

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on commuting zone characteristics interacted with dummies for political
affiliation. Interaction of commuting zone characteristics and “Moderate” is not reported. “Racial Segregation” is a Multi-group Theil Index calculated at the
census-tract level over four groups (White alone, Black alone, Hispanic, and Other) and aggregated at the commuting zone level, “Frac. Black” is defined as
the number of people in a commuting zone who are black divided by the commuting zone population, “Frac. Foreign Born” is the number of foreign born
inhabitants divided by total commuting zone population. The regressors are from Chetty et al. (2014). Please refer to Chetty et al. (2014) for a detailed
explanation of the construction of the commuting zone-level regressors. All regressions control for survey wave fixed effects and include all covariates in Table 3.
The dependent variables are defined as in Table 3. Commuting zone-level variables are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1 in the estimation
sample. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the commuting zone level.∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA9: Perceptions of Government

9

All Countries
All
Left
Right
US
All
Left
Right
UK
All
Left
Right
France
All
Left
Right
Italy
All
Left
Right
Sweden
All
Left
Right

Trust
Govt.
(1)

Govt.
Tools
(2)

Government
Intervention
(3)

Lowering
Taxes Better
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Problem
(5)

Negative View
of Government
(6)

Obs.

0.19
0.21
0.19

0.72
0.79
0.64

5.32
5.79
4.81

0.36
0.20
0.57

0.87
0.94
0.81

0.63
0.49
0.80

4,448
1,442
1,422

0.23
0.30
0.17

0.75
0.85
0.63

4.95
5.61
4.10

0.32
0.14
0.56

0.83
0.92
0.74

0.59
0.39
0.78

1,731
464
517

0.17
0.09
0.37

0.82
0.89
0.75

5.50
5.91
5.02

0.24
0.11
0.44

0.85
0.93
0.75

0.50
0.40
0.65

759
257
167

0.06
0.08
0.06

0.48
0.53
0.48

5.42
5.61
5.22

0.51
0.32
0.66

0.89
0.94
0.84

0.85
0.75
0.91

769
249
307

0.08
0.10
0.05

0.73
0.76
0.69

5.92
6.00
5.76

0.44
0.33
0.61

0.94
0.96
0.92

0.71
0.60
0.84

735
335
238

0.50
0.59
0.46

0.81
0.90
0.78

5.28
5.96
4.70

0.29
0.07
0.53

0.91
0.99
0.84

0.53
0.23
0.74

454
137
193

(7)

Notes: The table reports respondents’ views on the government. Trust Govt. is a dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that she can trust the
government to do what is right “Most of the time” or “Always”, Govt. Tools is a dummy equal to one if the respondent answers that to reduce the inequality of
opportunities between children born in poor and rich families the government has the ability and the tools to do “Some” or “A lot”, Government Intervention
is the respondent’s support, on a scale from 1 to 7, for government intervention to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less
unequal, Lowering Taxes Better is a dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage
more investment in economic growth” would do more to make the opportunities for children from poor and rich families less unequal than “raising taxes on
wealthy people and corporations to expand programs for the poor”, Unequal Opp. Problem is a dummy equal to one if the respondent believes that if children
from poor and rich backgrounds have unequal opportunities in life this is “A problem” or “A serious problem” or “A very serious problem”, Negative View of
Government is defined as in Figure 7 of the paper. Political affiliations “Left” and “Right” are defined as in Table OA1.

Table OA10: Views on Taxes and Public Spending

10

All Countries
All
Left
Right
US
All
Left
Right
UK
All
Left
Right
France
All
Left
Right
Italy
All
Left
Right
Sweden
All
Left
Right

Tax Rate
Top 1
(1)

Tax Rate
Next 9
(2)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(3)

Share Taxes
Top 1
(4)

Share Taxes
Bottom 50
(5)

Support
Estate Tax
(6)

Budget
Opportunities
(7)

Budget
Safety Net
(8)

Support Equality
Opp. Policies
(9)

Obs.
1-5
(10)

Obs.
6-9
(11)

37.58
40.49
36.11

25.75
27.13
26.07

10.09
8.83
11.96

0.23
0.24
0.21

0.11
0.10
0.13

0.30
0.41
0.18

37.29
39.17
35.74

13.93
15.17
12.75

3.74
4.10
3.41

3,564
1,193
1,163

4,447
1,442
1,422

25.22
28.10
22.49

14.78
15.19
14.52

7.86
5.96
10.05

0.35
0.39
0.31

0.07
0.05
0.08

0.35
0.51
0.20

32.73
35.22
29.08

13.51
15.03
11.86

3.61
4.08
3.09

851
216
261

1,731
464
517

37.15
39.97
34.65

23.06
23.21
22.89

6.50
5.67
6.89

0.28
0.31
0.26

0.10
0.08
0.10

0.32
0.44
0.26

41.30
42.12
41.52

13.36
14.45
12.19

3.90
4.20
3.67

758
256
167

758
257
167

43.71
47.07
42.70

29.41
30.98
28.60

8.51
6.92
9.59

0.18
0.19
0.17

0.12
0.09
0.13

0.22
0.31
0.18

38.59
39.95
37.09

13.37
14.81
12.31

3.66
3.97
3.42

769
249
307

769
249
307

37.75
38.66
34.74

26.35
27.66
25.26

10.37
9.04
11.44

0.19
0.19
0.17

0.14
0.12
0.15

0.23
0.31
0.14

38.99
40.15
38.33

15.70
15.55
15.37

3.96
4.11
3.84

732
335
235

735
335
238

50.81
53.49
46.99

43.61
44.99
41.39

22.50
22.23
23.32

0.11
0.11
0.10

0.17
0.17
0.17

0.28
0.49
0.16

43.03
43.26
43.25

14.52
16.67
13.07

3.76
4.19
3.53

454
137
193

454
137
193

Notes: The table reports respondents’ views on taxes and public spending. Political affiliations “Left” and “Right” are defined as in Table OA1. Tax Rate
Top 1, Tax Rate Next 9, Tax Rate Bottom 50 are the respondent’s chosen income tax rates for the Top 1% of the income distribution, the next 9%, and the
bottom 50%, respectively. Share Taxes Top 1 and Share Taxes Bottom 50 convert the tax rates chosen by respondents into shares of tax revenue paid by each
group. Support Estate Tax is a dummy equal to one if the respondent is in favor of the estate tax (defined as answering 4 or 5 on a scale from 1 to 5, where
1 means “do not support at all” and 5 means “strongly support”). Budget Opportunities and Budget Safety net are the share of the budget the respondent
believes should be allocated to education and health, and to safety net policies, respectively. Support Equality Opp. Policies is the respondent’s support, on
a scale from 1 to 5, for policies to improve equality of opportunity. Columns 10 and 11 report the number of observations for each row, for the outcomes in
columns 1-5 and 6-9, respectively.

Table OA11: Views of government and policy preferences, left versus right
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Budget
Safety Net
(5)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(6)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(7)

-1.907***
(0.703)

-0.198***
(0.030)

-0.607***
(0.065)

-0.399***
(0.090)

-0.987**
(0.482)

-7.202***
(1.183)

3.550***
(0.676)

Govt. Tools × Left-Wing

0.347
(0.691)

-0.002
(0.029)

0.430***
(0.064)

0.810***
(0.088)

0.752
(0.474)

2.107*
(1.162)

-1.528**
(0.664)

Trust Govt. × Left-Wing

0.912
(0.700)

0.058*
(0.030)

0.004
(0.065)

-0.032
(0.089)

-0.086
(0.480)

-1.418
(1.249)

0.704
(0.714)

Lowering taxes better × Right-Wing

-0.642
(0.569)

-0.130***
(0.024)

-0.517***
(0.053)

-0.623***
(0.072)

-2.170***
(0.390)

-7.614***
(0.982)

1.171**
(0.562)

Govt. Tools × Right-Wing

3.034***
(0.598)

0.055**
(0.025)

0.580***
(0.056)

1.075***
(0.076)

1.074***
(0.410)

0.798
(1.032)

-0.179
(0.590)

Trust Govt. × Right-Wing

1.339*
(0.741)

0.073**
(0.032)

0.010
(0.069)

0.022
(0.094)

0.230
(0.508)

-1.686
(1.285)

1.800**
(0.735)

4284

4283

4284

4284

4284

3436

3436

Lowering taxes better × Left-Wing

Observations

11

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on respondents’ views of government interacted with dummies for the respondent’s
self-reported political affiliation. “Left-Wing” and “Right-Wing” respondents are defined as in Table OA1. The coefficients on the interactions between views
of government and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic issue are not reported in the table. Lowering Taxes Better is a
dummy equal to one if the respondent thinks that “lowering taxes on wealthy people and corporations to encourage more investment in economic growth” is
better than “raising taxes [...] to expand programs for the poor” to improve mobility. Govt. Tools is a dummy equal to one if the respondent thinks that the
government has the ability and the tools to do “some” or “a lot” to improve mobility. Trust Govt. is a dummy equal to one if the respondent says that the
government can be trusted to do what is right “most of the time” or “always”. The dependent variables are defined as in Table 3 of the paper. All regressions
include the same controls as Table 3 of the paper. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA12: Correlation between views of government, policy preferences, and pessimism

Government Cannot Do Much
Unequal Opp. Not Serious Problem
Lowering Taxes Better
Low Spending Opp.
Optimistic

Government
Cannot Do Much

Unequal Opp.
Not Serious Problem

Lowering
Taxes Better

Low Spending
Opp.

Optimistic

0.207 (0.013)***
0.156 (0.014)***
0.146 (0.015)***
0.029 (0.015)**

0.25 (0.015)***
0.139 (0.017)***
0.123 (0.017)***

0.093 (0.016)***
0.093 (0.016)***

0.071 (0.015)***

-

Notes: Each coefficient in the table refers to a regression of the variable in the column on the variable in the row and a constant, controlling for country and
survey fixed effects. The number of observations is 4,440 for all regressions. Government Cannot Do Much is a binary variable equal to one if the respondent
says that the government cannot do much or can do nothing to equalize opportunities. Unequal Opp. Not Serious Problem is a binary variable equal to one if
unequal opportunities are not perceived to be a serious problem. Lowering Taxes Better is defined as in Table OA11. Low Spending Opp. is a binary variable
equal to one if the share of budget allocated by the respondent to education and health policies is below the 20th percentile in the variable distribution.
Optimistic is a binary variable equal to one if the respondent believes that the chances of moving from the bottom to the top quintile are neither “close to
zero” nor “low”. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

12

Table OA13: Regressing policy preferences on mobility perceptions: US
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.036*
(0.020)

0.000
(0.001)

0.004**
(0.002)

0.001
(0.003)

0.002***
(0.001)

0.045***
(0.012)

0.018
(0.031)

-0.035
(0.028)

0.000
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

-0.004
(0.023)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.000
(0.003)

0.001
(0.001)

0.005
(0.014)

0.021
(0.035)

-0.044
(0.031)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.177

0.183

0.154

0.727

0.406

0.030

0.948

0.824

0.422

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.069**
(0.033)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.003
(0.003)

0.001
(0.005)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.055***
(0.020)

0.086*
(0.051)

0.020
(0.045)

-0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

0.060*
(0.033)

0.003**
(0.001)

0.002
(0.003)

0.006
(0.005)

0.000
(0.001)

0.002
(0.020)

0.044
(0.049)

-0.004
(0.044)

0.002
(0.001)

0.006
1656

0.065
1656

0.313
1656

0.436
1656

0.099
1656

0.047
1656

0.551
812

0.699
812

0.105
1656

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

13
B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.046*
(0.025)

0.001
(0.001)

0.005*
(0.003)

0.008**
(0.004)

0.003***
(0.001)

0.048***
(0.016)

0.009
(0.036)

-0.018
(0.032)

-0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.075**
(0.029)

0.001
(0.001)

0.009***
(0.003)

0.005
(0.004)

0.001
(0.001)

0.041**
(0.019)

-0.018
(0.042)

0.085**
(0.038)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.453

0.661

0.288

0.635

0.436

0.768

0.634

0.038

0.882

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.076**
(0.038)

-0.003**
(0.002)

-0.008**
(0.004)

-0.008
(0.005)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.039
(0.024)

0.048
(0.048)

0.014
(0.043)

-0.000
(0.001)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

0.004
(0.039)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.012***
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.005
(0.025)

0.046
(0.054)

0.115**
(0.048)

0.000
(0.002)

0.141
1242

0.096
1242

0.513
1242

0.527
1242

0.251
1242

0.327
1242

0.977
812

0.115
812

0.802
1242

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for the respondent’s self-reported political
affiliation. The sample is composed of respondents from the U.S.. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative (5).”
Left-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative”
or “Very conservative.” The coefficient on the interaction between the mobility perception and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic
issue is not reported in the table. Outcome variables are defined in the main Appendix. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and right-wing
respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual hard
work. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a
college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least one of the parents not born in the country, and survey wave fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses.

∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA14: Regressing policy preferences on mobility perceptions: UK
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.041*
(0.024)

0.003***
(0.001)

0.006***
(0.002)

0.011***
(0.003)

0.003***
(0.001)

-0.021
(0.018)

0.078**
(0.038)

-0.032**
(0.015)

0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.020
(0.028)

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.005*
(0.003)

-0.007*
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.001)

0.003
(0.022)

0.017
(0.046)

-0.026
(0.018)

-0.003***
(0.001)

0.573

0.010

0.002

0.000

0.026

0.397

0.309

0.818

0.005

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.059
(0.038)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.009*
(0.005)

-0.003*
(0.002)

0.067**
(0.029)

-0.009
(0.062)

0.053**
(0.024)

-0.002
(0.002)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

0.043
(0.049)

0.000
(0.002)

0.004
(0.005)

0.007
(0.007)

0.003
(0.002)

-0.019
(0.038)

-0.040
(0.079)

0.007
(0.031)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.099
729

0.425
728

0.029
729

0.064
729

0.036
729

0.070
729

0.759
728

0.231
728

0.020
729

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

14
B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

-0.035
(0.036)

0.004*
(0.002)

0.004
(0.003)

0.009*
(0.005)

0.005***
(0.002)

0.022
(0.031)

-0.027
(0.061)

0.006
(0.024)

0.002
(0.002)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

-0.020
(0.061)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.003
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.008)

-0.000
(0.003)

0.065
(0.052)

0.072
(0.103)

0.002
(0.040)

-0.006**
(0.003)

0.830

0.940

0.256

0.309

0.091

0.476

0.406

0.940

0.011

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

0.015
(0.057)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.015***
(0.005)

-0.015*
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.002)

0.052
(0.048)

0.011
(0.098)

0.049
(0.038)

-0.004*
(0.002)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

0.093
(0.070)

0.002
(0.004)

0.003
(0.007)

-0.000
(0.010)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.080
(0.059)

-0.084
(0.120)

0.065
(0.046)

0.005
(0.003)

0.384
352

0.146
351

0.045
352

0.227
352

0.198
352

0.080
352

0.535
352

0.794
352

0.019
352

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for the respondent’s self-reported political
affiliation. The sample is composed of respondents from the U.K.. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative (5).”
Left-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative”
or “Very conservative.” The coefficient on the interaction between the mobility perception and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic
issue is not reported in the table. Outcome variables are defined in the main Appendix. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and right-wing
respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual hard
work. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a
college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least one of the parents not born in the country. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA15: Regressing policy preferences on mobility perceptions: France
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

-0.009
(0.026)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.006**
(0.003)

0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.001)

0.015
(0.017)

0.097*
(0.050)

-0.043**
(0.021)

-0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

-0.008
(0.024)

0.000
(0.001)

0.007***
(0.003)

0.007**
(0.003)

0.002*
(0.001)

0.020
(0.016)

0.049
(0.046)

-0.023
(0.019)

0.000
(0.001)

0.973

0.575

0.630

0.243

0.388

0.827

0.477

0.497

0.576

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.053
(0.048)

-0.005**
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.007)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.038
(0.031)

-0.127
(0.092)

0.112***
(0.038)

0.005*
(0.002)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

-0.082*
(0.042)

-0.000
(0.002)

-0.007
(0.004)

0.004
(0.006)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.041
(0.027)

-0.001
(0.081)

0.039
(0.034)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.644
739

0.099
739

0.510
739

0.199
739

0.849
739

0.934
739

0.302
739

0.152
739

0.076
739

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

15
B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

-0.057
(0.036)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.002
(0.004)

-0.010**
(0.005)

0.002
(0.001)

0.012
(0.025)

0.175**
(0.070)

-0.009
(0.029)

-0.003
(0.002)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.022
(0.038)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.002
(0.005)

0.001
(0.001)

0.026
(0.025)

0.111
(0.073)

-0.009
(0.031)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.130

0.490

0.657

0.074

0.930

0.699

0.529

0.992

0.704

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.139*
(0.082)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.004
(0.009)

-0.010
(0.011)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.016
(0.056)

-0.349**
(0.162)

0.098
(0.066)

-0.001
(0.004)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

-0.023
(0.066)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.007)

0.004
(0.009)

-0.000
(0.003)

-0.059
(0.045)

-0.142
(0.130)

0.047
(0.053)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.268
366

0.902
366

0.651
366

0.346
366

0.812
366

0.290
366

0.319
366

0.545
366

0.987
366

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for the respondent’s self-reported political
affiliation. The sample is composed of respondents from France. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative (5).”
Left-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative”
or “Very conservative.” The coefficient on the interaction between the mobility perception and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic
issue is not reported in the table. Outcome variables are defined in the main Appendix. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and right-wing
respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual hard
work. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a
college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least one of the parents not born in the country. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA16: Regressing policy preferences on mobility perceptions: Italy
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.027
(0.024)

0.002**
(0.001)

0.006***
(0.002)

0.004
(0.003)

0.003**
(0.001)

0.016
(0.021)

0.095**
(0.044)

-0.049**
(0.025)

0.001
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.050*
(0.029)

0.001
(0.001)

0.007***
(0.003)

0.013***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.038
(0.025)

0.102*
(0.053)

-0.048
(0.030)

0.000
(0.001)

0.533

0.350

0.646

0.042

0.364

0.096

0.926

0.975

0.662

-0.113***
(0.040)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.010***
(0.004)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.004**
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.034)

-0.172**
(0.073)

0.101**
(0.040)

-0.003
(0.002)

-0.045
(0.045)

0.001
(0.002)

-0.008**
(0.004)

-0.007
(0.005)

0.002
(0.002)

0.040
(0.039)

-0.027
(0.083)

0.072
(0.046)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.261
721

0.376
721

0.752
721

0.840
721

0.054
721

0.392
721

0.191
718

0.639
718

0.398
721

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.
Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing
Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

p-value diff.
Observations

16
B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.012
(0.038)

0.001
(0.002)

0.003
(0.004)

0.005
(0.005)

0.002
(0.002)

0.024
(0.032)

0.128*
(0.065)

-0.028
(0.035)

-0.000
(0.002)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.008
(0.047)

0.000
(0.002)

0.007
(0.004)

0.010
(0.006)

0.003
(0.002)

0.022
(0.040)

0.123
(0.082)

-0.044
(0.044)

0.001
(0.002)

0.937

0.587

0.581

0.602

0.727

0.961

0.969

0.777

0.717

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.117
(0.075)

0.000
(0.003)

-0.018**
(0.007)

-0.016
(0.010)

-0.005
(0.003)

-0.005
(0.063)

-0.426***
(0.130)

0.268***
(0.069)

-0.003
(0.003)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

-0.181**
(0.072)

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.010
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.009)

0.005
(0.003)

-0.112*
(0.061)

-0.166
(0.125)

0.055
(0.066)

0.001
(0.003)

0.541
358

0.740
358

0.419
358

0.305
358

0.039
358

0.223
358

0.151
357

0.026
357

0.446
358

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for the respondent’s self-reported political
affiliation. The sample is composed of respondents from Italy. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative (5).”
Left-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative”
or “Very conservative.” The coefficient on the interaction between the mobility perception and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic
issue is not reported in the table. Outcome variables are defined in the main Appendix. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and right-wing
respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual hard
work. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a
college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least one of the parents not born in the country. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA17: Regressing policy preferences on mobility perceptions: Sweden
Budget
Opp.
(1)

Support
Estate Tax
(2)

Support
Equality
Opp. Policies
(3)

Government
Interv.
(4)

Unequal Opp.
Very Serious
Problem
(5)

Budget
Safety Net
(6)

Tax Rate
Top 1
(7)

Tax Rate
Bottom 50
(8)

Govt.
Tools
(9)

Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

0.022
(0.037)

0.001
(0.002)

0.005
(0.003)

0.000
(0.005)

0.003**
(0.001)

0.003
(0.024)

-0.002
(0.066)

-0.047
(0.042)

0.000
(0.001)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.048
(0.030)

-0.001
(0.001)

0.003
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.001
(0.001)

0.008
(0.019)

-0.029
(0.053)

-0.004
(0.034)

0.000
(0.001)

0.591

0.394

0.615

0.810

0.180

0.882

0.747

0.430

0.834

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.131**
(0.056)

0.005**
(0.002)

-0.005
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.004*
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.037)

-0.023
(0.100)

-0.024
(0.064)

-0.003
(0.002)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

-0.085*
(0.051)

0.000
(0.002)

-0.003
(0.004)

0.004
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.033)

0.024
(0.091)

0.067
(0.059)

-0.002
(0.002)

0.548
445

0.118
445

0.719
445

0.651
445

0.241
445

0.972
445

0.730
445

0.294
445

0.571
445

A. Unconditional Beliefs

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

17
B. Beliefs Conditional On Effort
Q1 to Q1 × Left-Wing

-0.044
(0.057)

0.002
(0.002)

0.001
(0.004)

-0.013*
(0.007)

-0.000
(0.002)

0.044
(0.034)

-0.119
(0.103)

0.128**
(0.059)

-0.002
(0.002)

Q1 to Q1 × Right-Wing

0.041
(0.054)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.004)

0.003
(0.006)

-0.000
(0.002)

-0.048
(0.032)

-0.094
(0.097)

-0.057
(0.056)

-0.004**
(0.002)

0.287

0.275

0.988

0.086

0.968

0.052

0.859

0.026

0.549

Q1 to Q5 × Left-Wing

-0.029
(0.141)

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.015
(0.011)

-0.002
(0.017)

-0.001
(0.005)

0.003
(0.084)

-0.136
(0.254)

-0.003
(0.147)

0.004
(0.005)

Q1 to Q5 × Right-Wing

-0.134
(0.087)

-0.002
(0.003)

0.007
(0.007)

0.012
(0.010)

0.001
(0.003)

0.029
(0.052)

0.196
(0.157)

0.002
(0.091)

0.008**
(0.003)

0.525
225

0.413
225

0.079
225

0.497
225

0.688
225

0.786
225

0.263
225

0.976
225

0.589
225

p-value diff.

p-value diff.
Observations

Notes: The table reports estimates of regressions of the variable in the column on mobility perception interacted with dummies for the respondent’s self-reported political
affiliation. The sample is composed of respondents from Sweden. Political views are assessed on a five point scale, ranging from “Very liberal (1)” to “Very conservative (5).”
Left-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Right-Wing respondents have views on economic issues that are “Conservative”
or “Very conservative.” The coefficient on the interaction between the mobility perception and a dummy equal to one if the respondent has “Moderate” views on economic
issue is not reported in the table. Outcome variables are defined in the main Appendix. “p-value diff” is the p-value of a test of equality of the effects on left- and right-wing
respondents. Panel A studies the effect of unconditional probabilities, while panel B studies perceptions when respondents are asked to think conditional on individual hard
work. Controls included in all regressions are: indicator variables for gender, age less than 45, having children, being in the top quartile of the income distribution, having a
college degree, political affiliation, having a job with a status higher than father, having at least one of the parents not born in the country. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗p

< 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table OA18: Persistence of Treatment Effects on Mobility Perceptions –
Left-Wing respondents
First Survey
All Respondents
(1)

First Survey
Who Took Follow Up
(2)

Follow up
Respondents
(3)

8.532***
(1.806)

9.544**
(3.691)

7.841**
(3.625)

-1.386
(0.854)

-0.264
(1.883)

-1.340
(2.014)

-4.404***
(0.863)

-5.666***
(1.946)

-6.252***
(2.015)

-2.348***
(0.635)

-2.679**
(1.214)

-1.790
(1.331)

-0.394
(1.058)

-0.936
(2.506)

1.541
(1.951)

-0.210*
(0.125)

-0.315**
(0.131)

-0.169**
(0.066)

-0.217
(0.136)

-0.233*
(0.135)

916

214

214

Q1 to Q1
Treated
Q1 to Q2
Treated
Q1 to Q3
Treated
Q1 to Q4
Treated
Q1 to Q5
Treated

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
Treated

-0.197***
(0.058)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
Treated
Obs.

Notes: The coefficients and standard error in row j refer to a regression of the variable listed in row j on a dummy
for being in the treatment group. Column 1 shows the first round effects on the full sample of respondents in the
first round, while column 2 limits the sample to respondents who also took the follow up survey. Column 3 shows the
second round effects. All regressions include the same controls as Table 3 of the paper. All dependent variables are
defined as in Table 4 of the paper. The samples in all columns include only respondents who have views on economic
issues that are “Liberal” or “Very liberal.” Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

18

Table OA19: Persistence of Treatment Effects on Mobility Perceptions –
Right-Wing respondents
First Survey
All Respondents
(1)

First Survey
Who Took Follow Up
(2)

Follow up
Respondents
(3)

9.763***
(1.555)

7.650**
(2.990)

5.015*
(2.838)

-1.544**
(0.765)

-2.705*
(1.474)

-0.291
(1.658)

-6.581***
(0.932)

-6.901***
(1.884)

-3.038*
(1.769)

-1.932***
(0.597)

0.179
(1.170)

-1.851
(1.188)

0.294
(1.016)

1.778
(1.847)

0.165
(1.699)

-0.149
(0.107)

-0.029
(0.110)

-0.313***
(0.062)

-0.060
(0.128)

0.042
(0.126)

1033

264

264

Q1 to Q1
Treated
Q1 to Q2
Treated
Q1 to Q3
Treated
Q1 to Q4
Treated
Q1 to Q5
Treated

Q1 to Q4 (Qual.)
Treated

-0.309***
(0.056)

Q1 to Q5 (Qual.)
Treated
Obs.

Notes: The coefficients and standard error in row j refer to a regression of the variable listed in row j on a dummy
for being in the treatment group. Column 1 shows the first round effects on the full sample of respondents in the first
round, while column 2 limits the sample to respondents who also took the follow up survey. Column 3 shows the second
round effects. All regressions include the same controls as Table 3 of the paper. All dependent variables are defined
as in Table 4 of the paper. The samples in all columns include only respondents who have views on economic issues
that are “Conservative” or “Very conservative.” Standard errors in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

19

Figure OA1: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions Conditional on Effort
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

13

Children

12

Young

11

African-American

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

20
18

20
22
24
26
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

No

28

8

10

12
14
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

16

18

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability conditional on effort of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A)
or moving to the top quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals around the average response. See
the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

Figure OA2: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions: U.S.
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

12

Children

11

Young

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

21
25

30
35
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

40

8

No

10

12
14
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

16

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the top
quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The sample is composed of respondents from the U.S.. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals
around the average response. See the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

Figure OA3: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions: U.K.
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

12

Children

11

Young

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

22
30

35
40
45
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

50

4

No

6

8
10
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

12

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the top
quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The sample is composed of respondents from the U.K.. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals
around the average response. See the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

Figure OA4: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions: France
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

12

Children

11

Young

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

23
25

30
35
40
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

45

5

No

10
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

15

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the
top quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The sample is composed of respondents from France. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals
around the average response. See the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

Figure OA5: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions: Italy
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

12

Children

11

Young

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

24
20

25
30
35
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

40

5

No

10
15
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

20

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the
top quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The sample is composed of respondents from Italy. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals
around the average response. See the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

Figure OA6: Heterogeneity in Mobility Perceptions: Sweden
Panel A: Probability of remaining in the bottom quintile

Male

Panel B: Probability of reaching the top quintile

12

Children

11

Young

10

Immigrant

9

Moved up

8

College

7

Rich

6

Effort reason rich

5

Lack of effort reason poor

4

Econ system fair

3

Unequal opp. problem

2

Left-Wing

1

25
25

30
35
Pessimism: % staying in bottom quintile
Yes

40

4

No

6

8
10
12
Optimism: % reaching top quintile
Yes

14

No

Notes: The figure shows the average perceived probability of a child from the bottom quintile remaining in the bottom quintile (Panel A) or moving to the top
quintile (Panel B) for different groups of respondents. The sample is composed of respondents from Sweden. The shaded areas are 90% confidence intervals
around the average response. See the main Appendix for a definition of the groups.

OA.2

Data Sources for Population Statistics

• U.S.: U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey. Income brackets (annual gross household income) are: less than $20,000; $20,000-$40,000; $40,000-$70,000; more than $70,000.
• U.K.: data on gender, age, and income is from Eurostat Census Data. Data on share of
married, native, employed, unemployed, and college educated individuals is from the Office of
National Statistics. Income brackets (monthly net household income) are: less than £1,500;
£1,500-£2,500; £2,500-£3,000; more than £3,000.
• France: data on gender, age, and income is from Eurostat Census Data. Data on share
of married, native, employed, unemployed, and college educated individuals is from INSEE.
Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are: less than 1,500; 1,500-2,500;
2,500-2,000; more than 3,000.
• Italy: data on gender and age is from Eurostat Census Data. Data on income is from the
Bank of Italy. Data on share of married, native, employed, unemployed, and college educated
individuals is from ISTAT. Income brackets (monthly net household income, in Euros) are:
less than 1,500; 1,500-,2450; 2,450-3,350; more than 3,350.
• Sweden: data on gender, age, and income is from Eurostat Census Data. Data on share of
married, native, employed, unemployed, and college educated individuals is from Statistics
Sweden. Income brackets (monthly gross household income, in SEK) are: less than 33,000;
33,000-42,000; 42,000-58,000; more than 58,000.

OA.3

Information on construction of the French transition matrix

Our methodology is inspired by Piraino (2007). We perform a two-stage regression based on two
samples: a sample of sons who reported their fathers’ socioeconomic characteristics and a sample
of adult men (“pseudo fathers”) whose age was consistent with that of the actual fathers. Once
the samples are selected, the steps required for this empirical strategy are:
1. estimate an income equation from the older sample;
2. use the estimated coefficients to predict fathers’ incomes on the basis of sons’ reports;
3. construct a transition matrix based on these results.
Sample selection:
• Sample of fathers: from the 1985 wave of the “Formation et Qualification professionnelle,
INSEE” survey. They are men born between 1927 and 1947, who have at least one child and
who have less than four older sister and brothers. We restrict the sample to individuals with
positive income that are above half of the annual minimum wage and discard self-employed
individuals because we do not have information on income from self-employment. The final
sample has about 4500 fathers.
• Sample of sons: from the 2003 wave of the “Formation et Qualification professionnelle, INSEE
survey. They are born between 1963 and 1973, with fathers born between 1927 and 1947. We
therefore measure income of the pseudo fathers when sons are 12-22. We further restrict the
26

sample to those individuals who report a basic set of their father’s demographic characteristics,
have less than four older siblings, and, similarly to the fathers’ sample, have positive income,
are above half of the annual minimum wage and are not self-employed. The final sample has
1279 sons.
Variables to construct income of pseudo fathers: educational level, occupation category,
year of birth, indicator for whether father lived in Paris.

References
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? the
geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1553–1623.
Piraino, P. (2007). Comparable estimates of intergenerational income mobility in italy. The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 7 (2).
Reardon, S. F. (2011). Measures of income segregation. Technical report, CEPA Working Papers.
Stanford, CA: Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis.
Rupasingha, A. and S. J. Goetz (2008). Us county-level social capital data, 1990-2005. Technical
report, The Northeast Regional Center for Rural Development, Penn State University, University
Park, PA, 2008.

27

