                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FACULTY DEPLOYMENT IN RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES

                                        Paul N. Courant
                                         Sarah Turner

                                      Working Paper 23025
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23025


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We would like to thank Austin Slaughter, Aaron Phipps, Fran Murphy and Emily Cook for their
patience and their exemplary research assistance. We are also grateful for the efforts of George
Stovall of the University of Virginia and Ben Koester of the University of Michigan in helping us
to acquire and understand institutional data. We also received valuable comments from Kevin
Stange and from Ron Ehrenberg. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paul N. Courant and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Faculty Deployment in Research Universities
Paul N. Courant and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 23025
January 2017
JEL No. I23
                                          ABSTRACT
Deploying faculty efficiently (or more efficiently) should surely part of any optimizing strategy
on the part of a college or university. Basic microeconomics about the “theory of the firm”
provide some insight as to how a university would achieve productive efficiency given
differences in the price (salary rate) of faculty across disciplines and variation in compensation
within departments. The prices of faculty activities demonstrate substantial variation across
institutions, disciplines, within disciplines and over time. These observations about variation in
input prices raise fundamental questions about whether and, if so, how differences in the cost of
faculty affect resource allocation at research universities. We examine how teaching allocations
and costs vary both between departments and within departments. This allocation is complicated
because teaching and research are jointly produced by universities, while they are also substitutes
at some margin in faculty time allocation.

We examine the link between departmental compensation (payroll) and student course offerings
at two major public research universities. Strikingly, we find that faculty compensation per
student taught varies much less across departments than salary levels. In turn, changes over time
in relative salaries by discipline are much larger than changes in faculty compensation per student
as universities adjust to these cost pressures by increasing class size and increasing teaching
inputs from other sources. We also find that within departments the highest-paid faculty teach
fewer undergraduates and fewer undergraduate courses than their lower-paid colleagues. This
finding confirms our hypothesis that salaries are determined principally by research output and
associated reputation, and that universities respond rationally to relative prices in deploying
faculty.


Paul N. Courant
Harold T. Shapiro Collegiate Professor of Public
Policy, Arthur F. Thurnau Professor,
Professor of Economics and of Information
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
4126 Weill Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
pnc@umich.edu

Sarah Turner
University of Virginia
Department of Economics
Monroe Hall, Room 237
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
sturner@virginia.edu
                              Faculty Deployment in Research Universities
       Paul N. Courant (University of Michigan) and Sarah Turner (University of Virginia)



         It is sometimes asserted that higher education institutions are inefficient and wasteful.

Perhaps they are.1 Whatever else is going on, however, faculty continue to be a major source of

cost and account for more than 2/3 of instructional expenditures at public universities. Deploying

faculty efficiently (or more efficiently) should surely be part of any optimizing strategy on the

part of a college or university. The principal issue addressed in this paper is the extent to which

faculty in research universities are deployed efficiently in the context of an environment in which

their institutions are called upon to produce instruction and research.

         Basic microeconomics about the theory of the firm provide some insight as to how a

university would achieve productive efficiency in deploying faculty and other resources across

departments and within departments given market wages by discipline. Still, the case of the

allocation of faculty time to teaching responsibilities in academe is distinct for at least three

reasons. First, moving resources between academic departments is cumbersome. One cannot

generally redeploy faculty across fields of expertise. Increasing the size of the Philosophy

department while reducing that of Chemistry generally cannot be accomplished by moving a

chemist’s research from her lab to the library and her teaching from inorganic chemistry to

epistemology. Rather a decision to grow Philosophy and shrink Chemistry can only be fully

implemented when a chemist (and it won’t be just any chemist, depending on the configuration

of expertise and the desirability of same within the department) retires or leaves the department



1
  Critics of rising tuition levels in higher education commonly refer to growth in administrative and support service
as evidence of “bureaucratic bloat” (see, for example, Campos (2015)) while increased amenities that would appear
to be unrelated to student learning are cited as examples of wasteful expenditures (see, for example, Jacob, McCall,
and Stange (forthcoming) and popular press articles that followed).

                                                                                                              Page 2
for other reasons. In effect, there is little (or no) short-run opportunity for substitution of faculty

across disciplines, and the length of time required to make long-run adjustments can be long

indeed. In contrast, within departments, faculty effort can be reallocated between teaching and

research directly and indeed there is a good deal of variation in faculty teaching loads and

research expectations. Tenure-track faculty are often employed in the production of multiple

outputs, including research as well as teaching students of different levels. Finally, the

“technology of learning” as well as physical space limitations of universities may limit the extent

to which universities can change class sizes in response to the differential cost of faculty.

        The salaries of faculty exhibit substantial variation across disciplines, within disciplines

and over time. Yet, particularly in undergraduate education and doctorate education in the arts

and sciences, universities rarely engage in differential pricing (Stange, 2015). Nevertheless,

there are surely large differences in the cost of production for courses across departments and

within departments at a university, and these differences derive in large part from differences in

faculty salaries, class size and teaching loads. These observations raise fundamental questions

about whether and how differences in the cost of faculty affect resource allocation at research

universities. In an effort to understand the production function of the research university, we

examine how teaching allocations and costs vary both between departments and within

departments.

        The allocation of faculty to different activities is complicated because teaching and

research are jointly produced by universities, while they are also substitutes at some margin in

faculty time allocation. It follows that the allocation of faculty time to teaching – determined by

how many courses a faculty member teaches and how much effort is expended in the teaching –

may bear little relationship to how many students a faculty member enrolls and, in turn, how



                                                                                                 Page 3
much tuition revenue is generated. Recognizing different research productivity among faculty

and different market prices for research across disciplines suggests a model in which university

and department level decision- making incorporates input prices to approach efficiency in the

deployment of faculty to teaching and research.

         The questions are brought into sharp focus by the fairly dramatic changes in faculty

salaries across fields in recent decades at research universities. Overall, a rise in faculty salaries

should be relatively unsurprising in an overall labor market where returns to education are

increasing. At the same time, there has also been considerable heterogeneity across fields.

Disciplines like economics have seen dramatic increases in faculty compensation, while salaries

have increased only modestly in many fields in the humanities. Significantly, the salary

increases seen at research universities are not shared across all sectors of higher education.

         It is research universities (in the U.S., members of the Association of American

Universities and, to a substantial degree, members of the larger Association of Public and Land-

grant Universities), where the same personnel (tenure track faculty) do much of both teaching

and research that are the focus of our analysis. These research-intensive public universities

award a substantial share of graduate and undergraduate degrees, accounting for 36.5% of

doctorate degrees and 16.7% of BA degrees awarded by US institutions in 2015.2 The university

has two important margins as it allocates faculty resources. It can move resources between

departments and schools, growing, say, computer science while shrinking, say, comparative

literature,3 and it can also move resources between teaching and research within departments. To


2
  Authors’ tabulations from the IPEDS survey, focusing on those classified as “Research I” under the Carnegie
Classification.
3
  In some places these are in different colleges or schools within the university. We are ignoring that the
complications created by professional schools, but supposing that there is some authority that can reallocate across
broad lines of academic activity. For that matter, a university can grow the football team while shrinking the library,
a margin that we will also ignore, sticking here to academic departments, and, for reasons that will become clear, a
subset of academic departments.

                                                                                                               Page 4
set the stage for our analysis of instructional production in the research university, we begin with

a brief overview of the trends in the faculty labor market, where supply generated by doctorate

programs and demand from universities and the non-academic market determine price. We

focus our analysis on the public universities where data are generally available in the public

domain. Section three sets forth the theoretical framework where we outline a model of how

universities allocate faculty to teaching across and within departments. Section four investigates

the link between departmental compensation (payroll) and students and courses taught, leading

to measures of the distribution of class sizes and “cost per seat.” A simple and important

takeaway is that faculty compensation per student varies less across departments than salary

levels. In turn, changes over time in relative salaries by discipline are much larger than changes

in faculty compensation per student as universities adjust to these pricing pressures by increasing

class size and increasing teaching inputs from other sources.

       We find that within departments the highest-paid faculty teach fewer undergraduates and

fewer undergraduate courses than their lower-paid colleagues. Following the logic of our

theoretical discussion in Section three, this finding confirms our view that salaries are

determined principally by research output and associated reputation, and that universities

respond rationally to relative prices in deploying faculty.

       Our finding that research universities respond rationally to differences in prices and

opportunity costs of faculty deployment suggests, although it does not prove, that universities

endeavor to be efficient in the classic economic sense of minimizing the cost of producing

output. That university leadership recognizes and acts upon opportunities to increase productivity

in the important domain of allocating faculty to teaching and research suggests that we are likely

to find similar efforts in other domains.



                                                                                                Page 5
        We end with a brief conclusion that summarizes our results and their implications, and

suggests further work.



I.      Faculty Labor Markets: Trends and Compensation by Discipline

        Faculty Salaries

        Faculty salaries represent the price of the primary input in the higher education

production function. The relative increase in the earnings of college-educated workers has been

widely noted (see, for example, Autor, 2014) and one might think this premium is particularly

concentrated among doctorate recipients, who are at the top of the distribution of years of

educational attainment. Over the course of the last quarter century, faculty salaries have risen

(Figure 1) and these increases are somewhat larger than the earnings changes for college-

educated workers more generally.4 Since 1990, constant dollar faculty salaries have increased by

14% at the level of full professors and by 10-11% for associate and assistant professors. For

colleges and universities, an increase in the price of faculty, the most significant input in the

university budget, affects costs of production. Yet, as discussed in more detail below, the rising

tide has not lifted all boats and the increase in faculty salaries has been concentrated among

universities in the research sector and faculty in a subset of academic disciplines.

        Even as the faculty salary bill continues to dominate university expenditures on

instruction as there has been little – if any – substitution of capital and technology for doctorate

level instructors in the university production for, quite literally, centuries. What some have

labeled the “cost disease” would seem to be a significant force in explaining the long trend of




4
 Data from the Current Population Survey P-20 series show an increases in the constant dollar earnings of workers
with at least a BA degree between 1991 and 2014 of 3.4% for men and 11% for women.

                                                                                                           Page 6
rising costs in higher education.5 Over the last two decades, there have been few changes in

staffing ratios in aggregate with the student-faculty ratio dropping only slightly at public degree-

granting universities (16.6 to 16.1 from 1993 to 2013) while student faculty ratios have dropped

appreciably at private non-profit colleges and universities (dropping from 12.4 to 10.6 over this

interval), which would point broadly toward increasing labor costs absent changes in the

composition of faculty.6 These findings are generally inconsistent with substitution away from

increasingly expensive faculty.

         The national increase in faculty salaries misses two dimensions of increased stratification

– discipline and research intensity. First, faculty salaries have not risen proportionately across all

sectors of higher education and, in Table 1, we distinguish colleges and universities by public

control and research intensity, along with faculty rank. Indeed, constant dollar salaries of faculty

at community colleges and non-doctorate granting public colleges have actually lost ground at all

ranks since the early 1970s, with only modest gains at non-PhD institutions since 2000.7 In

contrast, faculty at research intensive universities (“Research I” in the Carnegie classifications),

most notably in the private sector, have made substantial real gains in compensation over the last




5
  The original insight derives from the Baumol-Bowen analysis of the performing arts in the 1960s and has been
broadly applied to higher education, including in an early study of the economics of private research universities
Bowen. Essentially, because higher education is labor-intensive and there are few opportunities for substituting
capital for labor, unit labor costs in sectors like higher education and the performing arts will increase more rapidly
than in the economy overall (a contemporary discussion can be found in Bowen (2012)). Recognizing that
technology is not entirely absent from modern classrooms and characteristics of faculty (including research
knowledge) may have adjusted, Bowen (2012) notes that any changes in the quality of teaching are not captured in
unit output measures.
6
  See Digest of Education Statistics 2014 (Table 314.10). Note that for public universities there is a substantial
cyclical component in student-faculty ratios, with student-faculty ratios rising during recessionary periods (Turner,
2015). What is more, as discussed below, there is substantial evidence of increased stratification or variance in
student-faculty ratios over time. Bound, Lovenheim and Turner (2010) show that the most selective institutions
experienced declines in student-faculty ratios, while student faculty ratios have risen at many less selective
institutions.
7
  Turner (2013) provides a detailed discussion of the divergence between the private and public sector in student-
faculty ratios and hiring during the recessionary period beginning in 2008, along with the widening of differences
between research universities and open-access institutions in the public sector.

                                                                                                                 Page 7
quarter century. Between 1990 and 2015, salaries of full professors increased, on average, by

23% at public universities and nearly 44% at private universities in constant dollar terms. The

increased stratification and competition in the market for research faculty is yet more evident

when we compare faculty at top-ranked research institutions to the broader set of research

universities (also shown in Table 1), where the increase in full professor salaries was about 51%

at the top privates and 31% at the top publics between 1990 and 2015. Salary increases have

been concentrated at the universities where faculty are expected to produce both scholarly

research and teaching, and it is the research contributions which are most broadly priced in the

national marketplace. An implication is that the price of research has increased at a greater rate

than the price of instruction.

         The differential changes in faculty salaries across type of institution mirror the well-

established pattern of increased input stratification across higher education, which is also a

reflection of the increased “quality competition” in higher education (Hoxby, 2009). Effectively,

just as colleges and universities compete for students, they are also competing for top-tier faculty

and greater availability of resources increases an institution’s capacity to attract top-tier faculty.

         Faculty salaries are also increasingly differentiated by discipline. Doctorate-level faculty

are one of the most specialized educational classifications in the labor market. Because the field

(and, indeed, subfield) of a PhD determines employment options, there are few opportunities for

“substitution” across disciplines – a unique feature of the academic labor market that we return

to shortly. What we see in the available aggregate data8 is the increased divergence among

fields in compensation: fields like economics, engineering and the physical sciences have higher

salaries than those in the humanities and some social sciences like sociology and anthropology.


8
  Note that faculty salaries by discipline are not collected as part of the standard IPEDS reporting process and it is
thus very difficult to assemble a long time series for a well-defined set of universities.

                                                                                                                 Page 8
The first columns of Table 2 present data for public universities that are in the AAU (and

participate in a central data exchange) for 2002-03 and 2014-15.                While salaries have been

fairly stagnant or increased at single-digit rates in a number of fields, including English, and

sociology, the discipline of economics defines the other tail with increases of about 30% across

the ranks over this interval. To see faculty salaries over the longer time horizon of nearly four

decades, we turn to data assembled on faculty salaries at the broader group of public land grant

universities in Figure 2. Over time, the variance in real salaries across disciplines has increased

markedly moving from an era in which the better compensated fields received only a modest

premium to the current period in which salaries differ by orders of magnitude across fields. As

probably more than one exasperated dean has noted, a rookie PhD economist commands a salary

almost twice that of a starting doctorate in English.

         Our interest is in how the structure of these differences in salaries across disciplines

within research universities links to the organization of instructional activities. At the same time,

salaries for faculty within discipline and rank also vary markedly which leads to the question of

how faculty with different skill and salary levels are allocated to different instructional and

research tasks within the university.

         Market Forces and Faculty Salaries

         As with any labor market, the determination of “price” or salary in academics is a

function of supply and demand. Thus, for entry-level faculty the only avenue for supply is new

doctorate production, while the supply of more senior faculty is constrained by past production.9



9
  A long research literature, with a particular focus on science and engineering fields, has assessed the particular
challenges of projections in doctorate labor markets where the long period for degree attainment creates a substantial
lag between program entry and degree receipt. Changes in market demand may then magnify any mismatch
between supply and demand of new doctorates in the presence of myopic expectations (see Breneman and Freeman,
1974; Freeman 1976; National Academy of Sciences 2000). The result is that doctorates entering the labor market
during weak job markets are likely to receive relatively low starting salaries.

                                                                                                              Page 9
A noteworthy point is that the flow of new doctorates varies in ways that only tangentially mirror

the flow of new positions. Figure 3 shows the relative change in new doctorates over the last

quarter century by discipline. While computer science and mathematics, which may have

considerable non-academic labor markets,10 are distinguished by the growth in number of PhDs

awarded, the relatively flat trajectories for the humanities and social sciences are also notable

because they occur in the presence of a long-term excess of doctorates relative to academic

positions. Considering the contrast between English and economics, the mismatch between new

doctorates and new positions would explain much of the recent trend in salaries. Figure 4 shows

the divergent trends in new job postings: whereas there is more than one position for each new

PhDs in economics, the situation is reversed in English where the number of jobs relative to

PhDs is less than 1 and declining.

        The decisions of colleges and universities to add faculty follow from demands for

teaching and research, with the latter only a significant factor for a small set of doctorate

granting universities. Behind the job postings are basic demand determinants that can be

expected to affect how universities choose to allocate hiring across fields. As the labor market

and student preferences (both undergraduate and graduate) change, students will choose to

pursue different specializations to the extent afforded by the curriculum. Over time, fields like

computer science that are known to have large changes in market demand demonstrate

substantial cyclical patterns in undergraduate degree receipt. Still, universities may – wisely – be




10
  Data from the 2013 Survey of Doctorate Recipients show that about 38% of computer science doctorates and 43%
of chemistry doctorates are at colleges or universities, while about 73% of sociology doctorates and 67% of politics
doctorates are employed at colleges and universities.

                                                                                                           Page 10
reluctant to address sharp changes in student demand generated by short-term factors with

permanent tenure track hiring.11

        University goals to increase research output also place upward pressure on the demand

for faculty. Fields in which external research funding is relatively plentiful will also experience

relative booms in hiring and salaries, as universities aim to compete for federal funds which are

not only inputs into rankings but also generate substantial opportunities for cost recovery.

Research funding shocks in the last half century have been large and differentiated across

specific science disciplines. For the physical sciences, defense investments and federal funding

spiked in the 1980s, before reversing in the 1990s and then rebounding somewhat. For the life

sciences, the doubling of the NIH budget between 1998 and 2003 contributed to an increase in

demand for faculty and salaries of research active faculty, particularly in the life sciences.

        Salary increases and reductions (at least in real terms) do not provide the only margin of

adjustment to changes in demand in academic labor markets. For faculty at research universities,

non-wage compensation often takes the form of benefits intended to increase research

productivity. Additional benefits may include funded graduate students and access to money to

purchase equipment, travel and data, as well as lower teaching loads and more frequent

sabbatical leaves. When these latter forms of compensation are used to compete for faculty they

necessarily affect a university’s resource allocation in the teaching domain.12




11
   Johnson and Turner (2009) explore some of the reasons beyond differences in faculty compensation that may limit
adjustment to student demand, including the need to maintain a minimum scale in small departments, administrative
constraints and curricular requirements intended to temper demand in popular majors.
12
   Writing more than two decades ago, Bowen and Sosa (1989) identify decreasing teaching loads as avenue for
adjustment and suggest that direct increases in salary would be a more efficient pathway to labor market clearing.
Yet, to the extent that universities may share the benefits of increased research productivity afforded by reduced
teaching, incentives may be aligned in compensation arrangements providing the in-kind benefit of reduced
teaching.

                                                                                                         Page 11
     II.      Faculty Deployment and Faculty Salaries – Sketching a Theoretical Framework

           The market for academic labor that we have just described determines the general pattern

of salaries across fields and subfields. Individual universities, their departments, and their faculty

have no influence on these general patterns. They are for the most part price takers in the

conventional sense, although there may sometimes be cases where the fit between an individual

university and faculty member is unusually good (in which case there is some rent to be divided)

or unusually bad (in which case there is unlikely to be a long-lasting match).

           We assume that the university maximizes an objective function13 that depends positively

on the quantity and quality of students taught, and the quantity and quality of research. As noted

above, we look only at arts and sciences departments, broadly defined to include computer

science. In practice, the university has a complicated budget constraint, because it has the

possibility of engaging in a variety of activities that can generate revenue in excess of cost (or

vice versa). Here we assume that in the background the university has a well-defined budget

constraint, and understands the relationships among changes in research and teaching activity,

revenue and cost, and the elements of the objective function.

           Faculty members each have a utility function defined on salary, leisure, the quality of the

work environment, time spent in various activities (e.g., teaching and research), quality of

teaching and research and reputation. Faculty tastes vary both within and across fields of

expertise, as does faculty skill. That is, within departments, some faculty members are able to

produce more or better research and teaching than others, for the same measured input. At a



13
  Universities are notorious for their complicated mechanisms of decision-making. Here we assume that the nexus
of President, Provost and Dean has solved all of the agency problems at those levels, and has consistent preferences
regarding what it would like chairs, faculty members, and everyone else to do, conditional on budget, etc., although
that leadership nexus is not assumed to understand, say, the best way to teach physics or decode papyri.

                                                                                                            Page 12
given allocation of time to research and teaching, some faculty would prefer to increase teaching

effort and others would prefer to increase research, holding salaries constant.

       The university’s problem is to deploy its faculty (including both tenure and non tenure

track) in a way that maximizes the value of the objective function. To keep the discussion

simple, we adopt the conventional rubrics of teaching and research, subscripted by field, and we

focus on the deployment of tenure-track faculty. Tenure-track faculty are especially interesting

because as a general matter they can (and do) both teach and do research. A key margin

regarding deployment of such faculty is the intra-departmental division between teaching and

research, which will depend in part on the intradepartmental distribution of skills and tastes.

This reasoning directly implies that within a department we should observe that the best

researchers should on average teach less than the best teachers (unless the best researchers have

sufficiently – and surprisingly -- strong preferences for teaching), where teaching less can be

accomplished via course reduction (fewer courses) or less onerous assignments (fewer or

students or students who are easier to teach per course).

       The trick to evaluating this hypothesis is to measure research quality. In the absence of

direct measures of research output, we can use our assumption that the university as a decision-

maker is rational and cares about research reputation. The university values scholarly reputation

and scholarly output. It doesn’t know how to produce those things, but it is good at finding

experts who do know how to produce those things, field-specifically. Those experts are tenure-

track faculty, organized into departments. The university tells the departments to hire great

faculty, and by and large it trusts the departments’ judgments, in part because the university’s

goal of having an excellent scholarly reputation is aligned with departmental goals to advance

departmental reputation.

                                                                                             Page 13
         Left to their own devices the departments will hire the best research faculty that they can

with the money that they are given, subject (probably) to meeting some minimum requirement

for undergraduate teaching quality imposed by the preferences of members of the department,

and (almost certainly) by some set of constraints on quality and quantity of undergraduate

education imposed by the university.14 In particular, the university will often agree to

supplement the department’s salary and slot budgets in exchange for the department’s teaching

sufficiently more undergraduates to cover any increase in cost.

         Scholarly reputation and output are produced, department by department, via

technologies that are black boxes from the perspective of the university. In this setup, it is fairly

straightforward to construct a model in which faculty salaries (and the net of other perks, such as

graduate vs. undergraduate teaching) within a department should be a good indicator of quality-

weighted research output. The marketplace in which field-specific faculty salaries are

determined is driven almost entirely by research. Except for the fact that salaries are never

reduced in nominal terms, the labor market should produce a set of salaries for tenure-track

faculty in each department that give us a ranking (in the happy extreme, an exact measure of

value marginal product) of faculty research production.

         If salary levels (intra-departmentally only) are good measures of research quality/quantity

and research skill isn’t strongly positively correlated with a preference for allocating time to



14
  Marc Nerlove (1972) constructs a model in which at sufficiently low levels of teaching quantity and quality
teaching and research are complements. He draws a production possibility frontier for teaching and research (he
includes graduate education as part of research) that has regions near the axes that slope up. In this formulation,
even a department that cared only about research would do some teaching. Meanwhile, former Cornell University
president Frank Rhodes (1998) asserts that the frontier slopes upward at low amounts of research. He quotes John
Slaughter: “Research is to teaching as sin is to confession. If you don’t participate in the former you have very little
to say in the latter.” That these complementarities are evident to university leaders does not necessarily imply that
they are evident to individuals or departments. In any case, departments in research universities generally act as if
they live in the region where research and teaching are substitutes in production.

                                                                                                                Page 14
teaching, we should observe that highly-paid faculty within a department do relatively little

teaching on average and that the teaching that they do has relatively high consumption value,

either directly or as an input into research. This is exactly what we find in the empirical work

below.15

         A second margin of choice for faculty deployment is interdepartmental. Noting that

undergraduate tuition within the arts and sciences hardly varies by field (Stange, 2015), the

university has an interest in economizing on the cost of instruction, which in turn would suggest

that it would want to have larger class sizes in fields where faculty are highly paid. But it’s not

that simple. The technology of teaching varies by field. Literature and other humanities are

often taught in ways that require a high level of faculty-student interaction, including provision

of extended comments on multiple drafts of papers. Courses in science, math, and some social

sciences, meanwhile, can often be organized without expressive writing and associated

communication. Thus it’s common to see introductory courses in quantitative fields that have

hundreds of students, while courses at the same level in the humanities will have 30 students or

fewer. The effect of such differences on the instructional cost per student seat can be much

larger than the effect of differences (even by factors of two to one) in the average salaries of

faculty in different fields.16




15
   Ron Ehrenberg has pointed out to us that there will be some cases where faculty stars with excellent research
reputations can contribute to departmental and university reputations (and perhaps tuition levels) by teaching large
undergraduate courses and allowing the institution to claim that undergraduates get to learn from, e.g., Nobel Prize
winners. This phenomenon is very much in the spirit of the optimizing framework we have sketched here. Where it
occurs it would weaken the negative relationship between research productivity and numbers of undergraduate
students taught. Exploring the teaching deployment of “superstars” would be a useful exercise which we leave for
future work.
16
   It is also possible that faculty members in lower-paid fields, reflecting the relatively low opportunity cost of their
time, are effective in influencing the administration and faculty governance to increase the number of slots in their
departments. This hypothesis was suggested in Johnson and Turner (2009) who note the parallel with the finding
from the corporate finance literature that weak divisions within firms are known to hold more than their optimal

                                                                                                                Page 15
         The technology of effective teaching and learning affects the nature of the game between

the university and its departments. In all cases, the department would like to be generously

supported in its research ambitions, while the university will generally undertake actions

designed to lead the department to take into account the volume and technology of its teaching

have on the revenues available to the institution. Thus the total salary pool available to the

department will generally depend positively on the number of students taught. To hire better

research faculty (which is to say, more expensive faculty) the department must agree to teach

more students. This is easier in some fields than in others. Indeed, where small classes are

essential to effective teaching, there may be no feasible bargain to be struck that would increase

the department’s tuition-generated resources.

         We note that in some universities there are formal budget models that allocate tuition

revenue to academic units, and in others, all or most such revenue is distributed centrally. For

our purposes what matters is that the university leadership can see and act upon the connection

between teaching activity and tuition revenue, enabling it to negotiate (either directly or via

manipulating budgeting formulas) with academic departments regarding faculty salaries, size and

workloads.17




allocation of cash (from the perspective of shareholders), as the return to internal lobbying may be greater for
executives in these units.

17
   See Courant and Knepp (2002) for a discussion of activity-based budgeting. The kind of bargaining that we are
talking about here would be facilitated by a system that allocated tuition revenue at the level of the school or college
(or the department, although the latter configuration would be unusual, and does not apply at either Michigan or
Virginia). For period that we are analyzing in this chapter Michigan allocated tuition revenue to deans, such that the
arts and sciences dean was empowered to engage in bargaining with departments, whereas at Virginia the bargain
was generally undertaken at a higher level of administration with teaching activity only weakly aligned with school-
level resources; beginning in 2015, Virginia adopted a new budget model with a resource allocation broadly similar
to the Michigan model.

                                                                                                               Page 16
    III.      Empirical Strategy and Data



           Our model of faculty allocation and compensation in university production functions

references the circumstances of research universities and, in particular, those disciplines in the

arts and sciences, broadly defined. We do not look at professional schools in areas like

medicine, law and faculty in these fields (and their assignments) are often separated from central

university resource allocation given the generally free-standing pricing, admissions and hiring

decisions within these professional schools.18

           Institutional Micro Data

           To examine how variation in compensation affects the allocation of faculty resources in

the university context, we look at micro data from two public research universities – the

University of Michigan and the University of Virginia. These institutions are broadly

representative of AAU universities which are intensive in research, while also producing a

significant number of undergraduate and graduate degree recipients. The University of Virginia

and the University of Michigan share very competitive undergraduate degree programs that are

generally ranked among the top-25 universities nationally, and the top 2 or 3 public universities.

The University of Michigan is somewhat larger than the University of Virginia19, generates

considerably more research funding, and is generally regarded as having a greater number of

highly ranked graduate programs. We believe it is reasonable to expect the findings from these

universities to apply directly to peer public and private institutions in the AAU, even as there is




18
   It is also the case that the compensation of faculty in business schools and medical schools is very different and,
especially in medical schools, much more complicated than in arts and sciences fields, so the exclusion of
professional schools helps to improve the tractability of the analysis.
19
   In Fall 2014, total enrollment was 43,625 with 28,395 undergraduates at the University of Michigan relative to
23,732 with 16,483 undergraduates at the University of Virginia.

                                                                                                               Page 17
surely some institution-specific variation. It is useful to underscore the observation that

individual-level data on faculty salaries at private universities are nearly impossible to obtain,

while public universities make such information available on a regular basis.

        In an effort to focus the analysis on a finite number of well-defined disciplines, we look

at 11 disciplines that constitute separate administrative departments at nearly every research

university and draw from the humanities (English, History, Philosophy), the social sciences

(Economics, Politics, Sociology, Psychology) and the natural and computational sciences (Math,

Physics, Chemistry and Computer Science). These disciplines are intended to span broad

differences in types of instruction such as the emphasis on written expression, lab experiences,

and quantitative analysis. In addition, there are notable differences among these disciplines in

faculty compensation, as well as student demand.

        For both the University of Virginia and the University of Michigan, we have combined

data on faculty compensation and course-level records of enrollment, which also identify the

instructor of record.20 For both universities, we are able to record salaries for all regular

instructional faculty, which proves to cover the great majority of courses offered. The course

level data include the instructor, course title, course type, enrollment level, and course number,

which allows for the distinction between graduate and undergraduate courses. For consistency,

we focus on traditional “group instruction” courses and do not analyze independent study listings

or speaker series (“workshops”).        For the University of Michigan, courses and salary data

extend from 2002-2015. For the University of Virginia, course offering data extend from the

present to 1990 while the faculty salary data are available for only the three most recent years.



20
  Data from the University of Michigan were obtained from the Learning Analytics Task Force and from public
records of salaries; data for the University of Virginia combine the publicly available faculty salary file with
comprehensive “web scraping” of the course offering directory, which was originally conducted by Lou Bloomfield.

                                                                                                       Page 18
There are 52,556 different records from our focal departments from the 1990-91 academic year

to 2014-15 for the University of Virginia alone.

        The empirical strategy proceeds in two related parts. The first set of questions focuses on

department level variation, where we assess differences by discipline and changes over time in

teaching allocations in relation to salary levels. The second piece of the analysis examines

within department variation in compensation and teaching.

        Descriptive Measures

        For the purpose of this analysis, discipline-level variation in faculty salaries is assumed to

be exogenous. In turn, we assume that individual faculty salaries are determined on the national

market by competitive forces.21 To provide a baseline, columns in the right-hand panel of Table

2 shows faculty salaries by rank for the disciplines that are the focus of our analysis for the

University of Virginia and the University of Michigan. One broad point is the notable correlation

in salaries across fields – economics is the most highly paid field while English is consistently at

or near the bottom. Secondly, salary differences between the universities are much smaller at the

assistant level than the full level, likely reflecting the greater reward for (highly variable)

research productivity among the full professors. Overall, between-university differences in

compensation reflect in part differences in the “ranking” or research productivity of departments.

While faculty in English and History receive broadly similar compensation, faculty in sociology

are far better compensated at the University of Michigan than at the University of Virginia,

reflecting both the higher research ranking and greater quantitative focus of the Michigan




21
  Beyond faculty productivity, some differences in compensation between the University of Michigan and the
University of Virginia may reflect differential program quality or compensating differences associated with the
different geographic regions.

                                                                                                            Page 19
department.22 Table 3 illustrates some of the differences between the universities in rankings

and research measures.

        In terms of the program offerings, our focal departments all award both undergraduate

and doctorate degrees. Again, there are some differences reflective of the overall institutional

scale (the University of Michigan is larger than the University of Virginia), but there are

similarities in terms of variations across disciplines in scale and the relative representation of

graduate and undergraduate students.



IV.     Empirical Evidence



        Between Department Analysis

        Teaching students is, perhaps, the most easily recognized “output” of an academic unit,

with this coin of the realm often captured in measures of student enrollment or student credit

hours.23 Our interest is in the alignment between the faculty inputs and the courses taught

between departments within universities. Table 4 shows the distribution of course seats in total

and relative to the overall faculty counts. The provision of course seats relative to faculty

headcount varies markedly across departments for both universities. Still, the “tails” of the

distributions are quite similar between the two institutions: English has the lowest student course

enrollment to faculty ratio at 35.2 for Virginia and 30.5 for Michigan, while chemistry and

economics are disciplines near the top with student course enrollment to faculty ratios 4-5 times



22
   Indeed, the finding that between-institution variation in faculty compensation within disciplines is linked to
variation in faculty research productivity between institutions follows the more general result from Ehrenberg,
McGraw, and Mrdjenovic (2006).
23
   While many universities have adopted budget models which tie revenue flows to enrollment (“RCM”), few such
models allow for decentralization and incentives at the level of the individual department, but instead limit
incentives to the school level.

                                                                                                          Page 20
higher at both institutions. Were faculty similarly priced across disciplines, such differences

would create enormous differences in the cost of instruction across fields.

         When we shift to thinking about expenditures on faculty relative to courses and students

taught the picture shifts dramatically. A rudimentary indicator of average cost of a course

offering in a department is the total faculty salary bill relative to course seats taught.24 Table 5

shows two measures which portray similar evidence: the first column includes all faculty

including those on leave, while the second only includes those actively teaching in 2014-15.

What we see is a very dramatic narrowing – and in some cases reversal -- of the relative

differences among departments in the cost-per student, while departments with the highest salary

levels are not those with the greatest cost of educational delivery. Two disciplines merit a

particular focus. English is an outlier on the high end for both Virginia ($2,837) and Michigan

($2,393). In contrast, economics – which has the highest average salaries, is near the bottom of

the distribution of cost of course-seat provision.

         Figure 5 illustrates the central finding that overall salary levels are negatively correlated

with the cost of providing a course seat across disciplines. This finding is consistent with our

theoretical prediction that universities adjust to variation in input costs by altering the

organization of teaching. A corollary to this point is that we would expect faculty costs per seat

to change by less than discipline-specific changes in faculty salaries over time.

         It is worth noting that the consequences for educational quality of compensating for

higher salaries via larger class sizes will vary as a function of the way in which disciplines

produce and share knowledge. In humanities fields it is often the case that being able to express


24
   Of course, faculty are compensated for research as well as teaching. This metric is appropriate to the extent that
the research share of faculty compensation is the same across departments. To the extent that research shares are
larger in the most highly compensated departments, these measures will overstate the teaching costs in relatively
research-intensive departments.

                                                                                                              Page 21
knowledge is inextricably bound up with the knowledge itself, in which case good pedagogy

requires substantial writing (or filming, or podcast-creating) with careful evaluating and editing

on the part of the instructor. In contrast, many more quantitative fields can be taught and

assessed without close interaction among the material, the student, and the instructor. We expect

that in all cases it is possible to increase class sizes at the cost of reducing educational quality.

However the terms of the tradeoff may differ greatly by field.

        To test the hypothesis that the technology of teaching differs across disciplines in ways

that may limit class size expansion and the organization of classroom activities, we coded syllabi

from 6 fields (English, economics, history, philosophy, physics, and psychology) at the

University of Virginia and the University of Michigan. Our sample is effectively one of

convenience as we chose randomly conditional on the availability of syllabi with the aim of

coding one course at the introductory, intermediate and upper levels of course offerings. We

present some examples in Table 6 and some basic intuitive points are clear: introductory courses

are generally larger than upper level courses, some disciplines (particularly economics and

psychology) have relatively large courses. Other points suggestive of differences in

“technology” are apparent in the grading and writing requirements. In economics and physics,

the majority of the evaluation is based on examination while writing is minimal. In English,

history and philosophy, writing and participation components of evaluation are the norm. We

summarize these results in the regressions results shown in Table 7: both discipline and course

scale have an appreciable effect on outcomes such as the percent of the grade determined by

examination and whether writing or participation are part of the evaluation. Our favored

interpretation is that variation in the nature of the material and the nature of learning across

disciplines drives these results.



                                                                                                Page 22
Intra-departmental analysis

         In section three we hypothesized that, within departments, research-productivity should

be negatively correlated with faculty teaching effort and that we could use salary as a measure of

research productivity. That is, controlling for rank, and recognizing that the market for faculty at

this level is determined largely by research reputation, we would expect a negative relationship

between salary and teaching activity within a department.

         We controlled for rank by running the regression on full professors only. Variation in the

salaries of assistant professors generally derives from accidents of history. The starting salary in

the year of hire is determined in the relevant marketplace, and salaries then move according to

budgetary circumstances. In our experience it’s unusual for differences in assistant professor

salaries to reflect much else. Associate professors come in two flavors. Some are progressing

nicely towards a second promotion, and if we could identify these it would be sensible to include

them in the model with a control for their rank. Unfortunately, the other flavor of associate

professor is progressing slowly if at all, and a model that describes their salary behavior well

does not fit the first flavor of associate professor. Based on these considerations and our

theoretical discussion of the expected power of salary as an indicator of research quality, we

limit our empirical analysis to full professors, whose salaries are likely to reflect current or recent

market circumstances.

         Table 8 reports the effects of salary (in 2014 dollars) and departmental fixed effects (the

omitted department is History) on the numbers of courses and students taught, using UM data

from 2002 to 2014.25 The regression also included fixed effects for each year (except 2002).

The regression confirms quite powerfully our prediction regarding salary and teaching. The


25
  Results for the University of Virginia are qualitatively similar though somewhat less precisely estimated given a
shorter panel of salary data.

                                                                                                            Page 23
magnitudes are not trivial. The coefficients on salary reported in the table are in thousands of

dollars, implying that an increase in salary of $10k leads to a reduction in the number of

undergraduate courses of about five percent of a course per year, and a reduction in the number

of undergraduate students by about 3.5 per year. The results suggest that superstars whose salary

is $100k more than the mean teach half an undergrad course less and about 35 fewer

undergraduate students. For some departments, 35 undergraduates per full professor per year is

more than the average load. Additionally, the coefficients for graduate students and graduate

courses are positive and significant, consistent with the idea that graduate teaching has amenity

value for faculty, or is part of the production of research, or, most likely, both in some

combination.

       The regression reported on in Table 8 and the preceding paragraph looks at all faculty

and controls for departmental differences via departmental fixed effects. In Table 9, we organize

the analysis somewhat differently, running separate regressions for each department at Michigan

(with year fixed-effects, as in Table 9). As before, there is a consistent and generally significant

negative relationship between full professor salaries within departments and the number of

undergraduate students and courses taught in that department. In this formulation, we also see

clearly that there is substantial variation in the slope of the relationship. In Psychology,

Economics, and Chemistry $10,000 in annual salary is associated with a reduction of about six

students per year. In Philosophy and History our estimate is about a third the size, and in English

and Sociology $10,000 in pay is associated with a reduction of less than 1.5 students per year.

As in our earlier specification, the numbers of undergrads taught falls with full professor salaries,

while the number of graduate students taught rises. These patterns are also evident in Figure 6,




                                                                                               Page 24
which multiplies the estimates by 50, showing the changes in students taught associated with a

$50,000 difference in salary.



V.     Conclusion and Thoughts Ahead

       Tenure track faculty in research universities teach and they do research. Over the past

several decades, the relative prices – in terms of wages paid to faculty – of those two activities

have changed markedly. The price of research has gone up way more than the price of teaching.

Salaries have risen much more in elite research universities than in universities generally. This is

quite consistent with models in which compensation depends on tournaments and rankings, and

the most successful workers can command a substantial premium relative to those who are

merely successful (Lazear and Rosen, 1981; Rosen, 1986; Rosen, 1981).

       Departments in research universities (the more so the more elite) must pay high salaries

in order to employ research-productive faculty. These faculty, in turn, contribute most to the

universities’ goals (which include teaching as well as research) by following their comparative

advantage and teaching less, and also teaching in ways that are complementary with research –

notably graduate courses. The university pays these faculty well because they are especially

good at research. It makes perfect sense that they would also have relatively low teaching loads

(along with relatively high research expectations, which we don’t observe directly.)

       In addition to deploying faculty productively within departments, the university has an

interest in providing its curriculum efficiently – which is to say, at the lowest cost consistent with

other desiderata, including quality and the ability to produce tuition revenue. The two most

important features that relate to faculty deployment across departments are faculty salaries and

class sizes. We observe large differences in both, with the faculty in the highest-paid



                                                                                              Page 25
departments tending to have the largest average class sizes, resulting in “cost per seat” being

essentially uncorrelated with salaries for the departments we have studied at Michigan and

Virginia.

        A striking finding at both institutions is that the cost per seat is much higher in English

than in any other department, notwithstanding the fact that salaries in English are at the low end

of the distribution. As a matter of arithmetic, this is the result of relatively small class sizes in

English. Why are class sizes there so small? We expect that it’s because the technology of

teaching and learning in English (and, plausibly, in other fields where detailed interpretation of

text is an essential part of what is to be learned) is such that it is difficult or impossible to teach

effectively in large classes. This is in contrast to, say, economics or chemistry, where learning

what is in the text book, and working on relatively well-defined problems, is much easier to scale

up.

        To be sure, economists would also like to teach small classes, both introductory and

advanced, but they also like to have strong colleagues across the discipline. The loss in teaching

quality and the amenity value of teaching associated with teaching large introductory sections

(and large advanced courses) is easily worth the gain of paying (and being paid) what the market

requires for good faculty.26 Based on our analysis in Table 9, that tradeoff is on average less

salutary in the humanities. Our analysis shows that departments in which close engagement with

text is likely to be an essential part of teaching and evaluation relies on interpretation (writing,

presentation) face lower tradeoffs between increases in salary and reductions in students taught.




26
  A related adjustment that may be adopted by departments with high salaries combined with teaching demands is
further division of labor between faculty conducting research and those conducting teaching to include the
appointment of “master teachers” to teach core and introductory classes (Figlio, Schapiro, and Soter, 2015).

                                                                                                       Page 26
       If we accept that the value placed on research in elite research university is warranted, we

conclude that the deployment of faculty is generally consistent with rational behavior on the part

of those universities. Faculty salaries vary, for a variety of reasons, and the universities respond

to that variation by economizing on the most expensive faculty, while attending to differences in

teaching technologies across fields.




                                                                                             Page 27
                                           References


Autor, David. 2014. “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality Among the "Other
99 Percent” Science, 23 May 2014: 344 (6186), 843-851.

Bound, John; Michael Lovenheim and Sarah Turner. 2010. “Why have college completion rates
declined? An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Bowen, William. 2012 “Cost Trends, the “Cost Disease,” and Productivity in Higher Education”
The Tanner Lectures Stanford University
http://www.ithaka.org/sites/default/files/files/ITHAKA-TheCostDiseaseinHigherEducation.pdf

Bowen, William G. 2013. "Academia Online: Musings (Some Unconventional).”
http://ithaka.org/sites/default/files/files/ithaka-stafford-lecture-final.pdf

Bowen, William and Julie Ann Sosa. 1989. Prospects for Faculty in the Arts and Sciences.
Princeton University Press.

Breneman, David and Richard Freeman. 1974 Forecasting the Ph.D. Labor Market: Pitfalls for
Policy, with Richard B. Freeman, Technical Report No. 2, National Board on Graduate
Education (Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences Press).

Campos, Paul. 2015. “The Real Reason College Tuition Costs So Much,” New York
Times, April 4, 2015, available at www.nytimes.com/2015/04/05/opinion/sunday/
the-real-reason-college-tuition-costs-so-much.html?_r=0.
Courant, Paul N. and Marilyn Knepp,“Activity Based Budgeting at the University of Michigan,”
(with Marilyn Knepp), in Douglas Priest et. al., eds., Incentive-Based Budgeting Systems in
Public Universities, Edward Elgar, 2002, pp. 137-160.
Ehrenberg, Ronald, McGraw, Marquise and Mrdjenovic, Jesenka, (2006), Why do field
differentials in average faculty salaries vary across universities?, Economics of Education
Review, 25, issue 3, p. 241-248.

Figlio, David. Morton Schapiro, Kevin Soter. 2015. Review of Economics and Statistics vol 97,
Issue 1: 715-724.

Freeman, Richard. 1976. “A Cobweb Model of the Supply and Starting Salary of New
Engineers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 29:236-48.

Jacob, Brian; Brian McCall and Kevin Stange. forthcoming. “College as Country Club: Do
Colleges Cater to Students' Preferences for Consumption?” Journal of Labor Economics.


                                                                                              Page 28
Johnson, William and Sarah Turner. 2009. “Faculty without students: Resource allocation in
higher education.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (2), 169-189

Hoxby, Caroline. 2009. "The Changing Selectivity of American Colleges." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 23(4): 95-118. DOI: 10.1257/jep.23.4.95

Lazear, Edward and Sherwin Rosen, 1981. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
Contracts,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), pp. 841-864

National Academy of Science. 2000. “Forecasting Demand and Supply of Doctoral Scientists
and Engineers: Report of a Workshop on Methodology”

Nerlove, Marc. 1972. “On Tuition and the Costs of Higher Education: Prolegomena to a
Conceptual Framework.” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 80, No. 3, Part 2: Investment in
Education: The Equity-Efficiency Quandary (May - Jun., 1972), pp. S178-S218

Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The Economics of Superstars”, American Economic Review, 71, issue 5,
p. 845-58

Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. “Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments,” American Economic
Review, 76(4), pp. 701-715.

Stange, Kevin. 2015. “Differential pricing in undergraduate education: effects on degree
production by field.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34.1: 107-135.

Sallee James M & Resch Alexandra M & Courant Paul N, 2008. “On the Optimal Allocation of
Students and Resources in a System of Higher Education,” The B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, De Gruyter, vol. 8(1), pages 1-26, June.

Turner, Sarah. 2013. “The Impact of the Financial Crisis on Faculty Labor Markets” in How the
Financial Crisis and Great Recession Affected Higher Education. Hoxby and Brown, ed.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                                                                           Page 29
Figure 1. Overall Trends in Faculty Salaries by Rank, Constant Dollars (2015$)




Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Higher Education
General Information Survey (HEGIS), “Faculty Salaries, Tenure, and Fringe Benefits” surveys, 1970‐71
through 1985‐86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), “Salaries, Tenure, and
Fringe Benefits of Full‐Time Instructional Faculty Survey” 1987‐2015. [See Table 316.10 from 2015
Digest of Education Statistics]




                                                                                                Page 30
Figure 2. Faculty salaries by rank and discipline, public universities, constant dollar (2015$)

 Assistant Professors




 Associate Professors




 Full Professors




Source: Faculty Salary Survey of Institutions Belonging to NASULGC (Oklahoma State University, Various
years).




                                                                                                  Page 31
Figure 3. Trends in Doctorates Conferred by Discipline (index 2000=100)




Source: Survey of Earned Doctorates, various years.




                                                                          Page 32
Figure 4. New Job Postings by field relative to new doctorates awarded, 2001‐2012




Sources: Authors’ tabulations from the American Economics Association and the MLA, with new PhDs by
discipline from the Survey of Earned Doctorates.




                                                                                           Page 33
Figure 5. Faculty Salaries and Cost Per Seat, University of Virginia and University of Michigan, 2014‐15

 University of Michigan




 University of Virginia




Source: Authors’ tabulations. University of Virginia shown in orange, University of Michigan in blue. This
version of the table presents the average salary of full professors on the x‐axis; the next version will use
the average salary of all faculty which produces a qualitatively similar presentation.


                                                                                                    Page 34
Figure 6. Change in Students Taught Within Departments per $50,000 in Salary




Source: See Table 11. Estimates based on within‐department regressions of the effect individual faculty
salary on teaching assignment.




                                                                                                Page 35
Table 1. Faculty Salaries by Type of Institution, Selected Years, Constant Dollar (2015$)

                                                      Assistant Professor
                                        1971         1980        1990          2000            2015
Research 1 Public                   $84,336        57,222     70,783         72,739          83,801
Research 1 Private                    73,741       54,417     73,088         84,895         101,244
Research 2 Public                     69,565       53,191     63,012         66,126          75,930
Other 4 yr Public                     66,251       51,484     59,807         60,746          65,810
Other 4 yr Private                    60,355       47,508     54,007         57,812          64,160
Priv Liberal Arts 1                   62,144       45,808     56,401         59,976          64,555
2‐Year Public                         67,875       52,778     59,766         58,990          57,912

Top 7 Private Universities            74,416       54,489       73,876       86,053         113,781
Top 5 Public Universities             70,742       56,459       74,575       80,973          95,053

                                                        Full Professor
                                     1971         1980       1990           2000            2015
Research 1 Public                  $120,131        96,491     114,427       123,811         141,205
Research 1 Private                   127,120      101,796     129,787       149,459         186,582
Research 2 Public                    111,328       86,409     101,954       109,547         125,028
Other 4 yr Public                    102,313       82,779      93,081        95,076          99,348
Other 4 yr Private                    89,032       76,390      84,731        90,721         100,941
Priv Liberal Arts 1                   95,940       71,853      89,804        99,558         106,659
2‐Year Public                         90,788       87,329      91,645        80,683          75,507



Top 7 Private Universities           131,690      107,058      141,430      166,396         213,495
Top 5 Public Universities            125,591      102,229      128,886      144,801         168,710

Source: Authors’ tabulations using Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS), “Faculty Salaries, Tenure, and Fringe
Benefits” surveys, 1970‐71 through 1985‐86; Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS),
“Salaries, Tenure, and Fringe Benefits of Full‐Time Instructional Faculty Survey” 1987‐2015. The top 7
private universities are coded as: Princeton, Harvard, Yale, Columbia, Stanford, Chicago, MIT. The top 5
public universities are coded as: UC‐Berkeley, UCLA, University of Virginia, University of Michigan, UNC‐
Chapel Hill.




                                                                                                  Page 36
Table 2. Faculty salaries by discipline and rank, AAUDE Public universities, the University of Michigan,
and the University of Virginia (2015 $)

                                                         Full Professors
                                       AAU Public Aggregate
                                                                          University of University of
         Department              2002‐03      2014‐15     % Change          Virginia     Michigan

Chemistry                          $139,450    $148,698         6.6%           $149,832        $154,673
Computer Science                   $146,690    $154,647         5.4%           $183,127        $170,329
Economics                          $156,965    $202,347        28.9%           $186,250        $241,464
English                            $116,228    $123,480         6.2%           $125,578        $139,149
History                            $121,106    $126,459         4.4%           $130,594        $144,650
Mathematics                        $125,957    $134,605         6.9%           $141,877        $147,399
Philosophy                         $127,274    $138,665         8.9%           $115,260        $163,305
Physics                            $129,609    $137,162         5.8%           $129,117        $140,172
Political Science                  $133,944    $148,812        11.1%           $149,147        $192,633
Psychology                         $132,491    $138,617         4.6%           $151,530        $167,564
Sociology                          $127,758    $137,473         7.6%           $136,213        $185,634

                                                       Assistant Professors
                                       AAU Public Aggregate
                                                                          University of University of
         Department              2002‐03      2014‐15     % Change          Virginia     Michigan

Chemistry                           $76,330     $83,527         9.4%            $78,400         $84,792
Computer Science                   $103,438     $98,563        ‐4.7%           $126,567        $100,974
Economics                           $94,614    $119,563        26.4%           $123,538        $124,948
English                             $64,891     $69,153         6.6%            $69,267         $71,149
History                             $65,513     $70,146         7.1%            $69,280         $74,478
Mathematics                         $72,471     $84,659        16.8%            $85,500         $60,298
Philosophy                          $65,631     $71,825         9.4%            $66,000        $108,981
Physics                             $79,831     $85,613         7.2%            $85,733         $90,140
Political Science                   $73,701     $82,838        12.4%            $87,100         $89,417
Psychology                          $72,190     $78,906         9.3%            $96,700         $87,124
Sociology                           $71,077     $77,203         8.6%            $66,388         $90,524

Source: Authors’ tabulations from AAUDE institutional data from public universities and institutional
public‐release files for the University of Virginia and the University of Michigan.




                                                                                                 Page 37
Table 3. Comparative Characteristics by Discipline, University of Virginia and university of Michigan




Source: U.S. News and World Report and National Academies of Science “Assessment of Research and
Doctoral Programs” (2010)




                                                                                                Page 38
Table 4. Student Course Enrollment relative to Faculty Staffing, 2014‐15

                                                       University of Virginia
                                  Enrollment                             Student‐Course/Faculty Ratio:
Field                    Total   Undergraduate        Graduate         Total    Undergraduate Graduate
Chemistry                  4,990         4,580             410            161.0         147.7          13.2
Computer Science           5,688         5,278             410            172.4         159.9          12.4
Economics                  6,533         6,237             296            186.7         178.2           8.5
English                    1,727         1,608             119             35.2          32.8           2.4
History                    3,869         3,811              58             77.4          76.2           1.2
Math                       2,656         2,088             568             83.0          65.3          17.8
Philosophy                 1,852         1,572              15            108.9          92.5           0.9
Physics                    2,749         2,509             240             91.6          83.6           8.0
Political Science          4,529         4,425             104            122.4         119.6           2.8
Psychology                 5,352         5,187             165            133.8         129.7           4.1
Sociology                  2,131         2,082              49            106.6         104.1           2.5

                                                       University of Michigan
                                    Enrollment                           Student‐Course/Faculty Ratio:
                         Total     Undergraduate      Graduate         Total    Undergraduate Graduate
Chemistry                 10,067           9,672            395           193.6          186.0          7.6
Computer Science           8,125           6,430          1,695            71.9           56.9         15.0
Economics                  7,320           6,429            891           120.0          105.4         14.6
English                    3,325           2,998            327            30.5           27.5          3.0
History                    5,112           5,031             81            56.8           55.9          0.9
Math                      10,123           8,967          1,156            82.3           72.9          9.4
Philosophy                 1,786           1,722             64            63.8           61.5          2.3
Physics                    4,290           4,026            264            71.5           67.1          4.4
Political Science          3,691           3,416            275            67.1           62.1          5.0
Psychology                11,848          11,423            425           108.7          104.8          3.9
Sociology                  2,758           2,522            237            86.2           78.8          7.4


Source: Authors’ tabulations.




                                                                                          Page 39
Table 5. Estimated Faculty Cost per Seat, University of Michigan and University of Virginia, 2014‐15

                 University of Virginia
                        Cost per Enrolled Student
                                        Currently
Field                  All Faculty       Teaching
Chemistry                        $760           $741
Computer Science                 $764           $673
Economics                        $847           $777
English                        $2,837         $2,217
History                        $1,335         $1,092
Mathematics                    $1,229         $1,229
Philosophy                       $938           $898
Physics                        $1,193         $1,058
Political Science                $945           $718
Psychology                       $921           $736
Sociology                        $962           $890
Total                            $985           $854

             University of Michigan
                     Cost per Enrolled Student
                                     Currently
                    All Faculty       Teaching
Chemistry                    $554            $528
Computer Science           $1,848          $1,780
Economics                  $1,312          $1,296
English                    $2,393          $2,111
History                    $1,548          $1,548
Mathematics                $1,095          $1,057
Philosophy                      $1,883            $1,883
Physics                         $1,535            $1,320
Political Science               $1,694            $1,570
Psychology                      $1,121              $800
Sociology                       $1,677            $1,369

Source: Authors’ tabulations.




                                                                                               Page 40
Table 6. Field‐specific examples of requirements in undergraduate courses
                                                                                                                                                                                         Paper /
                                                                                                                                                Participate /       Exam counts       Writing counts
Name                 Title                                                       Instructor Rank   Enrollment        Exam (0,1) Writing (0,1)   present (0,1)         for >50%          for > 50%
University of Virginia
ECON 2010            Principles of Microeconomics                               Lecturer                    298               1            0                    0                 1                0
ECON 3030            Money and Banking                                          Assistant Prof.              83               1            0                    0                 1                0
ECON 4210            International Trade: Theory and Policy                     Professor                    17               1            1                    1                 1                0
ENMC 4530            J. M. Coetzee in His Times                                 Associate Prof.               9               0            1                    1                 0                1
ENNC 3110            English Poetry and Prose of the Nineteenth Century         Professor                    19               1            1                    1                 0                1
ENRN 3250            Milton: Origins, Transgressions, Revolutions               Associate Prof.              29               1            1                    0                 0                1
HIEU 2101            Jewish History I: The Ancient and Medieval Experience      Associate Prof.              40               1            1                    1                 0                0
HIEU 3390            Nazi Germany                                               Lecturer                     61               1            1                    1                 1                0
HIST 4501            Scandals in History                                        Associate Prof.               8               0            1                    1                 0                1
PHIL 2450            Philosophy of Science                                      Professor                     7               1            1                    0                 0                1
PHIL 3710            Ethics                                                     Professor                    20               1            1                    0                 0                1
PHIL 3999            Philosophical Perspectives on Liberty                      Professor                    25               1            1                    0                 1                0
PHYS 2620            Modern Physics                                             Professor                    84               1            0                    0                 1                0
PSYC 2150            Introduction to Cognition                                  Associate Prof.             334               1            1                    0                 1                0
PSYC 3410            Abnormal Psychology                                        Professor                   290               1            1                    0                 1                0
PSYC 4110            Psycholinguistics                                          Associate Prof.              22               1            1                    1                 0                0

University of Michigan
ECON 101‐200         Principles of Economics I – Microeconomics                 Lecturer                    322               1            0                    0                 1                0
ECON 310‐001         Money and Banking                                          Lecturer                    184               1            0                    0                 1                0
ECON 340‐001         International Economics                                    Professor                   105               1            0                    0                 1                0
                     Introduction to Literary Studies: Shakespeare, Race, and
ENGLISH 298‐007 the 20th Century                                                Professor                       22            0            1                    1                 0                1
                    Topics in Literary Studies: The Road Trip in American
ENGLISH 313‐010 Literature                                                      Professor                    68               0            1                    1                 0                1
ENGLISH 451‐001 Literature 1600‐1830                                            Professor                    28               1            0                    1                 0                0
HISTORY 105‐001 Introduction to Religion: From Rastafari to the Sun Dance       Professor                    43               1            1                    1                 1                0
HISTORY 214‐001 Modern Europe                                                   Associate Prof.              29               1            1                    1                 0                0
HISTORY 386‐001 The Holocaust: The Fate of Jews, 1933‐1949                      Professor                    89               1            1                    1                 0                0
HISTORY 451‐001 Japan's Modern Transformations                                  Associate Prof.              26               1            1                    1                 0                0
PHIL 180‐001        Introductory Logic                                          Associate Prof.             131               1            0                    1                 1                0
PHIL 355‐001        Contemporary Moral Problems                                 Associate Prof.             130               0            1                    1                 0                1
PHIL 361‐001        Ethics                                                      Professor                    49               1            1                    1                 0                0
PHYSICS 240‐100 General Physics II                                              Professor                   147               1            0                    0                 1                0
PHYSICS 340‐001 Waves, Heat, and Light                                          Assistant Prof.              29               1            0                    0                 1                0
PHYSICS 401‐001 Intermediate Mechanics                                          Assistant Prof.              40               1            0                    0                 1                0
PSYCH 240‐020       Introduction to Cognitive Psychology                        Lecturer                    293               1            0                    0                 1                0
PSYCH 250‐020       Human Development                                           Lecturer                    285               1            1                    1                 1                0
PSYCH 438‐001       Hormones and Behavior                                       Associate Prof.             131               1            0                    1                 1                0




                                                                                                                                                                                            Page 41
Table 7. Association between course requirements and class size and department
                           (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                                               Participate /
Explanatory Vars.      Exam Pct           Writing Pct       Writing (1/0)      Present (1/0)

Enrollment            0.000668***          -0.000230         -0.000964*          -0.000858
                      (0.000211)          (0.000152)         (0.000489)         (0.000596)
Economics               0.366***            -0.437***         -0.609***             -0.377
                        (0.0937)            (0.0946)            (0.168)            (0.227)
English                -0.317***              0.144              0.130             0.0852
                        (0.0742)            (0.0949)          (0.0826)             (0.178)
History                  -0.0169             -0.164*            0.0114              0.260*
                        (0.0884)            (0.0928)            (0.113)            (0.136)
Physics                   0.181             -0.410***         -0.732***           -0.725***
                         (0.111)             (0.109)            (0.124)            (0.136)
Psychology                0.213*            -0.311***           -0.233             -0.0614
                         (0.111)             (0.116)            (0.205)            (0.215)
UM                       0.0151             -0.00936           -0.217**             0.183*
                        (0.0524)            (0.0524)          (0.0835)            (0.0970)
Constant                0.369***            0.517***          1.067***            0.634***
                        (0.0703)            (0.0799)          (0.0680)             (0.173)

Observations               68                 68                 68                  68
R-squared                0.722              0.630              0.648               0.531



Source: Philosophy is the omitted department. Convenience sample of 68 courses in 6 disciplines at he
University of Virginia and the University of Michigan.




                                                                                               Page 42
Table 8. Within Department Determinants of Courses and Students Taught, University of Michigan

Notes:
                                  (1)               (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                   Under       Grad          All      Under        Grad
         VARIABLES            All courses         courses     courses     students   students    students


                                                                              ‐
         Salary (000s)        ‐0.00461***    ‐0.00568***     0.00107***   0.343***   ‐0.354***   0.0114***
                               (0.000319)     (0.000319)     (0.000229)   (0.0264)    (0.0270)   (0.00333)
         Comp Sci                0.140**       ‐0.287***      0.427***     ‐0.628    ‐14.43***   13.80***
                                (0.0685)        (0.0655)       (0.0391)    (4.023)     (4.063)     (0.819)
         Chemistry                ‐0.131       ‐0.452***      0.321***    35.86***   30.61***    5.250***
                                (0.0941)        (0.0858)       (0.0564)    (10.41)     (10.45)     (0.692)
         Economics              0.673***        ‐0.153**      0.826***    43.93***   31.06***    12.87***
                                 (0.104)        (0.0753)       (0.0754)    (8.001)     (7.989)     (1.325)
                                                                              ‐
         Math                  0.202***          ‐0.479***    0.681***    13.54***   ‐25.43***   11.90***
                               (0.0704)           (0.0665)    (0.0445)     (4.107)     (4.155)    (0.689)
         Philosophy            0.390***           0.210**     0.181***     ‐0.426       ‐1.481   1.054***
                               (0.0985)           (0.0926)    (0.0536)     (5.255)     (5.254)    (0.357)
                                                                              ‐
         Physics               ‐0.525***         ‐0.540***     0.0151     24.20***   ‐27.81***   3.604***
                                (0.0768)          (0.0739)    (0.0407)     (4.218)     (4.250)    (0.632)
         Politics              0.307***          ‐0.204***    0.511***    48.52***   42.87***    5.653***
                                (0.0910)          (0.0774)    (0.0493)     (8.055)     (8.044)    (0.511)
         Psychology             ‐0.165**         ‐0.595***    0.430***      5.457       1.010    4.447***
                                (0.0789)          (0.0685)    (0.0473)     (5.486)     (5.493)    (0.459)
         Sociology                0.147          ‐0.423***    0.569***     ‐7.399    ‐14.94***   7.539***
                                 (0.117)          (0.0887)    (0.0689)     (5.283)     (5.040)    (0.885)
                                                                              ‐
         English               ‐0.169**          ‐0.455***    0.286***    21.47***   ‐25.09***   3.615***
                               (0.0844)           (0.0776)    (0.0402)     (5.803)     (5.819)    (0.341)
                                                                              ‐
         Other                 ‐1.053***         ‐0.882***   ‐0.171***    18.85***   ‐18.66***     ‐0.191
                                (0.0656)          (0.0604)    (0.0318)     (4.445)     (4.448)    (0.381)
         Constant               2.552***         2.302***     0.250***    105.4***   104.8***       0.593
                                (0.0916)          (0.0860)    (0.0562)     (6.186)     (6.238)    (0.793)

         Observations             5,351            5,351       5,351       5,351      5,351        5,351
         R‐squared                0.158            0.138       0.140       0.075      0.076        0.124
         Robust standard errors in parentheses
         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Notes: Faculty‐level data recording salary, courses taught and number of students for academic years
2002‐03 to 2014‐15 for the University of Michigan. Regressions include year fixed effects.


                                                                                                    Page 43
Table 9. Field‐specific within‐field regressions of teaching assignment on salary, University of
Michigan

                        (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
                                  Undergraduate   Graduate                    Undergraduate   Graduate
                    All Courses      Courses      Courses      All Students     Students      Students

Economics            ‐0.000147     ‐0.00774***    0.00759***    ‐0.482***       ‐0.609***     0.127***
                     (0.00134)      (0.000846)     (0.00100)     (0.119)         (0.119)      (0.0205)

Chemistry           ‐0.00622***    ‐0.00532***    ‐0.000903*    ‐0.639***       ‐0.633***      ‐0.00598
                     (0.00127)      (0.00136)     (0.000530)     (0.186)         (0.189)      (0.00855)

Computer Science    ‐0.00474***    ‐0.00413***    ‐0.000602     ‐0.259***       ‐0.209***     ‐0.0496***
                     (0.000781)     (0.000749)    (0.000623)     (0.0448)        (0.0480)      (0.0137)

English              ‐0.000609     ‐0.00420***    0.00359***      ‐0.120         ‐0.146*      0.0260***
                     (0.00184)      (0.00162)     (0.000881)     (0.0846)        (0.0847)     (0.00882)

History             ‐0.00778***    ‐0.00772***     ‐5.59e‐05    ‐0.241***       ‐0.244***      0.00292
                     (0.00116)      (0.00108)     (0.000495)     (0.0464)        (0.0460)     (0.00323)

Math                ‐0.00680***    ‐0.00554***    ‐0.00127*      ‐0.181*          ‐0.172       ‐0.00883
                     (0.00143)      (0.00171)     (0.000752)     (0.109)         (0.116)       (0.0162)

Philosophy           ‐0.00494*      ‐0.00526**    0.000322       ‐0.204*         ‐0.210*       0.00616
                     (0.00251)       (0.00210)    (0.00151)      (0.112)         (0.112)       (0.0100)

Political Science     ‐0.00111     ‐0.00417***    0.00306***      ‐0.172          ‐0.205      0.0331***
                     (0.00131)      (0.000965)    (0.000726)     (0.128)         (0.126)      (0.00778)

Psychology          ‐0.00774***    ‐0.00967***    0.00194***    ‐0.583***       ‐0.599***     0.0163**
                     (0.00106)      (0.000917)    (0.000747)     (0.0809)        (0.0808)     (0.00763)

Sociology           ‐0.00425***    ‐0.00354***    ‐0.000703      ‐0.106**       ‐0.104***      ‐0.00213
                     (0.00111)      (0.000724)    (0.000748)     (0.0411)        (0.0366)     (0.00982)

Notes: Faculty‐level data recording salary, courses taught and number of students for academic years
2002‐03 to 2014‐15 for the University of Michigan. Each cell‐standard error indicates the coefficient on
salary (measured in 000s) for a regression with the indicated teaching measure (column headings);
regressions include year fixed effects.




                                                                                                     Page 44
