NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIRTH ORDER AND DELINQUENCY:
EVIDENCE FROM DENMARK AND FLORIDA
Sanni N. Breining
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
David N. Figlio
Krzysztof Karbownik
Jeffrey Roth
Working Paper 23038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23038

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We thank Paul Bingley, Dalton Conley, John Donohue, Jens Ludwig, Justin McCrary, Joe Price,
and numerous seminar participants at the Danish Institute for Local and Regional Government
Research, NBER Summer Institute Economics of Crime Workshop, CESifo Economics of
Education Group Conference, University of Essex and University of Notre Dame. We are grateful
to the Florida Departments of Education and Health for providing the de-identified, matched data
used in this analysis. Breining gratefully acknowledges financial support from CIRRAU and
Danish Council for Independent Research. Figlio appreciates funding from the U.S. Department
of Education, the National Institutes of Health, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The
conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the positions of
the Florida Departments of Education and Health, nor those of our funders, nor those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sanni N. Breining, Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and
Jeffrey Roth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Birth Order and Delinquency: Evidence from Denmark and Florida
Sanni N. Breining, Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey
Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 23038
January 2017
JEL No. J01
ABSTRACT
Birth order has been found to have a surprisingly large influence on educational attainment, yet
much less is known about the role of birth order on delinquency outcomes such as disciplinary
problems in school, juvenile delinquency, and adult crime: outcomes that carry significant
negative externalities. This paper uses particularly rich datasets from Denmark and the state of
Florida to examine these outcomes and explore potential mechanisms. Despite large differences
in environments across the two areas, we find remarkably consistent results: in families with two
or more children, second-born boys are on the order of 20 to 40 percent more likely to be
disciplined in school and enter the criminal justice system compared to first-born boys even when
we compare siblings. The data allow us to examine a range of potential mechanisms, and the
evidence rules out differences in health at birth and the quality of schools chosen for children. We
do find that parental time investment measured by time out of the labor force is higher for firstborns at ages 2-4, suggesting that the arrival of a second-born child extends early-childhood
parental investments for first-borns.
Sanni N. Breining
Department of Economics and Business Economics
Aarhus University
Fuglesangs Alle 4
8210 Aarhus V
Denmark
snbreining@gmail.com
Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
David N. Figlio
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu

Krzysztof Karbownik
Institute for Policy Research
Northwestern University
2040 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
krzysztof.karbownik@northwestern.edu
Jeffrey Roth
Department of Pediatrics
University of Florida
PO Box 100296
Gainesville, FL 32610-0296
jeffroth@ufl.edu

1

Introduction

Economists and policy makers have long been interested in the production function for human
capital, with increasing attention paid to the development of non-cognitive skills (Cunha et al. 2010;
Conti et al. 2016). Delinquency is a welfare-relevant manifestation of lower-level acquisition of noncognitive skills. At young ages, disruptive peers have been shown to significantly impair learning
(Carrell and Hoekstra 2010; Carrell et al. 2016; Kristoffersen et al. 2014). At older ages, crime incurs
direct harm on others as well as significant investments to deter and punish criminal activity (Nagin
2013). A better understanding of the causes of crime would inform policies aimed at preventing
delinquency in the first place.
The family environment plays a major role in the development of these non-cognitive skills and
subsequent delinquency. Widom (1989) discusses a “cycle of violence” where delinquency among
parents is passed on to children. The sheer amount of time children spend with their family and the
influences each member has on one another imply that the family must have large effects; however
estimating effects of parental investments and sibling influences can be confounded by endogeneity
concerns.
This paper studies the effects of family environment on child delinquency outcomes through the
lens of the influence of birth order across siblings. There is a long history of studying birth order
in social psychology and economics (see, for example, Adler (1928), Behrman and Taubman (1986)
or Sulloway (1996)). The main recent empirical contributions stem from work by Black, Devereux
and Salvanes (BDS). Their 2005 study employed large datasets from Norway for outcomes measured
from 1986-2000, and they find large birth order effects on child outcomes that appear to dominate
those associated with family size. Using between and within-family variation in birth order, laterborn children achieve a lower level of educational attainment and have worse labor-market outcomes.
They also find a higher likelihood of teen births among women. Our work complements theirs by
bringing to bear evidence on important outcomes rarely explored in the literature, with data from
two very different settings.
In particular, this paper offers three main contributions. First, we provide some of the first
estimates of the effects of birth order on delinquency behavior – disciplinary actions and truancy
at school, juvenile delinquency, and adult crime and imprisonment – that make use of large-scale
data and facilitate sibling contrasts. A second innovation is that we study these relationships in
two very different environments: Denmark and the state of Florida. Using the same empirical
framework, variation in results (or lack thereof) across these environments provides insights into
whether the effects stem from particular institutions or are more general in their nature. Third,
using especially rich register data in Denmark and linked administrative data in Florida, we are
able to investigate potential mechanisms for such differences. This information includes measures of
infant and childhood health, parental investments, school quality and sibling composition.
Across both of our locations, and across different estimation techniques, we find that second-born
boys are substantially more likely to exhibit delinquency problems compared to their older sibling.
In particular, involvement with the juvenile justice system is found to be on the order of 40 percent
1

higher than the mean for first-born boys in both Denmark and Florida. Incarceration by age 21 is
also found to be 40 percent higher in Denmark. These effects are particularly strong among more
severe violent crimes (36 percent). In Florida, similarly large effects are found for suspensions in
school (29 percent) but effects on truancy are much more moderate and heterogeneous. We find
corroborative evidence when we consider a sample of young adolescents in Denmark where we can
measure behavioral problems directly in the form of hyperactivity and measures of conduct problems
by age 12.
In terms of mechanisms, we can rule out large classes of explanations. These include worse health
at birth (second-born children appear healthier) or in childhood (second-born children have fewer
disabilities), schooling decisions including the age of entry and the quality of schools chosen (secondborn children attend no worse schools and are more likely to attend pre-kindergarten and daycare)
as well as maternal employment (measured by maternity leave) in the first year of life. We do find
that maternal employment and the use of daycare is higher for second-borns in years 2-4 compared
to older siblings. While it is well known that first-borns have undivided attention until the arrival
of the second-born, these results show that the arrival of the second-born child has the potential to
extend the early-childhood parental investment in the first-born child and a concomitant bifurcation
of parental attention between first- and second-born children. We also consider test score outcomes
in both Denmark and Florida, and find that second-born boys in comparison to their older siblings
score lower on reading and math assessments in Denmark but only on reading test in Florida.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief background on
the previous literature with an emphasis on the areas where our results represent a contribution.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the empirical framework. Section 5 reports the main
results, mechanisms heterogeneity and robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.

2
2.1

Background
Previous evidence on birth order and delinquency

Previous work focusing on delinquency has employed survey data from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health (Argys et al. 2006; Averett et al. 2011; Cundiff 2013). These studies tend
to find modest to no evidence of increased crime associated with birth order, along with substance
use and sexual activity. For example, Cundiff (2013) uses Add Health data and finds that selfreported delinquency - a composite measure including marijuana use, non-violent crime, and binge
drinking - is not related to birth order in regression models that include family fixed effects. Silles
(2010) studies the National Child Development Study - a study of children born in one week in 1958
in the UK and followed afterward - and finds that first-born (and last-born) children have improved
non-cognitive test scores. Unfortunately, it is difficult to estimate family fixed-effects models with
precision in these survey datasets. For example, Cundiff (2013) includes 655 families, and the odds
ratio for delinquency is relatively imprecise (0.86 – 1.52 for middle-born compared to first-born).
The current paper relies on much larger administrative datasets that provide more precision when

2

using within-family variation in birth order to compare siblings.

2.2

Potential mechanisms

While birth order effects in education and labor market outcomes have been explored, the mechanisms behind these results have not been studied extensively. One potential explanation offered for
such effects is different levels of parental investments across children. A standard economic model
that reconciles fertility and parental investment in children is the so-called “quantity-quality tradeoff” proposed by Becker (1960), and further developed in Becker and Lewis (1973) and Becker and
Tomes (1976). It is based on the premise of negative correlation between the number of children
and income of the parents originating from rising marginal cost of quality with respect to quantity.
In other words, with each additional child it is more expensive to maintain the same “quality” of
children, and thus parents are going to invest less in human capital of higher birth order children
(Galor and Weil 2000).1 More recent literature has found mixed evidence on the “quantity-quality
tradeoff” (Black et al. 2005; Angrist et al. 2010; Mogstad and Wiswall 2016).
Empirically, parental time investments are found to be lower for later-born children, as the
first-born has some undivided attention from parents until a younger sibling arrives (Price 2008).2
Averett et al. (2011) find that first-born children are supervised more and have fewer risky behaviors.
Lehmann et al. (2014) also use NLSY data and show that birth order effects on parental-investment
measures appear to be present at ages 0-2 and grow until ages 5-6 when schooling may mitigate such
effects. Interestingly, the paper reports a broad shift in parenting for later-born children: parents
are more likely to miss prenatal visits, less likely to abstain from alcohol during pregnancy and
breastfeed, and parents provide less early-cognitive stimulation at home. Another direct measure
of parental investment is in the form of financial transfers, and de Haan (2010) used the Wisconsin
Longitudinal Study to show that such transfers are higher for earlier born children.
A second explanation is the influence that siblings have on one another: the quintessential peer
effect. Later children, unlike first-borns, will have older siblings as role models (Zajonc and Markus
1975). In addition, older siblings may also benefit from teaching younger siblings and acting as
such a role model (Smith 1993). These peer effects are difficult to isolate due to the simultaneity
of influences (Manski 1995; Joensen and Nielsen 2015; Black et al. 2016). There is also a literature
on the influence of sibling composition (brothers vs sisters) on educational attainment. Butcher
and Case (1994) found that the presence of brothers historically increased educational attainment
of women, although there is mixed empirical evidence for these effects with some studies finding
no effects and others finding opposite effects (Hauser and Kuo 1998; Kaestner 1997; Conley 2000;
1

An alternative model of the family that can explain birth-order differences is offered by Hotz and Pantano (2015)
who argue that parental reputation concerns could lead to more intense monitoring and discipline among older children
as a signal to later born children, and this could lead to direct effects on first-borns such as superior performance at
school and better behavior. Sulloway (1996) presents a related argument, that first-born children may be more likely
to identify with their parents and therefore to emulate and obey their parents in order to gain parental attention.
2
Price (2008) investigated American Time Use Survey and found that first-borns get 20-30 minutes more quality
time each day compared to second-born in a similar family. This appears to be due to equalizing time after the secondborn arrives even thought the first-born had undivided attention when there was only one child in the household.

3

Deschenes 2002; Dayioglu et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2009).

3

Data description

3.1

Denmark

For Denmark, the key data source is the Danish Birth Register, which includes information on individuals born in the period 1960-2010. For each child, the dataset includes information on exact date
of birth and various birth outcomes. A unique identification number enables us to link generations,
hence children can be linked to their parents and siblings. Given this structure of the data and
access to the specific date of birth, we can measure each individual’s birth order, the completed
family size and the sex composition of children in the family.
The unique identifiers also allow us to match the birth records to rich data from various administrative registers. This provides us with demographic characteristics of the parents such as age,
educational attainment, labor market status, earnings and immigrant status.
Our primary outcomes reflect delinquency behavior. To characterize such behavior in the Danish
context we exploit access to the Criminal Registers including convictions, suspended prison sentences
and incarceration, date of crime as well as type of crime. In Denmark, from the age of 15 an individual
is considered fully responsible for any criminal act, and we can observe all criminal convictions from
that age onward. Our main measure of risky behavior at the youngest age is an indicator of having
any criminal convictions by age 16, and we also consider having any criminal convictions by age
21. As a more severe measure of crime we also consider having ever been issued suspended or
implemented imprisonment sentence by those ages. All outcome variables are multiplied by 100 to
obtain percent values. Our data also allow us to explore effects at other ages, and across different
types of crimes.
To obtain a measure of school performance we study data from the School Registers. In Denmark
the typical child enters first grade of compulsory schooling education the year they turn seven.3
Compulsory school is completed with a ninth grade exit exam.4 We measure school performance as
ninth grade exit exam grades in reading and math. These exam results are based on assessments by
the student’s teacher and by an external reviewer. All grades are standardized to have zero mean
and unit standard deviation within each cohort.
In addition to the delinquency outcomes, we explore potential mechanisms that can explain the
birth order effects. One goal is to explore outcomes across a range of ages in an effort to determine
when differences across siblings begin to occur. First, we consider conditions surrounding the birth
of the child to measure the health endowed to the child which is partly due to prenatal investments.
Specifically we consider birth weight and whether the mother experienced any complications during
the pregnancy.
3
A few children may be one year younger and a few may be one year older; we also consider school starting age as
an outcome.
4
The Danish educational system is publicly funded from primary school throughout college. No tuition is charged
and once the student turns 18 he or she is offered monthly financial aid from the government.

4

Second, we consider maternal investments early in a child’s life. This includes information about
days the mother spent on maternity leave along with information on maternal employment status
0-10 years after childbirth. From the Register of Daycare Institutions we obtain information about
the populations’ use of daycare facilities. Each year between 1995 and 2008 we have information
about its type and place, and we create a measure of enrollment into out-of-home daycare at ages
1-3.
Next, we add a measure of school starting age to see if parents are treating second-born children
differently at that stage of the life cycle. Then we use information from the Danish National Patient
Registry and Danish Psychiatric Central Registry. From these data we have information about
psychiatric diagnoses of all children diagnosed at a Danish general hospital. We consider two groups
of diagnoses: disorders of psychological development as well as behavioral and emotional disorders,
and we observe whether the child has received such a diagnosis by age 10.5
Finally, we are able to explore measures of non-cognitive skills during childhood. Delinquency
can be viewed as a behavioral outcome that is the consequence of lower levels of non-cognitive skill
development, and there is evidence of birth order effects on non-cognitive skills (Black et al. 2015;
Kaufmann and Messner 2015); however, these studies evaluate non-cognitive skills later in life (at
the time of the military draft or by parents), and are not able to measure changes in behaviors
that could be related to later life crime such as emotional, hyperactivity and conduct problems.
The Danish data, on the other hand, provide us with information gathered in the internationallyrecognized Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)6 , a behavioral screening questionnaire
conducted when children are roughly 12 years old. These data were collected as part of the Danish
two-teachers experiment.7
The SDQ contains 25 items within five dimensions. Four of the dimensions concerns difficulties
covering conduct problems, emotional symptoms, hyperactivity and peer relationships. One dimension concerns strengths and covers prosocial behavior.8 In line with past literature, we can use the
four difficulty dimensions to generate the Total Difficulty Score reflecting the child’s socio-emotional
behavior. We follow the SDQ scoring rubric (Goodman et al. 2010) and divide these scores into
four categories: close to average, slightly raised, high and very high. Each of these categories will
constitute an outcome that we will study in the analysis below. Similarly we split the scores on the
fifth dimension, prosocial behavior. These measures will allow us to investigate whether there are
5

Psychological development disorders cover diagnoses classified within the ICD10 codes F80-F89. Behavioral and
emotional disorders cover diagnoses classified within the ICD10 codes F90-F98; one of the most frequent diagnoses
within this category is ADHD.
6
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire was first developed by Goodman (1997) and later used in numerous
studies (e.g. Currie and Lin 2007; Kelly et al. 2009; Datta Gupta and Simonsen 2010; Berger and Spiess 2011;
Kristoffersen et al. 2014).
7
The experiment was conducted in the 2012-13 school year and took place at the intermediate stage of primary
school (6th grade). The sample consists of around 10,000 pupils from 231 public schools across 14 municipalities. If a
school is part of the sample all its 6th graders were included. For more information about this data see “2L Rapport Undersøgelse af effekten af tolærerordninger” by Andersen et al. (2014). The survey we are using was conducted before
the two-teacher experiment began. Approximately 10,000 sixth grade pupils answered the questions in September
2012. Here they were around 12 years old.
8
For a detailed list of questions see http://www.sdqinfo.com/.

5

differences in psychological attributes or non-cognitive skills by birth order in early adolescence.

3.2

Florida

The Florida Departments of Education and Health merged birth records for all children born in
Florida between 1992 and 2002 with school records for the academic years 1995-96 through 2012-13
for the purpose of this research. The Florida agencies matched children along three dimensions:
first and last names, date of birth, and social security number. Rather than conducting probabilistic
matching, the match was performed such that a child would be considered matched so long as
(1) there were no more than two instances of modest inconsistencies, and (2) there were no other
children who could plausibly be matched using the same criteria. Common variables excluded from
the match were used as checks of match quality. These checks confirmed a very high and clean match
rate: In the overall match on the entire population, the sex recorded on birth records disagreed with
the sex recorded in school records in about one-one thousandth of one percent of cases, suggesting
that these differences are almost surely due to typos in the birth or school records.
Between 1992 and 2002, 2,047,663 births were recorded by the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics;
however, in the current project we can utilize only the 1994 to 2002 births as we are unable to match
siblings for the 1992 and 1993 birth cohorts. There were 1,609,470 singleton births in Florida between 1994 and 2002, and of these 1,290,077 children were subsequently observed in Florida public
school data, representing an 80.2 percent match rate. The match rate is almost identical to the
percentage of children who are born in Florida, reside there until schooling age, and attend public
school, as computed using data from the decennial Census and American Community Survey for
years 2000 through 2009.9 In the school districts representing the vast majority of Florida households, children are matched to households, and we link these anonymized school records back to the
relevant students’ birth records (via the birth-school link conducted by the Florida Departments of
Education and Health) to determine birth order; this backward-matching also allows us to check the
likelihood that students we believe to be siblings are actually siblings (e.g., by comparing maternal
characteristics such as date of birth).
Florida birth certificates enumerate demographic characteristics of the mother (including education, marital status and place of residence), demographic characteristics of the father if he appears
on the birth certificate, and health and demographic characteristics of the newborn.10 In particular,
we observe birth weight and indicators for any maternal health problems, whether or not they are
related to the pregnancy.
Our primary in-school delinquency outcomes are suspensions and truancy. We obtain these
measures from administrative school records that are available for the school years from 2002-03
through 2011-12. We measure suspensions as an indicator variable whether the child was ever
temporarily removed from school in a given school year, while we measure truancy based on the
9

Figlio et al. (2013) provide extensive validity checks on the matching procedure.
In a very small number of cases (fewer than 100 sibling pairs) where the race or ethnicity of the mother on sibling’s
birth certificates do not match, we assign the race and ethnicity associated with the birth certificate of the first-born
child.
10

6

reported absence rate, defined as number of days absent (net of suspended days) in school to total
number of days that the child was enrolled in a given school year.11 Both variables are multiplied
by 100 to obtain percent values.12 This results in repeated observations for each student, which will
allow us to trace effects across different grades, as described in more detail below.
In addition, the Florida Education Data Warehouse provides us with a wide array of additional
outcomes that we use to investigate the mechanisms beyond the identified birth order effects. Our
measures of academic performance are based on Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)
in mathematics and reading, a state-wide standardized yearly assessment of all students in Florida
conducted in grades three through ten. In this paper we focus on test scores in grades three through
eight, because curriculum differences make interpersonal test score comparisons relatively difficult in
high school (e.g., one tenth grader is taking algebra while the other is enrolled in calculus). Therefore,
each child in the sample can contribute up to six observations, one for each grade observation.
Unlike in Denmark, we cannot match children to their medical records in Florida. However, the
Florida school records also provide an opportunity to observe poor health outcomes in childhood
and adolescence. Specifically, we observe whether each child receives special education services for
physical disabilities, such as orthopedic impairments, sensory impairments, and speech pathologies,
as well as intellectual and emotional disabilities. These measures are high-quality indicators of some
elements of child health as they are linked to school finances and monitored by Florida Department
of Education.
While we have limited ability to measure investment in human capital, we can measure one of
its components, namely school quality as defined by the state of Florida via its school accountability
system. Since 1999, the Florida Department of Education has awarded each of its public schools a
letter grade ranging from A (best) to F (worst). Initially, the grading system was based mainly on
average proficiency rates on the FCAT standardized exam. Beginning in 2002, grades were based
on a combination of average FCAT proficiency rates and average student level FCAT test score
gains from year to year; other quality indicators, such as competency in science, were subsequently
added.13 We utilize this information to construct contemporaneous school quality measure. For
ease of implementation, we measure the school letter grades numerically, with A schools receiving 4
points and F schools receiving 0 points. As additional measures of parental investment in children,
we also investigate if the second-born is less likely to attend pre-kindergarten and whether parents
hold back the child a year at the start of schooling.
To measure interactions with the juvenile justice system, one large anonymous Florida school
11

Florida law defines a “habitual truant” as a “student who has 15 or more unexcused absences within 90 calendar
days with or without the knowledge or consent of the student’s parent or guardian”. We focus on days absent from
school as an indicator of a proclivity toward truancy.
12
The Florida records also include information on disciplinary referrals that do not result in suspensions, but the
statewide referral data only include the most serious disciplinary infractions and therefore include just a subset of
all disciplinary incidents; 93 percent of the disciplinary incidents reported in the state records result in suspension.
Because we are not entirely certain about the rules governing which non-suspension referrals are included in the data,
we concentrate exclusively on disciplinary referrals that result in suspension.
13
See Rouse et al. (2013) for a detailed description of the over-time changes to Florida’s school accountability
system.

7

district reports whether children have been incarcerated in juvenile detention centers.14 Between
the 1989-90 academic year and the 2004-05 academic year, the school district retained a code in
its student master records for whether the student was in a juvenile detention center, and maintained records for that student as long as the student remained registered for school in the district.
Florida children are required to remain in school until their sixteenth birthday, so this variable is
most complete for children under the age of sixteen. Given the ending date of the records for the
juvenile detention code, we can measure juvenile detention through the end of the mandatory school
attendance period for children born on or before August 31, 1989.15 For the purpose of this juveniledelinquency analysis, we measure whether children are siblings based on whether they are co-resident
and have the same last name16 ; since we can begin to measure residential addresses in this county
in the 1989-90 academic year, we feel most comfortable about our ability to measure birth order for
children born on or after September 1, 1979.17 Limiting ourselves to first- and second-borns who
were born between September 1, 1979 and August 31, 1989 leaves us with 24,928 children in 12,464
families. In this school district, we cannot measure variables observed on birth certificates, but we
are able to observe whether a child is limited English proficient, receives subsidized meals, or lives
in a low-income micro-neighborhood.

3.3

Sample construction

We construct the analysis samples for both locations in the same way, to the extent possible. As in
the previous literature, we exclude twins from the sample because all of the mechanisms for birth
order effects that we postulate involve the children being the product of successive pregnancies. Our
main analysis will focus on the first two children of families with two or more children, as the previous
literature has found that birth order effects are particularly salient for the first two children in a
family. Further, given our emphasis on delinquency outcomes we focus on families where the secondborn child is a boy. The main analysis sample is also restricted to full biological siblings meaning
that all the children have the same mother and father so that we can exploit variation within these
stable families by comparing outcomes across siblings.18 We present results for second-born girls,
and for other types of families, as separate investigations later in the paper.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for all families, all families with two or more children where the
first two children are full biological siblings, and our main analysis sample. In Denmark, the family
characteristics are very similar across these samples, with mother’s age at first birth moderately
14
School districts in Florida are county-level. We are unable to link the Florida statewide school records to juvenile
crime data, and the children in the matched birth-schools data are too young to measure juvenile crime for many
sibling pairs in any event.
15
September 1st is the typical cutoff for school attendance in any given year.
16
We have also relaxed this definition of sibship to look at consistently coresident children with different last names,
and continue to find similar results, but we prefer the same-name definition because we are most confident there that
the children are full siblings.
17
With this restriction, we will only miscode birth order for families with more than a six year gap between older
siblings and the oldest-observed children enrolled in school in 1989-90.
18
In Denmark we observe complete information on fathers in 98 percent of sibling population and father is the same
in 92 percent of families with first two born siblings. In Florida we observe complete information on fathers in 79
percent of sibling population and father is the same in 70 percent of families with first two born siblings.

8

lower for families with 2 or more children compared to all families. In Florida, families with 2 or
more children have higher educated mothers, come from higher income ZIP codes, and are more
likely to be white. These differences are largely due to the restriction that siblings have the same
father. For example, if we study all mothers with two or more children irrespective of the father
status then the fraction of African American mothers increases to 22 percent.
One of the main contributions of the paper is that we can compare birth order effects using
the same types of model specifications and similar outcome measures across two very different
environments. Table 1 shows that there are clear differences in the observables between Denmark
and Florida. The average age at first birth in Denmark is lower than in Florida by about one year.
Within the sample of two or more children the spacing between first- and second-born is bigger
in Denmark than in Florida. The education systems are different, but in Denmark, 32 percent of
mothers have a basic education that ends after 9 years and 23 percent have a college degree, whereas
in Florida 10 percent of mothers in our analysis sample are high school dropouts and 31 percent
have a college degree.19
Florida has much more racial-ethnic variation than Denmark, and although race or ethnicity are
not reported in the Danish Registers, national statistics reveal that 8.9 percent of people living in
Denmark are immigrants, and of these 58 percent originate from non-western countries. There is
a negligible fraction of immigrants of Hispanic origin. In contrast 22 percent of mothers in Florida
are African American and 24 percent are of Hispanic origin. Finally, the fraction of immigrants is
twice as high in Florida as it is in Denmark, and furthermore the sources of immigration differ. In
Denmark immigrants come mostly from Turkey, Iraq, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Iran, and Pakistan. In
Florida the most frequently-occurring countries are Cuba, Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela, and the
Dominican Republic, but in addition, 44 percent of immigrants to Florida come from non-Hispanic
countries in the Caribbean, Europe, Asia, and Africa.
The last panel of Table 1 reports means for the outcome variables. Interactions with justice
system are not uncommon, and in Denmark by age 21 nearly 11 percent of individuals have a conviction, 4.2 percent are given suspended prison sentences and 1.4 percent are actually incarcerated.20
When we focus on boy-boy and girl-boy families these rates are somewhat higher. In Florida, 5.6
percent of our analysis sample is suspended and the absence rate is 3.8 percent.

4

Empirical model

The main estimating equations for person i born in cohort c(i) in family f (i) are of the form:

Yi = β0 + β1 Secondi + β2 Girli + β3 Xi + δc(i) + µf (i) + εi
19

(1)

In about 10 percent of cases we do not observe maternal and paternal education in Denmark. Similarly we do not
observe maternal and paternal employment in 9 percent of cases. In OLS regressions where we use these variables as
controls we impute mean values and create an indicator variable for missing education and/or employment.
20
We exclude all traffic offenses to focus on more serious offenses. Our data on convictions are very similar to national
statistics and we under-count between 12 and 20 percent of suspended and implemented incarceration sentences
(Statistik). This undercounting is likely driven by the selected sample of families that we include in our final analysis.

9

where β1 compares second-born boys to their older sibling, β2 is an intercept shift for girls in
girl-boy families, X contains controls described below, δc are cohort effects included to control for the
possibility that secular trends in population-level student performance might confound birth order
estimates, and µf are family fixed effects to exploit within-family variation. The fixed effects are
appealing because they control for factors that are invariant within families, and we are particularly
interested in comparing siblings. In practice, previous work suggests that family fixed effects do not
have a large impact on estimates (Black et al. 2005; Bagger et al. 2013; Härkönen 2014). A cost of
within-family estimation is that standard errors can increase, but with our large samples precision is
not particularly problematic. We report results with and without family fixed effects, and when we
exclude them our vector of β3 contains estimates on mother and father age at birth and education,
marital status and immigrant status indicators as well as regional controls (ZIP codes – 1,472 in
total – for Florida and municipalities - 275 in total - for Denmark). In Denmark we further include
maternal and paternal employment, family income and number of children until 2011 as a measure
of completed family size, while in Florida we include race and ethnicity indicators.21 We cluster
standard errors at the family level.
In the Florida school records we observe individual students multiple times between grades
one (three) and eight. Since we want to observe children longitudinally as they age, we impose a
longitudinal component into the observed grades. Namely, we start with observations in grade one
and then assign children to subsequent “imputed grade levels” with each school year, which allows
us to account for grade repeaters. In the main results we pool all the student observations together
and in Figures 2, 3 and 5 we present estimates as children progress through schooling, scaling the
estimates, except for test scores, by the baseline first-born boy mean for each imputed grade.22
In the Florida juvenile-delinquency data, we can include an indicator for (first observed) limited
English proficiency, subsidized school meal status (a common measure of socio-economic status), and
average school meal status in student micro-neighborhood. This latter variable is possible because
the school district divides the county into over 1,000 micro-neighborhoods for the purposes of school
assignment and school bus routing and scheduling. While the neighborhoods vary in size, on average
between 50 and 200 students live in a micro-neighborhood at any given time.23
One estimation concern is that family structure can have its own effects on a family other than
direct birth order effects. Bagger et al. (2013) note that birth order and family size are jointly
determined. That is, one cannot manipulate family size, holding within-family distribution of birth
orders constant. Another example is that families with same-sex children among their first-borns
are more likely to have additional births - a measure that is often used as an instrument for family
21

In Denmark maternal and paternal employment as well as family income are measured in the year before birth.
Our fixed effects results hold also when we include time varying family controls such as mother’s age, education and
marital status as well as zip code/municipality of residence.
22
In Florida we observe test scores for grades three through eight, and thus in Table 6 we restrict our attention to
these grades only. We observe suspensions and truancy in grades one through eight for birth cohorts 1994 to 2000
while three through eight for birth cohorts 2001 and 2002. We construct the imputed longitudinal grade starting in
the first observed grade in these samples. The results are robust to restricting the delinquency measures to grades
three through eight.
23
Specific numbers are not provided here in order to preserve the anonymity of the school district in question.

10

size (Angrist et al. 2010; Conley and Glauber 2006). Black et al. (2005) also use this instrument in
their analysis of family size, but they note that (1) same-sex siblings may have an independent effect
on child outcomes and (2) that the birth order effects are stable when instrumenting for completed
family size. To address these issues, we will show results with and without controls for completed
family size. We will also report results for different sex compositions that drive the instrument for
family size used in the literature. This serves as both a robustness check and an exploration of
sibling influences under the assumption that same-sex siblings have more influence on one another
compared to mixed-sex siblings.
Another issue is that last-born children may have worse outcomes when families decide not
to continue having children if they have one that is particularly costly e.g. has health problems
(Ejrnæs and Portner 2004). Our main analysis includes families with two or more children, and we
also examine results in families with three or more children so that the second-born is not the last
born.

5

Main results

This section first reports results for delinquency outcomes (Table 2), which is then followed with the
analysis of different types of criminal activity in Denmark (Table 3). Table 4 presents short-run noncognitive outcomes at age 12 in Denmark while Table 5 investigates early childhood mechanisms. We
then present short-run cognitive outcomes, namely test scores in Table 6. Subsequent tables further
examine potential mechanisms and heterogeneity focusing on spacing between siblings (Table 7),
maternal education (Table 8), contrast between native born and immigrant parents (Table 9), and
finally for Florida on racial and ethnic contrasts (Table 10).

5.1

Delinquency

Table 2 reports our main results for delinquency. Panels A, B and C show results for Denmark, where
second-born boys are more likely to have criminal-justice involvement and serve time in prison both
by age 16 and 21. In models with family fixed effects, second-born boys are 1.6 percentage-points
more likely to have been found convicted of a crime when aged 15 or 16 compared to first-borns. This
is 35 percent higher than first-born boys. By age 21, the estimate suggests a 3.6 percentage-points
increase, or 22 percent higher than the mean for first-born boys. These results are fairly stable
in OLS models both with and without extensive controls, and in models with family fixed effects.
The early-age result grows somewhat in magnitude when we include family fixed effects. The larger
effect (compared to the mean) at younger ages when crime is less common is consistent with birth
order effects having particularly strong influences for the extremes of the behavioral distribution.
We document this phenomenon in Figure 1, which depict elevated effects on criminal activity for
ages 16 to 18 that subsequently stabilize for all outcomes.
When we look at more serious crimes - those that yield a prison sentence - the means of the
dependent variables for first-born boys are 0.1 and 1.0 percent by age 16, and 2.7 and 7.2 percent

11

by age 21 for implemented and suspended sentences, respectively. By age 21, Table 2 shows that
second-born boys are found to be 1.1 and 2.4 percentage-points more likely to have spent time or be
sentenced to spending time in prison, respectively, which implies 40 and 33 percent effects. These
are very large effects given that we are using within-family variation.
Panel D of Table 2 provides analogous results for juvenile-delinquency by age 16 in a single,
large anonymous county in Florida. In the OLS model without family fixed effects but with a wider
set of controls, second-born boys are 0.5 percentage-points more likely to become involved with the
juvenile justice system, which is approximately 21 percent higher than the mean for first-born boys.
When we focus on within-family comparisons by adding family fixed effects, the estimate increases
to 1.1 percentage-points, or 42 percent. Notably, even though as documented in Table 1 the state
of Florida is very different from Denmark in terms of observable socio-demographic characteristics
as well as the judicial systems, the estimated effects of being born second are remarkably similar
across the two locations.
Another measure of behavioral issues can be found in the Florida schooling data in the form of
suspensions and absences. We define these as an indicator for being ever suspended and the absence
rate in a given school year multiplied by 100. Remarkably, we find similar results for suspensions as
they are 1.7-4.3 percentage-points higher (or 29-72 percent higher than the mean for first-born boys).
For absences, we find point estimates of 0.01 to 0.35 percentage-points more absences from school,
or 0.2 to 9.4 percent higher. For suspensions, similar to the criminal activity results, we document
moderately larger second-born effects earlier in life, namely in elementary school in comparison
to middle school (left panel of Figure 2). This pattern is not confirmed for absence rates (right
panel of Figure 2), however, where we observe fewer absences for the youngest grades, and more
absences among second-borns in grades 4, 5 and 8.24 This could be explained by the fact that in
early schooling years absenteeism is much more related to health and acclimatization to education
processes than intentionally missing classes: a sign of misconduct in later grades that corroborates
the delinquency findings.25
For the delinquency outcomes measured in Florida schooling data, adding family fixed effects
reduces the point estimates. One explanation is that the set of controls varies across panels D and
E due to data availability. Given that there are meaningful controls at our disposal in both settings,
however, the fact that they increase point estimates for some outcomes but decrease point estimates
for others helps to rule out straightforward explanations that the results are due to omitted variable
bias that operates in a similar way across outcomes. In any event, we favor the within-family
comparison including family fixed effects to absorb time-invariant characteristics of families and we
proceed with it throughout the subsequent sections of the paper.26
24
Approximately zero effects documented in Table 2 are driven by this heterogeneity over time as the negative early
schooling coefficients cancel out with positive coefficients is grades 4, 5 and 8. Thus in subsequent tables we mostly
focus on truancy in grades 4 to 8.
25
The early grades results are less negative and the later grades results are more positive for absences when we
estimate OLS regressions with or without controls, and thus in Table 2 in columns (4) and (5) of panel E we estimate
positive and significant coefficients. This discrepancy supports the need for within and across families comparison
rather than just across families comparison.
26
Even though at each grade we compare individuals from the same family, across grades we have a repeated

12

The uniqueness of Danish registry data allows us to investigate different types of crime. If our
working hypothesis about decreased non-cognitive abilities that affect particularly extreme parts of
the distribution is correct then we should see larger birth order effects for more severe rather than
petty crimes. Table 3 reports the results for violent crime (e.g. manslaughter, rape or death threats),
property crime (e.g. forgery, arson or burglary) and special crime (e.g. drug offenses, illegal weapon
possession or human trafficking) convictions. First as expected, convictions rate is the highest for
property crimes, followed by special crimes and lowest for violent crimes. However, the second-born
effects are the largest among the latter group which supports our hypothesis on particularly strong
influences for the extreme outcomes.

5.2

Non-cognitive measures

In addition to measures of delinquency, we are able to study the relationships between birth order
and measures of non-cognitive skills observed as part of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ), measured at approximately age twelve for a subset of the Danish population of children.
One limitation of this data set is that we cannot implement family fixed effects strategy due to
observations on only three cohorts in selected schools. Therefore, we present OLS estimates with
a rich set of controls including child birth year dummies, mother’s age at first birth, mother’s
age, father’s age, municipality dummies, maternal and paternal education, maternal and paternal
employment, family income, immigrant dummy, and number of children in family.
Tables 4 and A1 present the results. Panel A of Table 4 presents total difficulties score, and we
show its sub-components - emotional, conducts, hyperactivity and peer problems - in panels A to D
of Table A1. In panel B of Table 4 we present a positive outcome, namely prosociality score.
Second-born boys are about 5 percent less likely to be categorized as close to average in comparison to their older siblings and although insignificant we find positive coefficients on all the
remaining categories of total difficulty score. Investigation of the sub-components of the total score
reveals that second-born boys are particularly adversely affected in terms of hyperactivity. They
are 4.9 percentage-points less likely to score “close to average” on the hyperactivity component. At
the same time, we do not find any statistically significant effects for emotional problems, conduct
problems,peer problems and prosocial behavior. Relating this to Heckman (2000) findings of noncognitive skills being important determinants of success, these increased hyperactivity problems may
be precursors to criminal-justice involvement later in life (Heller et al. 2015).

5.3

Mechanisms: Early-life measures

Our first set of potential mechanisms investigates what happens to these children prior to attending
school, and we present the effects of birth order on maternal, infant and childhood health as well
as probing into several parental investment channels including differential labor supply responses or
cross-section of families i.e. not all pairs utilized in grade one comparisons are old enough to make it to grade eight
comparisons. Due to data restriction we are underpowered to run this panel analysis, however when we restrict the
sample to grades one to six then our results are qualitatively consistent with the repeated-cross section estimates for
these grades.

13

school choices. If we find meaningful effects at these younger ages, this provides some insights into
the timing of when differences begin to appear.
Table 5 presents the results. Columns (1) and (2) consider birth weight and complications in
pregnancy as measures of the health endowment at birth and proxy for maternal health during
pregnancy. Here we find that second-borns weigh 3.7 percent more on average in Denmark and
2.6 percent more in Florida. Similarly, second-borns have fewer complications during pregnancy
compared to first-borns (20 percent lower in Denmark, 12 percent lower in Florida). These differences
are not explained by the fact that mothers are older for second-born births.27 This result suggests
that second-borns are not starting out in worse health compared to their older sibling, ruling out
one potential mechanism. This is consistent with work by Lundberg and Svaleryd (2016) who find
that early life health measures such as hospitalizations are higher among first-borns in Sweden.
Next we consider parental time investment in the form of daycare/preschool and maternal employment. We find that daycare at age 1 is 17 percentage-points lower in Denmark for second-born
boys (Table A2). However by age 2 and 3 second-born boys are 3.4 and 10.8 percentage-points more
likely to be enrolled in out-of-home daycare (5 and 14 percent higher than the mean for first-born
boys). This finding corresponds well with maternal employment effects, which we depict in Figure
4 for 0 to 10 years after child birth. It shows that 2-4 years after birth mothers of second-born boys
are significantly more likely to be employed compared to mothers of first-borns. The net effect of
substituting maternal care with institutional care is ambiguous, however, and in fact earlier return
to the labor market may be harmful for boys (Fan et al. 2015). We additionally document that
maternity leave is modestly shorter for second-born boys compared to the first-borns – 8.6 fewer
days of maternity leave compared to a mean of 150 days for first-born boys yields about 6 percent
effect. It thus appears that the addition of a second-born child results in mothers spending more
of a first-born’s early childhood out of the of labor force: maternity leave upon the arrival of a
second-born adds time that mothers spend with first-borns in addition to the undivided attention
received by first-borns in their first year of life.
In Florida we cannot observe maternal employment or maternity leave uptake but we do observe
pre-kindergarten participation, which can begin as early as age two. We define our outcome variable
as either parents declaring pre-kindergarten attendance of their children at the time of kindergarten
enrollment or actually observing children being enrolled in public pre-kindergarten. We find nearly
7 percentage-points higher participation rate among second-born boys, which is equivalent to 12
percent effect. This finding could indicate a reduction in direct parental investment in favor of
institutionalized care but pre-kindergarten participation is generally viewed in the literature as a
positive investment in human capital (Havnes and Mogstad 2011).
In terms of school starting age, we see a 3.5 percent decrease in age at first grade in Denmark;
27
There is a positive relationship between maternal age and birth weight when we regress log birth weight on
maternal age even if we include family fixed effects, however the main results do not change when we add controls
for maternal age at birth. We have also investigated several other birth outcomes, and we find positive effects for
birth weight in levels, one and five minutes Apgar scores; negative effects for probability of being low birth weight
and being preterm; and no significant effect for abnormal conditions at birth or congenital anomalies. These results
are qualitatively similar in both Denmark and Florida.

14

however, we do not document any elevated probability of being held back in first grade in Florida.
Given that the evidence on school starting age and age at testing are mixed, we view our estimates
as rather not supporting the lower investment in second-born children.28 In fact, it seems that
second-born boys in Florida are initially attending higher quality primary schools in comparison
to their older siblings, however, the school quality gradient changes as children progress through
schooling, and in subsequent grades we observe a mix of positive and negative coefficients generally
oscillating around zero (Figure 5). Thus, lower quality schools located in less-affluent neighborhoods
should not explain a large part of our delinquency results.
Both data sets allow us to also investigate childhood health as measured by various disabilities.
About 18 percent of school age children in Florida are diagnosed with some form of disability,
and in our sibling sample we observe 6.8 percent and 6.9 percent of first-born boys having been
diagnosed with cognitive and behavioral disability, respectively. The incidence of disability diagnoses
in Denmark in far lower with about 2.4 percent on average. Columns (7) and (8) in Table 5 document
no birth order gradient in either developmental or behavioral disabilities for both locations, and if
anything, we actually see a decreased probability of second-born being diagnosed with cognitive
disability in Florida.29
One innovation in the current paper is that we are able to explore a wide range of potential
alternative mechanisms, including health endowments at birth, parental investment in the form
of maternal employment and the use of daycare, as well as school choice. While we do not find
the primary mechanism that results in the higher delinquency outcomes later in life, we do find
relatively precise zero results on some of these measures. On others we find decreased direct parental
investment in the form of time spent with parents in favor of indirect investment in the form of formal
childcare arrangements. Whether and how these differences could affect observed later life gaps is
an open research question. This leaves us with parental investments within the home (as opposed
to time out of the home and in the labor force) and sibling influences as our leading explanations
for the birth order results.30

5.4

Test scores

Our next set of results considers childhood test scores. These are of interest in their own right
as educational outcomes, and indeed have been studied in the previous literature. We are also
28
Black et al. (2011) document small positive effects of starting school younger but much larger negative effects of
age at test. On the other hand, they also document that boys starting schooling younger have higher incidence of
mental health problems at age 18. The school starting age effects are generally relatively small and thus should not
be the main drivers of our birth order effects in Denmark.
29
In the case of Denmark we have also investigated addiction-related hospitalizations by either age 16 or 21, which
include poisoning by narcotics or psychodysleptics or toxic effects of alcohol. We do not find any birth order gaps in
these hospitalization outcome rates. Similarly we do not find differences between second-born boys and their older
siblings in the probability of dying by either 16 or 21. Finally, we looked at the number of emergency room visits by
age 5 and 10. For both of these outcomes we find that second-born boys have about 10 percent more visits than their
older siblings; however, we are unable to distinguish if these are due to poorer underlying health or more accidents
related to e.g. increased hyperactivity documented in Table A1.
30
Buckles and Munnich (2012) document that a one-year increase in spacing increases test scores for older siblings
by about 0.17 SD, which is comparable to their birth order effect. The paper does not consider delinquency outcomes.

15

interested in them to investigate whether the behavioral differences identified in our main results are
also evident in these measures that are more traditionally thought of as measures of cognitive skills.
In Denmark, we observe them for 9th grade, so slightly younger than our crime by age 16 results,
and in Florida we have results for younger children - grades 3-8 - so as early as age 8. If we find
effects at these younger ages, this trend provides some insights into the timing of when differences
begin to appear, and also whether they grow or shrink as children age.
Table 6 shows that in Denmark, second-born boys have lower test scores: 0.11 and 0.14 standard
deviations for math and reading, respectively. In Florida, we do not find a birth-order effect for
math scores, but we do find that reading scores are 0.08 standard deviations lower for second-born
boys. When we look at each grade separately (Figure 3), we find that the positive but insignificant
estimate for mathematics is driven by early grades. In fact, for grades three and four we find positive
and statistically significant effects of being the second-born. This result would be consistent with the
higher early investment into cognitive skills of second-born boys that fades out over time, allowing
the non-cognitive aspects to dominate. For reading we observe negative estimates in all studied
grades that, except for grade 8, are relatively constant over time.

5.5

Heterogeneous delinquency effects

We have documented very similar effects of birth order on delinquency in both Denmark and Florida;
however, the richness of the data in both locations allows us to investigate heterogeneity of these
effects in much more detail. We divide this analysis into two parts. First, we continue to consider
potential mechanisms through spacing and sex composition of the sibship. Investigation of distance
between siblings in terms of age and sex could provide us with some clues about implicit differential
investments related to the nature of family arrangements. Second, we investigate if the birth order
effects are different in more versus less advantaged families – this is proxied by education, maternal
employment (only Denmark), nativity as well as race and ethnicity (only Florida).
We begin by presenting in Table 7 the differential effects of birth order by spacing between firstand second-born children in our data. We divide families into those that had the second birth up
to two years after the first one and those where the distance in age between siblings is three years
or more.31 We find that in both locations delinquency is generally higher among families where the
children are closer in age. That said, there are differences in the relative magnitudes of the birth order
effects by spacing groups in Denmark versus Florida. In Denmark we find larger birth order effects
for the closer spaced siblings while in Florida we find that sibling pairs with longer spacing duration
have relatively larger birth order effects. We are underpowered to detect statistically significant birth
order effects by spacing in the unnamed Florida county where we observe juvenile justice system
interactions, but the (imprecisely estimated) results are larger for siblings spaced further apart akin
to what we found for suspensions. In Denmark the results on convictions at age 16 are weaker and
31

We define spacing in months based on date of birth, then convert it to years and round to the nearest integer.
For example, if the first-born birth date is November 1994 and the second-born birth date is September 1997 then
they are separated by 34 months or 2.8 years, and we assign them spacing of 3 years. Our results are invariant to
various ways of measuring spacing.

16

we do not have precise estimates, yet the effect for both types of prison sentences by age 16 is nearly
40 percent higher for families where the siblings are closely spaced. Our results are more precise at
age 21 where we see both higher convictions and incarceration sentencing for the second-borns born
up to two years after their older sibling.
The results for Denmark are broadly consistent with the idea that resources and parental attention are diluted more in families where the children are born closer to one another. If boys require
more attention from parents (Bertrand and Pan 2013; Autor et al. 2016) then this finding could
help to explain why more closely-spaced sibling pairs have greater incidence of delinquency. It’s not
entirely clear why the birth order effect is greater in Denmark for more closely spaced siblings while
the opposite is true for Florida. One possibility could involve different practices regarding maternity
leave following pregnancy. As we observed in Section 5.3, a potential mechanism for birth order
effects, at least in Denmark, where we observe maternal labor market outcomes, is that the firstborn child experiences extra maternal attention when very young and again when the second-born
child is born; if maternal attention is differentially important during very early childhood, then this
difference could generate the finding that the birth order effect is particularly pronounced in Denmark when children are closely spaced. In Florida, maternity leave policies are not as generous, so
one might imagine that the “double-dose” of extra maternal attention would be attenuated, thereby
putting more weight on the time at home without siblings explanation, which privileges first-born
children the longer the birth spacing. These explanations, of course, are speculative.
Our identification for the second-born boy effect comes from the comparison of birth order in
boy-boy and girl-boy pairs. If there is gender antagonism between siblings then it is plausible that
the second-born effects would be larger among the girl-boy families. On the other hand, if there is
gender complementarity in delinquency behavior (e.g., it is higher among individuals of the same
sex due to peer pressure) we might expect to observe higher estimates among the boy-boy pairs.
We present these results in Table A3, and they show mixed evidence. In the case of both types
of incarceration sentences in Denmark boys fare modestly worse in families with an older sister as
compared with a brother. For example, in the case of incarceration by age 21, second-born boys in
girl-boy families have an expected rate 4.3 percentage-points higher than their first-born sister, for
an expected rate of 4.4 percent; that rate is 3.3 percent for second-borns in boy-boy families. On the
other hand, the results are very similar in the two family compositions for convictions in Denmark
and truancy in Florida, while the pattern is actually reversed for juvenile incarceration in Florida.
The estimates for the boy-boy comparison are somewhat more modest compared to our main results
in Table 2.
So far we have provided suggestive evidence that the negative effects of being a second-born boy
are larger for families that need to share the resources between siblings for a longer period of their
childhood (spacing) and where the children might require higher levels of management and oversight
(opposite-gender, potentially). If these hypotheses about resources in the form of either financial
capacity or attention are correct, then it makes sense to investigate heterogeneity by socio-economic
status.

17

In Table 8 we divide families into those with mothers having less than 12 years of formal education
(equivalent of high school dropout in the United States) and those who have 12 or more years of
schooling. More educated families tend to have more resources, live in more affluent and safer
neighborhoods, and are able to send their children to higher-rated schools. It is also the case
that delinquency rates are more than twice as high in the less educated sample for virtually all
our measures. That said, the estimates for Denmark suggest very similar second-born effects for
convictions among both high and low educated parents. The estimates are larger among the families
where mother has less education, but this is offset by the higher baseline delinquency rate among
children raised in these households. This pattern is somewhat different for crimes that involve either
form of prison sentence. Specifically, by age 16 the differences in rates are much larger among
households with lower educated mothers while this pattern is reversed by age 21. In Florida, the
estimated effect sizes are similar for both suspensions and truancy, albeit much larger for the former
delinquency measure.
A similar resource availability story can be examined by looking at maternal employment but
here the expected sign of the effect is not so clear. On the one hand, employed mothers provide
additional income and resources, but on the other hand this advantage means that children are send
to day care or overseen by unrelated adults. If quality of maternal time outweighs the benefits of
what can be purchased with additional income then we could actually see second-born boys doing
worse in families where the mother works, especially during early childhood (Fan et al. 2015). Our
results, reported in appendix Table A4, document that delinquency is on average higher in households
where mom is not employed one year after birth in case of both children. The point estimates and
effect-sizes are also higher for the non-employed samples with the exception of convictions by the
age of 21 where after scaling they are comparable. Thus, especially for the teenage crime it appears
that income effect may dominate maternal time effect for these more extreme outcomes.
There exists ample evidence that children with immigrant backgrounds fare worse in terms of
many later life outcomes (Borjas 2006; Abramitzky and Boustan 2016) although the differences vary
for schooling outcomes, with Aslund et al. (2011) documenting relative disadvantage in Sweden while
Figlio and Ozek (2016) showing superior educational outcomes for the children of immigrants in the
United States. Very little is known about the birth order effects in these families. We document
the gradient between second-born boys and their older siblings for immigrant and native families in
Table 9. First, it is worth noting that the children of immigrants in Denmark have higher convictions
and prison sentencing rates, but the children of immigrants in Florida have lower rates of suspensions
and absences in comparison to the children of native-born people. In both locations, however, we
find larger second-born effect sizes among the children of immigrants relative to the children of
native-born residents with a notable exception of teen incarceration in Denmark where the pattern
is reversed.
Although Denmark is fairly racially and ethnically homogeneous, in Florida the student population we investigate is 20 percent African American and another 18 percent Hispanic. It is also the
case that African Americans and Hispanics have on average lower socio-economic status and their

18

children fare worse in schooling outcomes. Thus, we present results separately for African Americans, non-African Americans, Hispanics and non-Hispanics in Table 10. Absenteeism is lower among
these two minority groups in comparison to the rest of the population, but the suspension rate for
African Americans is more than twice as high as for non-African Americans. The second-born effect
is similar among Hispanics and non-Hispanics for suspensions but larger for the former group for
truancy. When comparing African Americans to non-African Americans, however, the effect sizes
for both outcomes are larger among non-African Americans.
Thus far we have focused in our analysis on a more positively selected sample of stable families
where the mother and father are the same for both children. However a non-negligible fraction of
children is raised in non-intact families where parents differ across births. In Florida 30 percent
of children in families with two or more children have different or unknown fathers for the first
two births, while in Denmark this number is lower (9.5 percent) but still non-trivial. Since family
instability is likely correlated with behavioral problems, and thus delinquency (Autor et al. 2016),
we did not want to pool together these two types of families. In Table A5 we present separately
the results for boy-boy and girl-boy families with different fathers across the two births.32 First,
with the exception of truancy, the delinquency rates are much higher in these families in comparison
to the baseline sample - from about two times for convictions and suspensions to five times for
teenage incarceration. For convictions and suspensions, we find very similar effect sizes as in Table
2. In cases where the mean values increase the most across samples, suspended or implemented
imprisonment sentences, we do not estimate any significant birth order gaps. The point estimates are
also substantially smaller than these documented for more stable families. A hypothesis consistent
with this set of results may suggest that resources and parental attention that could prevent the
most extreme behavior do not matter so much in families with changing male role models. It is
also possible that changing family structure might alter the ways in which male role models treat
first-born versus second-born children.

5.6

Robustness checks

Given the very large magnitude of these differences between first- and second-born children, we
check the robustness of the results in a number of ways. In the main set of results our fixed effects
specification controls only for cohort effects but it is possible that our estimates are still biased
because we do not account for mother time varying characteristics like marital status and education
or place of residence. These characteristics could change across births and influence the secondborn either positively (e.g. mother improving her education) or negatively (e.g. family moving
to a poorer neighborhood due to reduced resources). When we control for maternal age at birth,
maternal education, maternal marital status and location at the time of birth in the fixed effects
models our estimates are similar (panel A in Table A6).
In Table 5 we have documented that second-borns are moderately healthier at the time of birth
32

The set of families where the identity of the father is unknown for at least one birth is 20.6 percent in Florida
and only 2.3 percent in Denmark.

19

in comparison to their older siblings, and thus, if there is a causal effect of health at birth on
delinquency then the main results could be mediated through improved health. When we control
for birth outcomes in our preferred specification in panel B of Table A6, however, the results do not
change which suggests that better health in infancy does not moderate the effects on delinquency.
At the same time, because health at birth has a causal effect on cognitive development (Figlio et al.
2014) our second-born estimates for test scores increase marginally in magnitude when we control
for birth weight.
One explanation for our main results pertains to potential stopping rules that parents use when
determining family size. In our preferred sample we focus on the first two births among families
with two or more children, but it is possible that issues associated with the second-born child might
induce some families to cease their fertility following the second-born child. To address this issue,
we drop from the sample all families for whom we observe exactly two children (panel C in Table
A6). This cuts our sample by about 60 and 85 percent in Denmark and Florida, respectively. In
Denmark this is almost entirely due to families stopping their fertility at parity two, while in Florida
we lose even more observations because of the nature of the data – since we only observe births
over 9 years, it is possible that the families which we drop now as having exactly two children will
continue their fertility beyond the year where we can observe them. First, it is worth noting that
in these larger families the average delinquency rates for the first-born boys are higher than in the
preferred sample which could be related to the lower socioeconomic status of families with higher
fertility. Nonetheless, our results are very stable whether we include exact parity two families or
not.

5.7

Effects for girls

Boys and girls have much different delinquency rates, they go through puberty at different ages,
and they perform better in certain subjects. Therefore, in order to facilitate an “apples to apples”
comparison in our estimation strategy we have thus far focused on the comparison of second-born
boys to their older siblings – whether both brothers and sisters in the main sample or only older
brothers in panel A of appendix Table A3. But the birth order gradient in delinquency for girls
is also of interest, and we therefore present the estimates for the sample of girl-girl and boy-girl
comparisons in panels C and D of appendix Table A3.
There is much less variation in delinquent behavior of girls relative to boys, with means for
first-born girl in girl-girl families being between 54 to nearly 100 percent lower than means for
first-born boys in boy-boy families. The notable exception here is truancy, which is similar across
genders. Consequently, the majority of coefficients for Denmark lack precision - in Panel C of Table
A3 - with only suspended sentences pointing towards 84 percent disadvantage of second-born girl
in comparison to her older sister. For Florida we estimate a statistically significant 43 percent gap
between sisters in suspensions and a much smaller 2.8 percent gap in truancy. The difference in
suspensions is about twice the size compared to the boy-boy difference, while the truancy difference
is comparable across these family types. We document the persistence of these differences in Florida

20

in Figure A2. In general, the negative coefficients for Denmark depicted in Figure A1, suggesting
advantage of second-born girls, appear to be driven by the opposite-gender contrast. Indeed, all
estimates in Panel D of Table A3 suggest that the second-born girl disadvantage is slightly smaller
when they have older brother which is in contrast to what we discussed when comparing Panels A
and B for boys.33 Overall, we view these results for girls as consistent with our findings for boys,
with second-born girls being more disadvantaged in comparison to their sisters at least in terms of
less severe school delinquency outcomes.
We also investigate the degree to which any differences in birth order effects by second-born
gender are possibly due to different mechanisms affecting girls versus boys. For instance, it may
be the case that second-born girls are in better health, or that parents invest more in early human
capital if the second-born child is female. As can be seen in appendix Table A7, compared to the
parallel second-born boy mechanisms presented in Table 5, most of the potential mechanisms that we
explored (e.g., neonatal health, pre-kindergarten participation, and school quality) are remarkably
similar between second-born boys and second-born girls. The same conclusion applies to maternal
labor market activity after birth depicted in Figures 4 and A4. This general pattern of findings
leads us to believe that the mechanisms we explored do not account for a substantial part of boy-girl
differences in birth order effects on delinquency.

6

Conclusions

Previous research has paid considerable attention to identifying the effects of birth order on a range
of cognitive outcomes such as test scores, educational attainment, and wages. We contribute to this
literature by studying a set of more extreme outcomes relating to delinquency. In order to gauge the
degree to which birth order is determining delinquent behavior, we perform, to the extent practicable,
parallel analyses in two rich but otherwise considerably different societies – Denmark and the United
States (Florida). These societies have much different approaches to crime and punishment and are
demographically very different, but our sets of findings are fundamentally quite similar.
We find, consistently across both locations, that second-born boys are substantially more likely to
exhibit delinquency problems compared to their older sibling. Second-born boys in Denmark have
substantially higher rates of juvenile crime, particularly severe violent crime, and imprisonment
than do their older siblings. We observe antecedents for these patterns in terms of early delinquency
problems (especially disciplinary behavior that results in suspensions but also in middle school
truancy) as well as in terms of direct measures of conduct problems and hyperactivity at age 12.
The gaps in delinquency are smaller when we investigate the effect of being a second-born girl.
We explore a wide variety of early-life outcomes in order to understand the mechanisms through
which birth order effects are occurring. We are able to rule out broad classes of explanations. We
33
We find similar effects for second-born girls to those for second-born boys in terms of reading, and for second-born
girls the estimates for math are u-shaped. We present these results in Figure A3. In Figure A5 we further present
evidence on quality of schools attended by second-born girls in these girl-girl and boy-girl families. Akin to estimates
for second-born boys we find elevated probability of attending better quality school in first grade that then diminishes
and oscillates around zero.

21

find no evidence that second-born children are less healthy, and indeed second-born children appear
to be healthier at birth and have lower rates of disability in childhood. We also find no evidence
that parents invest less in second-born children’s education. These children attend no-worse schools
and are more likely to attend pre-kindergarten. We consider differences in parental attention as
a potential contributing factor to the gaps in delinquency across the birth order. Second-born
children tend to have less maternal attention than do their older siblings because first-born children
experience their mother’s maternity leaves and temporarily reduced labor market participation both
following their own births as well as following the birth of the second-born. Therefore, in addition
to the fact that first-borns experience undivided attention until the arrival of the second-born, we
discovered that the arrival of the second-born child has the potential to extend the early-childhood
parental investment in the first-born child.
These new results have important implications for social policy. Crime, delinquency, and incarceration have enormous social costs and are associated with major losses in human potential. Our
findings that birth order appears to influence the likelihood of delinquency among boys, and that
differences begin to appear early, suggests potentially fruitful avenues for monitoring and interventions. Our findings regarding systematically different dosages of early-childhood parental attention
as a plausible mechanism also engender further discussion of parental leave as a long-run social
benefit.

22

References
Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Boustan, “Immigration in American Economic History,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 2016, forthcoming.
Adler, Alfred, “Characteristics of the first, second, and third child,” Children, 1928, 3 (5), 14.
Andersen, Simon, Louise Beuchert-Pedersen, Skyt Helena Nielsen, and Mette Thomsen, “2L Rapport: Undersogelse af effekten af tolaererordninger,” 2014.
Angrist, Joshua D, Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser, “Multiple Experiments for the Causal
Link between the Quantity and Quality of Children,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2010.
Argys, Laura, Susan Averett, and Daniel Rees, “The Effect of Older Siblings on Adolescent
Behavior: Is it Siblings or Parents,” 2006.
Aslund, Olof, Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson, and Hans Gronqvist, “Peers, Neighborhoods, and Immigrant Student Achievement: Evidence from a Placement Policy,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011.
Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman, “Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes,” 2016.
Averett, Susan, Laura Argys, and Daniel Rees, “Older Siblings and Adolescent Risky Behavior:
Does Parenting Play a Role?,” Journal of Population Economics, 2011, 24 (3), 957–978.
Bagger, Jesper, Javier Birchenall, Hani Mansour, and Sergio Urzua, “Education, Birth
Order, and Family Size,” 2013.
Becker, Gary S., “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in “Demographic and Economic Change in
Developed Countries,” Columbia University Press, 1960, pp. 209–240.
and Gregg H. Lewis, “On the Interaction between the Quantity and Quality of Children,”
Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81 (2), S279–S288.
and Nigel Tomes, “Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of Children,” Journal of
Political Economy, 1976, 84 (4), S143–S162.
Behrman, Jere R. and Paul Taubman, “Birth Order, Schooling, and Earnings,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 1986, 4 (3), 121–145.
Berger, Eva M. and Katharina C. Spiess, “Maternal Life Satisfaction and Child Outcomes:
Are They Related?,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2011, 32 (1), 142–158.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influence and the Gender
Gap in Disruptive Behavior,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 32–64.

23

Black, Sandra, Erik Gronqvist, and Bjorn Ockert, “Born to Lead? The Effect of Birth Order
on Non-Cognitive Skills,” 2015.
, Paul Devereux, and Kjell Salvanes, “The More The Merrier? The Effects of Family Size
and Birth Order on Children’s Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, pp. 669–700.
,

, and

, “Too Young to Leave the Nest? The Effects of School Starting Age,” Review of

Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (2), 455–467.
, Sanni Breining, David Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, Skyt Helena
Nielsen, Jeffrey Roth, and Marianne Simonsen, “Sibling Spillovers,” 2016.
Borjas, George, “Making it in America: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population,” Future of
Children, 2006, 16 (2), 55–71.
Buckles, Kasey and Elizabeth Munnich, “Birth Spacing and Sibling Outcomes,” Journal of
Human Resources, 2012, 47 (3), 613–642.
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Case, “The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on Women’s
Education and Earnings,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (3), 531–563.
Carrell, Scott E. and Mark Hoekstra, “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed
to Domestic Violence Affect Everyone’s Kids,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2010, 2 (1), 211–228.
,

, and Elira Kuka, “The Long-Run Effects of Disruptive Peers,” 2016.

Chen, Yen-Chien, Stacey H. Chen, and Jin-Tau Liu, “Separate Effects of Sibling Gender and
Family Size on Educational Achievements - Methods and First Evidence from Population Birth
Registry,” 2009.
Conley, Dalton, “Sibship Sex Composition: Effects on Educational Attainment,” Social Science
Research, 2000, 29 (3), 441–457.
and Rebecca Glauber, “Parental Educational Investment and Children’s Academic Risk: Estimates of the Impact of Sibship Size and Birth Order from Exogenous Variation in Fertility,”
Journal of Human Resources, 2006, 41, 722–737.
Conti, Gabriella, James J Heckman, and Rodrigo Pinto, “The Effects of Two Influential
Early Childhood Interventions on Health and Healthy Behaviors,” Economic Journal, 2016, 126
(596), F28–F65.
Cundiff, Patrick, “Ordered Delinquency: The "Effects" of Birth Order on Delinquency,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2013, 39 (8), 1017–1029.
Cunha, Flavio, James J Heckman, and Schennach Susanne M., “Estimating the Technology
of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (3), 883–931.
24

Currie, Janet and Wanchuan Lin, “Chipping away at health: More on the relationship between
income and child health,” Health Affairs, 2007, 26, 331–344.
Dayioglu, Meltem, Murat G. Kirdar, and Aysit Tansel, “Impact of Sibship Size, Birth Order
and Sex Composition on School Enrolment in Urban Turkey,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics, 2009, 71 (3), 399–426.
de Haan, Monique, “Birth order, family size and educational attainment,” Economics of Education
Review, 2010, 29, 576–588.
Deschenes, Olivier, “Estimating the Effects of Family Background on the Return to Schooling,”
2002.
Ejrnæs, Mette and Claus C. Portner, “Birth Order and the Intrahousehold Allocation of Time
and Education,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2004, 86 (4), 1008–1019.
Fan, Xiaodong, Hanming Fang, and Simen Markussen, “Mother’s Employment and Children’s Educational Gender Gap,” 2015.
Figlio, David and Umut Ozek, “Cross-Generational Differences in Educational Outcomes in the
Second Great Wave of Immigration,” 2016.
, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, “The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,” 2013.
,

,

, and

, “The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,”

American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3921–55.
Galor, Oded and David N. Weil, “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond,” American Economic Review, 2000, 90
(4), 806–828.
Goodman, Anna, Richard Rowe, and Ye Gan, “http://www.sdqinfo.com/c3.html,” 2010.
Goodman, Robert, “The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: A Research Note,” Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 1997, 38, 581–586.
Gupta, Nabanita Datta and Marianne Simonsen, “Effects of Universal Child Care Participation on Pre-teen Skills and Risky Behaviors,” 2010.
Härkönen, Juho, “Birth Order Effects on Educational Attainment and Educational Transitions in
West Germany,” European Sociological Review, 2014, 30 (2), 166–179.
Hauser, Robert M. and Hsiang-Hui D. Kuo, “Does the Gender Composition of Sibships Affect
Women’s Educational Attainment?,” Journal of Human Resources, 1998, 33 (3), 644–657.

25

Havnes, Tarjei and Magne Mogstad, “No Child Left Behind: Subsidized Child Care and Children’s Long-Run Outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (2), 97–129.
Heckman, James J, “Policies to foster human capital,” Research in Economics, 2000, 54, 3–56.
Heller, Sara B., Anuj K. Shah, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan,
and Harold A. Pollack, “Thinking Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime
and Dropout in Chicago,” 2015.
Hotz, Joseph V. and Juan Pantano, “Strategic Parenting, Birth Order and School Performance,”
Journal of Population Economics, 2015.
Joensen, Juanna and Skyt Helena Nielsen, “Spillovers in Educational Choice,” 2015.
Kaestner, Robert, “Are Brothers Really Better?

Sibling Sex Composition and Educational

Achievement Revisited,” Journal of Human Resources, 1997, 32 (2), 250–284.
Kaufmann, Katja and Matthias Messner, “Child Development and the Timing and Causes of
Birth-Order Effects,” 2015.
Kelly, Yvonne, Amanda Sacker, Ron Gray, Jon Kelly, Dieter Wolke, and Maria A.
Quigley, “Light drinking in pregnancy, a risk for behavioural problems and cognitive deficits at
3 years of age?,” International Journal of Epidemiology, 2009, 38, 129–140.
Kristoffersen, Jannie, Morten Kraegpoth, Skyt Helena Nielsen, and Marianne Simonsen, “Disruptive School Peers and Student Outcomes,” 2014.
Lehmann, Jee-Yeon K., Ana Nuevo-Chiquero, and Marian Vidal-Fernandez, “The early
origins of birth order differences in children’s outcomes and parental behavior,” 2014.
Lundberg, Evelina and Helena Svaleryd, “Birth Order and Child Health,” 2016.
Manski, Charles F., “Identification problems in social sciences,” 1995.
Mogstad, Magne and Matthew Wiswall, “Testing the Quantity-Quality Model of Fertility:
Linearity, Marginal Effects, and Total Effects,” Quantitative Economics, 2016.
Nagin, Daniel, “Deterrence: A Review of the Evidence by a Criminologist for Economists,” Annual
Review of Economics, 2013, 5, 83–105.
Price, Joseph, “Parent-Child Quality Time: Does Birth Order Matter?,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 240–265.
Rouse, Cecilia, David Figlio, Dan Goldhaber, and Jane Hannaway, “Feeling the Florida
Heat? How Low-Performing Schools Respond to Voucher and Accountability Pressure,” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2013, 5 (2), 251–281.

26

Silles, Mary, “The Implications of Family Size and Birth Order for Test Scores and Behavioral
Development,” Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29 (5), 795–803.
Smith, Thomas E., “Academic Achievement and Teaching Younger Siblings,” Social Psychology
Quarterly, 1993, 56 (1), 77–85.
Statistik, Danmarks, “Fodselsargange efter kon, alder ved forste dom og lovovertraedelse.”
Sulloway, Frank, Born to Rebel: Birth Order, Family Dynamics, and Creative Lives, New York:
Pantheon, 1996.
Widom, C. S., “The cycle of violence,” Science, 1989, 244 (4901), 160–166.
Zajonc, Robert B. and Gregory B. Markus, “Birth order and intellectual development,” Psychological Review, 1975, 82 (1), 74–88.

27

Figures and Tables
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Denmark

Florida

All

All 2+ families

2+ Boy-Boy and
Girl-Boy families

All

All 2+ families

2+ Boy-Boy and
Girl-Boy families

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

25.23

25.04

25.04

-

25.82

25.88

32.52
34.98
22.08
75.36

31.86
34.42
22.89
74.38

31.69
34.42
23.02
74.37

20.30
58.60
21.10
-

10.45
59.25
30.30
-

10.15
59.27
30.58
-

28.26

28.14

28.11

-

28.55

28.61

23.85
44.57
20.22
83.99

23.70
43.85
21.02
84.19

23.54
43.61
21.26
84.12

14.83
59.59
25.59
-

10.86
60.90
28.23
-

10.69
60.85
28.47
-

Family controls
Income
Low
Low-Medium
Medium-High
High
Mother immigrant
Father immigrant
Mother African American
Mother Hispanic
Spacing (first-born to second-born)
Completed family size

22.54
27.61
26.25
23.60
11.94
10.62
2.34

22.84
28.79
26.27
22.10
12.78
11.52
3.03
2.59

22.92
28.84
26.17
22.08
12.87
11.66
3.03
2.59

25.02
25.06
25.19
24.73
24.03
21.89
23.94
-

15.79
22.75
28.72
32.74
20.58
11.24
22.94
2.65
-

15.53
22.81
28.67
32.99
20.37
10.89
22.74
2.65
-

Outcomes
Convicted by age 16
Convicted by age 21
Sentenced to prison by age 16
Sentenced to prison by age 21
Incarcerated by age 16
Incarcerated by age 21
Suspended in school
Absence rate in school

3.26
10.93
0.78
4.22
0.11
1.40
-

3.27
11.01
0.83
4.36
0.12
1.48
-

4.29
14.39
1.24
6.12
0.18
2.18
-

-

4.51
3.83

5.61
3.84

448,979

235,720

121,100

1,592,342

148,788

75,914

Parental controls - Mother
Age mother – first-born
Education
Basic
High school or vocational
College
Employed
Parental controls - Father
Age father – first-born
Education
Basic
High school or vocational
College
Employed

Number of children

Note: Sample in column (1) is based on all singleton births between 1981 and 1990 in Denmark. Sample in column
(4) is based on all singleton births between 1994 and 2002 in the state of Florida. We are unable to provide maternal
age at first birth for this sample since we do not know older and younger siblings for the full population of births. We
also do not observe education for fathers who do not appear on the birth certificate and the sample size for paternal
education is 1,277,106. Columns (2) and (5) are based on the sample of families with two or more children and the
same father. We can link siblings only in about 70 percent of counties of Florida and only if both births occurred in
the state of Florida between 1994 and 2002. We can link all siblings in Denmark. Columns (3) and (6) present the
subsample of interest with second-born boys. Employment and income in Denmark are measured in the year before
birth. All other controls are measured at the time of child’s birth. Individual level income in Denmark and ZIP code
of birth median income based on 2000 Census for Florida. Spacing refers to distance in years between first and second
birth. Binary variables are multiplied by 100 giving percent values.

28

Table 2: Main results
(1)

(2)
OLS with
controls

OLS

(3)

(4)

Fixed effects

OLS

(5)
OLS with
controls

(6)
Fixed effects

Panel A. Denmark: Convictions
Second-born
Girl

By age 16
1.370***
(0.259)
-3.116***
(0.137)

0.647***
(0.167)
-3.156***
(0.137)

1.616***
(0.307)
-2.740***
(0.218)

2.034***
(0.284)
-12.114***
(0.240)

4.571
121,100/60,550

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children/families

By age 21
3.866***
(0.427)
-12.017***
(0.236)

3.618***
(0.483)
-11.923***
(0.356)

16.330
121,100/60,550

Panel B. Denmark: Sentenced to prison
Second-born
Girl

By age 16
0.732***
(0.152)
-0.898***
(0.061)

0.444***
(0.090)
-0.916***
(0.061)

0.917***
(0.174)
-0.655***
(0.121)

By age 21
2.221***
(0.310)
-6.312***
(0.155)

0.944***
(0.201)
-6.360***
(0.156)

1.038
121,100/60,550

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children/families

2.393***
(0.348)
-6.242***
(0.248)

7.217
121,100/60,550
Panel C. Denmark: Incarcerated

Second-born
Girl

By age 16
0.246***
(0.059)
-0.123***
(0.021)
0.138
121,100/60,550

0.065*
(0.034)
-0.127***
(0.022)

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children/families

Second-born
Girl

Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations/children/families

0.271**
(0.129)
-2.586***
(0.094)

By age 21
0.980***
(0.199)
-2.566***
(0.094)
2.710
121,100/60,550

1.086***
(0.227)
-2.619***
(0.155)

Panel D. Large FL County: In juvenile justice system
By age 16
0.514*
1.146**
(0.266)
(0.561)
-1.522***
-1.229**
(0.237)
(0.509)

0.547**
(0.267)
-1.511***
(0.239)

2.582
24,928/12,464

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children/families

Second-born

0.311***
(0.068)
-0.080*
(0.046)

3.664***
(0.151)
-3.935***
(0.126)

Panel E. Florida: Behavioral outcomes in school
Suspensions
Absences
4.272***
1.726***
0.351***
0.230***
(0.210)
(0.224)
(0.030)
(0.040)
-3.974***
-4.279***
0.051
0.035
(0.120)
(0.177)
(0.034)
(0.032)

5.942
349,184/76,036/38,018

0.008
(0.030)
-0.034
(0.024)

3.725
347,736/75,914/37,957

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All dependent variables, except for absence rate, are binary indicators
multiplied by 100. These are: probability of being convicted (panel A), probability of being sentenced to suspended
imprisonment (panel B), probability of being incarcerated (panel C), probability of being in juvenile detention center
(panel D) and probability of being suspended in school (columns (1) to (3) in panel E). OLS and FE regressions in
columns (1), (3), (4) and (6) include only child birth year dummies. Controls in columns (2) and (5) in Panels A, B
and C in addition to birth year dummies include mother’s age at first birth, mother’s age, father’s age, municipality
dummies, maternal and paternal education, maternal and paternal employment, family income, immigrant dummy,
number of children in family. Controls in column (2) in Panel D in addition to birth year dummies include first
observed limited English proficiency, subsidized school meal status, and average school meal status in student microneighborhood. Controls in columns (2) and (5) in Panel E in addition to birth year dummies include mother age
at first birth, mother age, father age, ZIP code of birth dummies, mother and father education dummies as well as
indicator variables for race, ethnicity, immigrant status and marital status at the time of birth. Panels A, B and C
are based on 1981 to 1990 birth cohorts; panel D is based on September 1979 to August 1989 births while panel D is
based on 1994 to 2002 birth cohorts.

29

Table 3: Types of crime by age 21: Denmark birth cohorts 1981-1990

Second-born
Girl

(1)
Violent Crime
1.606***
(0.292)
-3.925***
(0.204)

(2)
Property Crime
2.163***
(0.416)
-7.406***
(0.300)

(3)
Special Crime
2.099***
(0.356)
-5.877***
(0.257)

4.526

10.885

6.551

Mean of Y for first-born boy

121,100/60,550

Number of children/families

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies. All crime outcomes are measured based on convictions for violent, property and special offenses.
Special crime includes for example drug offenses and illegal weapon possession.

Table 4: Short-run non-cognitive outcomes: Denmark birth cohorts 1999-2000

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Close to average

Slightly raised

High

Very high

-0.041*
(0.023)
0.009
(0.019)

Panel A: Total difficulties score
0.021
0.006
(0.018)
(0.011)
-0.033**
0.009
(0.014)
(0.010)

0.829

0.094

0.034

Panel B: Prosociality score
0.020
0.002
(0.021)
(0.017)
-0.062***
-0.041***
(0.017)
(0.013)

-0.024
(0.027)
0.138***
(0.021)
0.695

0.155

Number of children

0.090

0.014
(0.013)
0.015
(0.011)
0.043
0.003
(0.014)
-0.035***
(0.010)
0.059

3,370

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All outcome variables are binary indicators. OLS regressions in
columns (1)-(4) include the following controls: child birth year dummies, mother age at first birth, mother age, father
age, municipality dummies, maternal and paternal education, maternal and paternal employment, family income,
immigrant dummy, number of children in family. The questionnaire was answered by 6th grade students from birth
cohorts 1998-2000. Panel A is a combination of emotional problems score, conduct problems score, hyperactivity score
and peer effects problems score. We present the results for these scores separately in Table A7.

30

31
0.220
76,036
38,018

8.114
76,036
38,018

0.767
175,686
87,843

0.667
89,262
44,631

6.760
174,724
87,362

0.018
85,258
42,629

0.546
76,036
38,018

0.067
62,753
37,237

0.761
71,902
35,951

3.648
71,902
35,951

0.068
76,036
38,018

0.069
76,036
38,018

-0.000
(0.004)
-0.032***
(0.003)

Behavioral
disability

0.030
85,258
42,629

Behavioral and
emotional
disorders
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.021***
(0.002)

Disorders of
psychological
development
-0.000
(0.003)
-0.015***
(0.002)

Panel B. Florida: Birth cohorts 1994-2002
Attending A
School quality
Pre-kindergarten
Held back a year quality school in
Cognitive disability
participation
(0-4) in third grade
third grade
0.066***
-0.006
-0.014**
-0.019*
-0.008*
(0.008)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.010)
(0.004)
-0.030***
-0.041***
0.001
0.006
-0.036***
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.003)

150
98,576
49,288

(8)

(7)

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies.

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

Second-born
-0.027***
(0.007)
0.005
(0.005)

Complications in
pregnancy

Ln(birth weight)
0.026***
(0.003)
-0.040***
(0.002)

0.264
172,934
86,467

8.141
172,642
86,467

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

0.037***
(0.002)
-0.040***
(0.001)

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Denmark: Birth cohorts 1981-1990
Maternal
School starting age
Complications in Days of maternity
Out of home
employment one
pregnancy
daycare at age 2
leave
(1st grade)
year after birth
-0.053***
-8.574***
-0.005
0.039***
-0.235***
(0.005)
(0.692)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.006)
-0.002
-0.232
-0.006*
-0.006
-0.107
(0.004)
(0.538)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)

(2)

Second-born

Ln(birth weight)

(1)

Table 5: Mechanisms: neonatal and childhood health, parental investment and school quality

Table 6: Short-run cognitive outcomes

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

(1)
(2)
Denmark: Birth cohorts 1986-1997
Math
Reading
-0.109***
-0.137***
(0.010)
(0.012)
-0.084***
0.347***
(0.007)
(0.009)
0.278
144,906
144,906
72,453

-0.044
144,906
144,906
72,453

(3)
(4)
Florida: Birth cohorts 1994-2002
Math
Reading
0.013
-0.076***
(0.011)
(0.011)
-0.039***
0.081***
(0.009)
(0.009)
0.459
307,402
72,888
36,444

0.386
310,650
72,998
36,499

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies.

32

Table 7: Heterogeneity effects by spacing between first- and second-born child
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Spaced 1-2 years
apart

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Spaced 3+ years
Spaced 1-2 years
Spaced 3+ years
apart
apart
apart
Panel A. Denmark: Convictions
By age 16
By age 21
0.143
0.332
4.119***
1.982**
(0.704)
(0.487)
(1.073)
(0.796)
-2.926***
-2.625***
-13.194***
-11.081***
(0.365)
(0.270)
(0.577)
(0.450)
5.213
48,552
24,276

0.884**
(0.412)
-0.863***
(0.208)

4.137
72,548
36,274

18.112
48,552
24,276

15.127
72,548
36,274

Panel B. Denmark: Sentenced to prison
By age 16
By age 21
0.203
4.198***
0.935*
(0.263)
(0.813)
(0.546)
-0.519***
-6.977***
-5.762***
(0.146)
(0.417)
(0.307)

1.407
48,552
24,276

0.789
72,548
36,274

8.202
48,552
24,276

6.552
72,548
36,274

Panel C. Denmark: Incarcerated
By age 16
Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

By age 21

0.435**
(0.180)
-0.191**
(0.091)

0.115*
(0.070)
-0.006
(0.047)

1.896***
(0.552)
-3.080***
(0.272)

0.108
(0.335)
-2.315***
(0.185)

0.230
48,552
24,276

0.075
72,548
36,274

3.203
48,552
24,276

2.377
72,548
36,274

Panel D. Large FL County: In juvenile justice system
By age 16
0.449
0.911
(0.886)
(1.516)
-1.377**
-0.925
(0.623)
(0.886)
2.540
16,958
8,479

2.674
7,970
3,985

Panel E. Florida: Behavioral outcomes in school
Suspensions (G1 to G8)
Absences (G4 to G8)
1.748***
2.911***
0.144**
0.416***
(0.426)
(0.433)
(0.071)
(0.096)
-4.770***
-3.620***
-0.144***
-0.088*
(0.042)
(0.050)
(0.249)
(0.246)
6.764
198,872
40,064
20,032

4.842
150,312
35,972
17,986

3.761
113,774
35,076
17,538

3.485
86,382
31,360
15,680

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies.

33

Table 8: Heterogeneity effects by maternal education at birth
(1)
< 12 years

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

(2)
(3)
(4)
12+ years
< 12 years
12+ years
Panel A. Denmark: Convictions
By age 16
By age 21
1.651***
0.642*
4.468***
2.301***
(0.629)
(0.339)
(0.936)
(0.599)
-3.511***
-1.629***
-16.208***
-8.580***
(0.451)
(0.234)
(0.698)
(0.425)
6.559
39,386
19,693

2.741
68,234
34,117

22.594
39,386
19,693

11.158
68,234
34,117

Panel B. Denmark: Sentenced to prison
By age 16
By age 21
1.259***
0.245
2.845***
1.271***
(0.365)
(0.167)
(0.722)
(0.375)
-0.664**
-0.424***
-8.757***
-3.610***
(0.261)
(0.115)
(0.521)
(0.263)
1.459
39,386
19,693

0.514
68,234
34,117

10.855
39,386
19,693

3.974
68,234
34,117

Panel C. Denmark: Incarcerated
By age 16
By age 21
0.454***
0.075
0.862*
0.515**
(0.127)
(0.056)
(0.478)
(0.216)
0.035
-0.004
-4.125***
-1.106***
(0.088)
(0.036)
(0.336)
(0.144)
0.099
39,386
19,693

0.051
68,234
34,117

4.158
39,386
19,693

1.187
68,234
34,117

Panel D. Florida: Behavioral outcomes in school
Suspensions (G1 to G8)
Absences (G4 to G8)
2.883***
1.421***
0.084
0.158***
(0.826)
(0.225)
(0.161)
(0.040)
-7.478***
-3.836***
-0.154
-0.117***
(0.696)
(0.177)
(0.134)
(0.032)
12.439
40,980
8,760
4,380

5.096
308,204
67,276
33,638

5.349
23,186
7,506
3,753

5.558
176,970
58,930
29,465

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies.

34

Table 9: Heterogeneity effects by immigration origin of the parents
(1)
Native-born

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

(2)
(3)
(4)
Immigrant
Native-born
Immigrant
Panel A. Denmark: Convictions
By age 16
By age 21
2.705***
6.375***
0.895***
3.629***
(0.321)
(0.856)
(0.524)
(1.214)
-2.101***
-6.277***
-11.072***
-16.572***
(0.222)
(0.725)
(0.376)
(1.029)
3.860
102,898
51,449

8.046
18,202
9,101

14.847
102,898
51,449

22.100
18,202
9,101

Panel B. Denmark: Sentenced to prison
By age 16
By age 21
0.404**
2.475***
1.515***
4.469***
(0.174)
(0.529)
(0.363)
(0.978)
-0.391***
-2.101***
-5.136***
-12.332***
(0.118)
(0.446)
(0.254)
(0.807)
0.795
102,898
51,449

2.807
18,202
9,101

6.236
102,898
51,449

11.204
18,202
9,101

Panel C. Denmark: Incarcerated
By age 16
By age 21
0.129***
0.889***
0.527**
2.371***
(0.049)
(0.281)
(0.225)
(0.707)
-0.003
-0.500**
-1.958***
-6.284***
(0.035)
(0.233)
(0.151)
(0.577)
0.045
102,898
51,449

0.764
18,202
9,101

2.112
102,898
51,449

5.251
18,202
9,101

Panel D. Florida: Behavioral outcomes in school
Suspensions (G1 to G8)
Absences (G4 to G8)
1.737***
1.655***
0.117**
0.264***
(0.265)
(0.396)
(0.048)
(0.072)
-4.573***
-3.137***
-0.121***
-0.122**
(0.204)
(0.341)
(0.038)
(0.062)
6.294
278,674
60,546
30,273

4.542
70,510
15,490
7,745

3.832
159,454
52,840
26,420

2.901
40,702
13,596
6,798

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies. We define immigrants in Florida based on the fact that mother was born outside of the US while
in Denmark if either of the parents were born outside of Denmark.

35

Table 10: Heterogeneity effects by race and ethnicity: Florida birth cohorts 1994-2002

(1)
(2)
Suspensions (G1-G8)

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of observations
Number of children
Number of families

(3)
(4)
Absences (G4-G8)

Panel A. Race
Non-African
African
American
American
1.584***
-0.014
(0.224)
(0.107)
-3.731***
-0.272***
(0.174)
(0.094)

African
American
2.215**
(0.871)
-8.928***
(0.786)
12.384
36,696
8,284
4,142

5.183
312,488
67,752
33,876

3.223
20,826
7,138
3,569

Panel B. Ethnicity
Non-Hispanic
Hispanic
1.809***
0.247***
(0.268)
(0.073)
-4.389***
-0.209***
(0.204)
(0.061)

Hispanic
1.501***
(0.399)
-3.870***
(0.350)
5.264
78,578
17,296
8,648

6.142
270,606
58,740
29,370

3.368
44,998
15,116
7,558

Non-African
American
0.172***
(0.043)
-0.103***
(0.035)
3.691
179,330
59,298
29,649
Non-Hispanic
0.117**
(0.048)
-0.094**
(0.038)
3.725
155,158
51,320
25,660

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies. We define race and ethnicity based on maternal information at birth.

36

Figure 1: Birth order effects on criminal activity in early adulthood: Estimates for second-borns by
age in Denmark
B. Sentenced to prison

0

20

40

20

Conviction

Sentenced to prison
60
80

40

100

120

60

A. Convicted

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

16

Age

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

Age

0

100

Incarcerated
200

300

C. Incarcerated

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Age

Note: All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies and are scaled by means of
dependent variable for first-born boy in a given group. Dependent variables are delinquency measures by given age. Standard
errors clustered at mother level with reported 95% confidence intervals. Estimates based on boy-boy and girl-boy sample.

37

25

Figure 2: Birth order effects on delinquency in childhood: Estimates by grade in Florida
B. Absence rate

-20

0

Second born effects (%) suspensions
20
40
60
80

Second born effects (%) absence rate
-10
0
10
20

100

A. Suspensions

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

Note: Estimates based on boy-boy and girl-boy sample. Dependent variables are delinquency measures in a given grade. For
further details see notes in Figure 1.

Figure 3: Birth order effects on cognitive development in childhood: Estimates by grade in Florida
B. Reading

-.14

-.06

-.12

Second born effects (SD) mathematics
-.04
-.02
0
.02
.04

Second born effects (SD) reading
-.1 -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02
0

.06

.02

A. Mathematics

3

4

5
6
Longitudinal grade

7

8

3

4

5
6
Longitudinal grade

7

Note: Estimates based on boy-boy and girl-boy sample. Dependent variables are mathematics or reading test score in a given
grade. For further details see notes in Figure 1.

38

8

Figure 4: Maternal labor market activity after birth: Estimates for Denmark
B. Full time employment

-.15

-.2

-.1

Any employment
-.05
0

Employed >= 200 days in a year
0
.2

.05

.4

A. Any employment

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
Years after birth

7

8

9

10

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
Years after birth

7

8

9

10

Note: Estimates based on boy-boy and girl-boy sample. Dependent variables are maternal employment measures in a given year
after child birth i.e. being employed 1st year after birth, 2nd year after birth etc. For further details see notes in Figure 1.

Figure 5: Birth order effects on attended school quality: Estimates by grade in Florida
B. School quality (0 to 4 scale)

-2

Second born effects (%) school quality
-1
0
1
2

Second born effects (%) attending A quality school
-4
-2
0
2
4
6

3

A. Attended A rated school

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

Note: Estimates based on boy-boy and girl-boy sample. Dependent variables are school quality measures in a given grade. For
further details see notes in Figure 1.

39

8

Appendix Tables
Table A1: Short-run non-cognitive outcomes: Denmark birth cohorts 1999-2000

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Close to average

Slightly raised

High

Very high

-0.002
(0.020)
-0.114***
(0.019)

Panel A: Emotional problems score
0.008
-0.013
(0.014)
(0.010)
0.031**
0.011
(0.014)
(0.011)

0.878
-0.013
(0.021)
0.051***
(0.017)

0.059

0.041

Panel B: Conduct problems score
-0.002
-0.000
(0.016)
(0.012)
-0.016
-0.029***
(0.013)
(0.010)

0.847

0.079

0.051

Panel C: Hyperactivity score
-0.005
0.029**
(0.017)
(0.012)
-0.016
-0.007
(0.013)
(0.010)

-0.049**
(0.023)
0.041**
(0.019)
0.820

0.080

0.040

Panel D: Peer problems score
-0.024
0.023
(0.022)
(0.019)
-0.052***
-0.024*
(0.018)
(0.014)

-0.013
(0.029)
0.079***
(0.024)
0.638

0.170

Number of children

0.097

0.006
(0.011)
0.071***
(0.012)
0.022
0.016
(0.010)
-0.006
(0.008)
0.023
0.024
(0.015)
-0.019
(0.011)
0.061
0.013
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.015)
0.095

3,370

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All outcome variables are binary indicators. OLS regressions in
columns (1)-(4) include the following controls: child birth year dummies, mother’s age at first birth, mother’s age,
father’s age, municipality dummies, maternal and paternal education, maternal and paternal employment, family
income, immigrant dummy, number of children in family. The questionnaire was answered by 6th grade students from
birth cohorts 1998-2000. These are sub-scores for the results reported in panel A of Table 4.

40

Table A2: Daycare by age of the child: Denmark birth cohorts 1993-2000

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children/families

(1)
At age 1
-0.172***
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.005)

(2)
At age 2
0.034***
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.004)

(3)
At age 3
0.108***
(0.006)
-0.011***
(0.004)

0.160

0.667
87,442/43,721

0.764

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child
birth year dummies.

41

42
1.428

Mean of Y for first-born girl
Number of children
Number of families

4.073

15.680

-12.820***
(0.589)

4.290

0.593
(0.413)

4.224

16.414***
(0.612)

16.325

2.748***
(0.648)

0.935

-1.098***
(0.160)

0.136

0.004
(0.101)

0.119

1.948***
(0.204)

1.038

0.555**
(0.243)

By age 16

58,864
29,432

55,756
27,878

58,680
29,340

62,420
31,210

(6)

By age 21

Incarcerated
By age 16

(5)

0.138

2.711

0.010

0.126

0.004

0.079

6.555

0.139

2.438

Panel D: Boy-Girl families
-7.243***
-0.184***
-3.231***
(0.395)
(0.062)
(0.247)

0.854

Panel C: Girl-Girl families
0.715***
-0.001
0.086
(0.225)
(0.026)
(0.091)

0.859

Panel B: Girl-Boy families
9.552***
0.505***
4.257***
(0.421)
(0.080)
(0.266)

7.216

Panel A: Boy-Boy families
1.491***
0.201**
0.543*
(0.480)
(0.094)
(0.317)

By age 21

(4)
Denmark
Sentenced to prison

(3)

2.485
11,992
5,996

-1.525**
(0.661)

1.214
11,696
5,848

-0.237
(0.554)

1.091
11,916
5,958

2.186***
(0.655)

2.567
13,050
6,525

1.326*
(0.768)

Juvenile justice
system by age
16

(7)

6.276
37,828
18,914

-4.108***
(0.275)

1.921
35,166
17,583

0.818***
(0.187)

2.010
36,560
18,280

6.566***
(0.298)

5.942
39,476
19,738

1.193***
(0.295)

Suspensions

(8)
Florida

3.738
33,474
16,737

-0.153***
(0.051)

3.585
31,118
15,559

0.101**
(0.050)

3.589
31,908
15,954

0.297***
(0.055)

3.643
34,528
17,264

0.124**
(0.052)

Absence rate

(9)

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies. Birth cohorts for
Denmark: 1981-1990; birth cohorts unnamed county in Florida (column (7)): September 1979 to August 1989; birth cohorts for the state of Florida: 1994-2002.

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

-3.179***
(0.342)

0.030
(0.252)

Second-born

Second-born

1.418

4.362***
(0.374)

4.566

1.607***
(0.419)

Mean of Y for first-born girl
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Second-born

(2)

By age 21

Convictions
By age 16

(1)

Table A3: Main results by gender composition

Table A4: Heterogeneity effects by maternal employment: Denmark birth cohorts 1981-1990
(1)
Non-employed

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy

Second-born
Girl
Mean of Y for first-born boy

(2)
(3)
(4)
Employed
Non-employed
Employed
Panel A. Convictions
By age 16
By age 21
2.849**
0.716**
4.018**
3.023***
(1.158)
(0.365)
(1.690)
(0.603)
-3.018***
-2.161***
-14.566***
-11.088***
(0.826)
(0.248)
(1.259)
(0.424)
5.998

3.805

21.923

14.451

Panel B. Sentenced to prison
By age 16
By age 21
1.910***
0.201
3.522***
1.574***
(0.630)
(0.203)
(1.272)
(0.414)
-0.457
-0.589***
-7.330***
-5.211***
(0.469)
(0.135)
(0.930)
(0.284)
1.413

0.847

10.514

5.999

Panel C. Incarcerated
By age 16
Second-born

By age 21

0.646**
(0.278)
0.088
(0.172)

0.097*
(0.054)
-0.038
(0.041)

1.907**
(0.860)
-2.878***
(0.610)

0.544**
(0.253)
-1.960***
(0.166)

Mean of Y for first-born boy

0.138

0.048

3.895

2.040

Number of children
Number of families

11,426
5,713

80,286
40,143

11,426
5,713

80,286
40,143

Girl

Note: Maternal employment is defined as a mother working full or part time one year after birth. Standard errors
clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies.

43

44

9.483

32.367

2.978
10,106
5,053

17.712

(4)
Denmark
Sentenced to prison
By age 16
By age 21
0.179
0.954
(0.904)
(1.831)
-1.903***
-15.979***
(0.627)
(1.246)

(3)

(6)

0.705

7.641

Incarcerated
By age 16
By age 21
-0.090
1.092
(0.397)
(1.252)
-0.716***
-7.661***
(0.255)
(0.845)

(5)

Florida

(8)

11.385
10,466
5,233

2.952***
(0.830)
-6.044***
(0.660)

4.510
10,426
5,213

0.131
(0.111)
-0.015
(0.097)

Suspensions Absence rate

(7)

Note: Sample is based on all families where father is known and different irrespective of the marital status. Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates
come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies.

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

Second-born

(2)

Convictions
By age 16
By age 21
3.612**
6.261***
(1.563)
(2.338)
-4.278***
-21.560***
(1.076)
(1.620)

(1)

Table A5: Main results: Sample of families with different fathers

45

1.613***
(0.308)
-2.721***
(0.220)

Second-born

5.483

1.729***
(0.517)
-3.199***
(0.373)
19.175

4.694***
(0.793)
-14.050***
(0.586)

16.330

3.549***
(0.485)
-11.822***
(0.358)

3.463***
(0.487)
-11.931***
(0.356)

(7)
Florida

121,100
60,550

7.217

0.138

2.710

1.396
49,688
24,844

9.182

0.249

3.706

Panel C: Dropping families of size two
1.035***
2.928***
0.270**
1.382***
(0.314)
(0.598)
(0.131)
(0.407)
-0.754***
-8.225***
-0.250***
-3.829***
(0.216)
(0.430)
(0.092)
(0.282)

1.038

(8)

8.010
10,480
5,240

2.175***
(0.626)
-5.948***
(0.507)

5.942
76,036
38,018

3.952
10,478
5,239

-0.066
(0.078)
0.109*
(0.064)

3.725
75,914
37,957

0.010
(0.030)
-0.041
(0.025)

0.007
(0.031)
-0.034
(0.024)

Suspensions Absence rate

1.701***
(0.226)
-4.242***
(0.179)

(6)

Panel B: Controlling for birth outcomes
0.910***
2.316***
0.307***
1.059***
(0.175)
(0.350)
(0.068)
(0.228)
-0.643***
-6.144***
-0.073
-2.580***
(0.122)
(0.251)
(0.047)
(0.158)

(5)

1.584***
(0.227)
-4.278***
(0.176)

(4)

Denmark
Sentenced to prison
Incarcerated
By age 16
By age 21
By age 16
By age 21
Panel A: Additional maternal/household controls
0.940***
2.311***
0.300***
1.025***
(0.175)
(0.351)
(0.067)
(0.229)
-0.646***
-6.246***
-0.084*
-2.623***
(0.121)
(0.249)
(0.046)
(0.155)

(3)

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies. Additional controls
in panel A include mother’s age at birth, education, marital status and ZIP code of residence in the case of Florida. In Denmark controls include municipality
dummies, mother’s age at birth, maternal and paternal education, maternal and paternal employment as well as family income. Additional controls in panel
B include log birth weight, maternal pregnancy complications and gestational length. Panel C drops families that have exactly two children. Birth cohorts for
Denmark: 1981-1990; birth cohorts for the state of Florida: 1994-2002.

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

Second-born

Mean of Y for first-born boy
Number of children
Number of families

Girl
4.571

1.626***
(0.309)
-2.741***
(0.218)

Second-born

Girl

(2)

Convictions
By age 16
By age 21

(1)

Table A6: Main results - robustness of fixed effects models

46
0.222
72,993
36,497

8.080
72,994
36,497

0.762
164,476
82,238

0.653
84,072
42,036

6.665
165,012
82,506

0.516
72,994
36,497

0.032
59,986
35,698

0.750
69,230
34,615

3.631
69,230
34,615

0.031
72,994
36,497

0.036
72,994
36,497

0.007*
(0.004)
-0.036***
(0.003)

Behavioral
disability

0.010
80,558
40,279

Behavioral and
emotional
disorders
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.021***
(0.002)

Disorders of
psychological
development
-0.004*
(0.002)
-0.017***
(0.001)
0.004
80,558
40,279

(8)

(7)

Panel B. Florida: Birth cohorts 1994-2002
Attending A
School quality
Pre-kindergarten
Held back a year quality school in
Cognitive disability
participation
(0-4) in third grade
third grade
0.057***
-0.007*
0.004
0.006
-0.009***
(0.008)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.003)
-0.031***
-0.033***
0.001
-0.001
-0.037***
(0.006)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.003)

149
92,992
46,496

Note: Standard errors clustered at mother level. All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies.

Mean of Y for first-born girl
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

Second-born
-0.034***
(0.007)
0.004
(0.006)

Complications in
pregnancy

Ln(birth weight)
0.027***
(0.003)
-0.035***
(0.002)

0.259
161,814
80,907

8.107
161,814
80,907

Mean of Y for first-born girl
Number of children
Number of families

Girl

0.036***
(0.002)
-0.036***
(0.001)

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A. Denmark: Birth cohorts 1981-1990
Maternal
School starting age
Complications in Days of maternity
Out of home
employment one
pregnancy
leave
daycare at age 2
(1st grade)
year after birth
-0.051***
-8.341***
-0.002
0.042***
-0.257***
(0.005)
(0.720)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.007)
0.001
0.395
-0.004
0.007
-0.095***
(0.004)
(0.551)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.005)

(2)

Second-born

Ln(birth weight)

(1)

Table A7: Mechanisms: neonatal and childhood health, parental investment and school quality: Second-born girl effects

Appendix Figures
Figure A1: Birth order effects on criminal activity in early adulthood: Estimates for second-borns
by age in Denmark
B. Sentenced to prison

-60

-250

-200

-40

Conviction
-20

Sentenced to prison
-150
-100

0

-50

0

20

A. Convicted

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

16

17

18

19

Age

20

21

22

23

24

Age

-3000

-2000

Incarcerated
-1000

0

1000

C. Incarcerated

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Age

Note: All estimates come from fixed effects regressions controlling for child birth year dummies and are scaled by means of
dependent variable for first-born girl in a given group. Dependent variables are delinquency measures by given age. Standard
errors clustered at mother level with reported 95% confidence intervals. Estimates based on girl-girl and boy-girl sample.

47

25

Figure A2: Birth order effects on delinquency in childhood: Estimates by grade in Florida
B. Absence rate

-20

-200

Second born effects (%) suspensions
-150
-100
-50
0
50

Second born effects (%) absence rate
-10
0
10
20

100

A. Suspensions

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

Note: Estimates based on girl-girl and boy-girl sample. Dependent variables are delinquency measures in a given grade. For
further details see notes in Figure A1.

Figure A3: Birth order effects on cognitive development in childhood: Estimates by grade in
Florida
B. Reading

-10

-20

0

Reading
-10

Mathematics

10

0

20

A. Mathematics

3

4

5
6
Longitudinal grade

7

8

3

4

5
6
Longitudinal grade

7

Note: Estimates based on girl-girl and boy-girl sample. Dependent variables are mathematics or reading test score in a given
grade. For further details see notes in Figure A1.

48

8

Figure A4: Maternal labor market activity after birth: Estimates for Denmark

-.4

-.15

-.1

Any employment
-.05
0

Employed >= 200 days in a year
-.2
0
.2

.05

.4

B. Full time employment

.1

A. Any employment

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
Years after birth

7

8

9

10

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
Years after birth

7

8

9

10

Note: Estimates based on girl-girl and boy-girl sample. Dependent variables are maternal employment measures in a given year
after child birth i.e. being employed 1st year after birth, 2nd year after birth etc. For further details see notes in Figure A1.

Figure A5: Birth order effects on attended school quality: Estimates for second-borns by grade in
Florida

-2

-4

-2

-1

School quality
0

1

Attending A quality school
0
2
4

2

B. School quality (0 to 4 scale)

6

A. Attended A rated school

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

8

1

2

3

4
5
Longitudinal grade

6

7

Note: Estimates based on girl-girl and boy-girl sample. Dependent variables are school quality measures in a given grade. For
further details see notes in Figure 1.

49

8

