                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         TESTS OF INTERNATIONAL CAPM
                        WITH TIME-VARYING COVARIANCES




                                Charles Engel

                            Anthony P. Rodrigues




                           Working Paper No. 2303




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2303
                                                       July 1987




             Tests   of International CAB'1 with Time-Varying   Covariances




                                         ABSThACT




     We perform maximum likelihood estimation of a model of international
asset pricing based on CAI4. We test the restrictions imposed by CAB'l against
a more general asset pricing model. The "betas" in our CA11 vary over time
from two    sources -—   the   supplies of the assets (government obligations of
France, Germany, Italy, Japan,     the   U.K. and the U.S.)   change over time, and so
do the conditional covariances of returns on these assets.                We let the
covariances change over time as a function of macroeconomic data.     We also
estimate the model when the covariances follow a multivariate ARCH process.
When the covariance of forecast errors are time—varying, we can identify a
modified CAI4 model with measurement error -- which we also estimate. We find
that the model in which the CAE4 restrictions are imposed (which involve
cross—equation constraints between coefficients arid the variances of the
residuals) perform much better when variances are not constant over time.
Nonetheless,   the CAPM model is rejected in favor of the less restricted model
of asset   pricing.

Charles Engel                                         Anthony P.   Rodrigues
Dept. of Economics                                    Dept. of Economics
Rouss Hall                                            Fordham University
University of Virginia                                Bronx, NY 10458
Charlottesville, VA 22901
 1. Introduction


       One branch       of the "asset market approach" to           exchange rates   has focused
 on the demand     by   residents of an open economy for           foreign currency denominated
 assets.    In   this view, people diversify their portfolios to hold a variety of
 domestic   and foreign assets with the aim of getting the maximum return on
 their portfolios while taking into consideration the riskiness of the assets.
 In particular, foreign currency denominated assets are subject to exchange
rate   risk -     or,    perhaps more    accurately,        they    might be subject to more
purchasing    power risk than       domestic   assets.       In the general equilibrium of
such a "portfolio balance" model, the supplies of outside assets affect
macroeconomic variables,         including the     exchange rate. The portfolio balance
approach    to flexible exchange rates was pioneered by                     Black (1973), Kouri
(1976),    Branson (1977) and Girton and Henderson (1977).
       Some general       forms of the portfolio balance      have been treated
                                                                     model
empirically      by, among others, Frankel(1982a, 1984), Branson, Haittunen and
Masson (1977, 1979),        Dooley and Isard       (1979,    1983) and Lewis         (1986).   These
models    typically postulate that demand          for   domestic assets relative to foreign
assets is a function of i_i*_6, where i is the return on home assets, i is
the return on assets from abroad, and 8 is the expected rate of depreciation
of the domestic currency. The qusntity i_i*.8 is often referred to as the
risk premium in this literature. It represents the excess expected return the
domestic asset must       pay   to compensate for its riskiness. (Of course, the risk
premium    as defined here could be negative, implying                     foreign   assets pay a
greater    expected rate of return.)               These    papers       proceed by making some
assumption on how expectations of the future exchange rate are formed, and
then estimate bond demand equations as functions of the risk premium, or else
estimate a reduced form in which the exchange rate depends on asset supplies.
     The portfolio balance approach can be seen as one possible explanation of
the finding by many authors (incluiing Geweke and Feige (1979), Frankel
(1980),    Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and Cumby and Obstfeld (1981)) that
uncovered    interest parity does not hold.                That    is,    in the sample periods
                                               1
tested, the conditionally expected return differential between comparable
assets across countries is non-zero (i+1_i+i—5+1 has a non-zero mean
conditional on information available at time t). Although the presence of a
risk premium is one explanation for this finding, others include the
possibility of inefficient markets or a peso problem.
       Numerous studies have tested whether the rejection of uncovered interest
parity is attributable to a risk premium, without resorting directly to
estimating bond demand equations.        Various ingenious approaches have been
taken by Hansen and Hodrick (1983), Hodrick and Srivastava (1984), Domowitz
and Hakkio (1985), Mark (1985), Cumby (1986), Giovannini and Jorion (1987a),
and Kaininsky and Peruga (1986).                 typically exploit the time
                                     These studies
series    properties of asset returns (and sometimes other variables sth as
consumption)   without relying on asset supply data.
       Cie branch of this literature can be viewed as a refinement on the
portfolio balance models, in that it derives asset demand equations (rather
than asset pricing equations as in most of the literature cited in the
previous paragraph) from an underlying utility maximization approach. Frankel
(1982b) proposed that a popular and reasonable model of asset diversification
--  the capital asset pricing model (CAF1) -- can be implemented for
international asset data and estimated. Furthermore, the restrictions that
CAI1 places    on more general bond demand equations can be tested. Papers that
employ    this type of international CAB test include Frankel (1983), Frankel
and   Engel (1984), and Engel and Rodrigues (1986).

       These papers demonstrate that CAW implies an equation of the form:
(1)                             Etzt+i c +
where z1 is a vector     of real rates   of   return between   time t   and t+1 relative
to    the real return on some numeraire asset (the jth real return is calculated
as [(1+i3)(l+a3)/(1+n)] — 1, where i is the nominal rate of return of an asset
in its own currency, a is the rate of appreciation of the currency relative to
the   currency of the numeraire asset and i is the rate of inflation of prices
in the currency of the numeraire asset), c is a vector of constants, P is a
constant that is a measure of relative risk aversion of the typical market
participant, 0 is the conditional variance at time t of z1, arid - is a
vector whose jth element is the value of the total outstanding supply of the
                                          2
 jth asset as a share of the value of all assets. The derivation of this
 equation assumes that all investors have the same consumption basket, and that
 the law of one price holds.
        Frankel's key observation is thatif Etzt+i is replaced by the realized
 values of   z1, then under  rational expectations, the variance of the vector
 of forecast errors (zt+i_Etzt+i) should equal 0.    This suggests an empirical
 test of CAPM. Regress each relative ex—post rate of return on all of the asset
 shares in A.. If there are N assets (not counting the numeraire), this would
yield an NxN matrix of regression coefficients that under the CA14 hypothesis
should be proportional to the covariance matrix of the regression errors —
with the constant of proportionality equal to P.
     In the international finance context, this idea has been implemented by
constructing aggregate asset data comprised of the outstanding obligations of
governments from each of several countries.     Dollar assets are chosen as
numeraire, and average real returns for assets from each of the other
countries    relative to the real return on dollar assets are calculated. In the
CAF4   tests that have been performed using this technique there has been little
support for the restrictions imposed by the CAPM theory. (See Frankel (1986)
for a discussion of this literature.)
     Typically the conditional variance, 0, has been treated as a constant.
However, several authors, including Hodrick and Srivastava (1984), Ciznby and
Obstfeld (1984), Hsieh (1984) and Diebold and Nerlove (1986) have noted that
forecast errors in foreign exchange markets are notoriously heteroskedastjc.
Giovanniril and Jorion (1987a) offer some "back of the envelope" calculations
that suggest that the degree of variability over time in 0 is large enough to
account for the empitical failure of the CAI!1   model.   (However, see   Giovannini
and Jorion (198Th) and Frankel (1987)).
       The international finance literature does not offer a very good     guide   to
the  determinants of the variance of the forecast error. It seems plausible
that forecasts should have higher variance in times of economic turbulence.
(tie approach we take in this paper is to let 0 vary over time as a function of
macroeconomic data such as the U.S. money supply and oil prices. If, in fact
shocks to the U.S. money supply and dollar oil prices increased the difficulty
of forecasting foreign exchange rates, then the constant variance models of
Frankel are misspecified. They base their measurement of the forecast
variance at any time on the average of past squared forecast errors. However,
                                       3
if the money supply or oil prices have been behaving erratically in the recent
past, it is likely that the exchange rate forecast variance will increase.
     A method of modelling time-varying variances that does not rely on
macroeconomic data has been suggested by Engle (1982). In essence, he
postulates that the variance this period is likely to be large following a
large error (positive or negative) in the previous period. In a univariate
context, for example, we might see
                                           a + I3e,
where a is the variance this period, and E is the forecast error made at t for
the time t-1 forecast.             This modelling of the variance is labelled
autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) by Engle. ARCH models
have been used in the foreign exchange literature by Dojnowitz and Hakkio
(1985), Hsieh (1985) and Kaminsky and Peruga (1986).
        In this paper we estinte and test a six-country international CAI4
model,     allowing for time-varying variances following both ARCH          specifications
and models relating the variance to macroeconomic          data. We use   aggregate asset
data representing the nominal obligations of six governments -                   France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K. and the U.S. -            and the rates of return from
Eurocurrency markets from April       1973 to December1984. These CAI1 tests can
be viewed as         a direct extension     of Frankel's tests by allowing for
heteroskedasticity. This work is also quite similar            to that of    Bollerslev,
Engle    and Wooldridge (1985), who estimate    -   but do   not test the restrictions
imposed    by -   one CAPH   model for domestic U.S. assets,    using   nominal rates   of
return.
      We also allow for a generalization of the Frankel-type CAPH model by
introducing     the possibility that the empirical CAEM equation (1) does not hold
exactly.      We imbed the model in the traditional measurement error framework
and   test   the CAPH restriction under the assumption that the variance of the
forecast     error depends on observable data.      We are able to identify the
elements     of the variance matrix of the measurement error because they are
assumed      to be   time-invariant, as opposed     to   the variance of the forecast
errors.
      Insection 2 we introduce the time-varying variance CA1 model and test
CAPH under the assumption that the variance is a function of macroeconomic
variables. In the next section, some multivariate ARCH models are presented
                                            4
and estimated. The CAF1 restrictions are tested. Section 4 presents the
measurement error nxxiel, and section 5 conchxies. The appenthces contain
thscussions of the Lagrange multiplier tests that appear throughout the paper,
the sources of the data, and the estimation techniques.




                                     5
2. CAP1 with Time-Varying Variances

     A general model of the real rates of return on N+1 assets might be that
the rates of return are influenced by changes in the value of the outstanding
supply of these assets. Thus, one might expect that for any given asset, its
expected rate of return would rise if the supply of that asset increased. The
expected return on this asset may also be influenced by an increase in the
supplies of other assets.
     Choosing one asset as numeraire, the expected rates of return on the
N—vector for the other assets relative to the numeraire might be a function of
the value of the supplies of these assets as a share of the total value of the
N+1 assets. Thus, we could write:
(2)                                  Etzt+i 0 +
where B is an NxN       matrix   of coefficients, and the other variables are  defined
as in section 1.         In this general form of the equation, B could       vary over
time.

        Equation    (1) is clearly a restriction on equation (2) -      it   forces the
matrix of coefficients in the N equations        to be proportional to the covariance
matrix of forecast errors of z1. In              the earlier papers   that have   tested
international      CAB1, B and Q were treated as constants. Here, we allow both th
vary    over    time. As in the previous literature, we can     test the restriction

imposed    by   CAB,1 that B is proportional to 0.
        In this paper,    there   are six aggregate assets. Each is essentially the
outstanding debt at the end of period t of each of the six governments. The
debt is calculated in such a way as to inclixle only the value of debt in the
hands of the public. For example, corrections are made for foreign exchange
intervention       by central banks that   may remove some of the obligations of one
government from public hands and replace it with another. The calculation of
the data is described in detail in Frankel (1982b). The data set used here is
an updated      data   set kindly provided to us by Alberto Giovannini. The asset
share data are measured at the end of the month and run from April 1973 to
December 1984. See Appendix 2 for a description of the data.
     To produce an empirical model, it is assumed that expectations are formed
                                             6
 rationally. Thus     equations (1) and (2) can   be transformed into regression
 equations   by replacing the expected value of       with the ex postrealized
 value of this variable, and appending an error term equal to the forecast
 error at the end of each equation. Thus, the ex post real rates of return are
 used to calculate z1, with the dollar as the nuineraire asset. The rate of
 return the asset of each country is calculated in dollar terms              as
              1/S, where i is constructed for each country from spot
 one—month forward   exchange rates and the Eurodollar one-month rate assuming
covered interest parity, and S is the end of period exchange rate in dollars
per unit of each country's currency (e •g., the dollars per mark exchange
rate) . Each nominal rate is then deflated by the comnon deflator        which
is    a dollar inflation index.    is a geometrically weighted average of price
indices of the six   countries (converted into dollar terms by multiplying by
Sr). The ex post rates of return are measured from July 1973 to January 1985.
These data are described in more detail in Appendix 2.
    We assume that errors are distributed normally. The log likelihood for
observation t is given by
(3)       lnL —2.5lnn —.51nI0I —.5(z — c    —
                                                                 c
                                                BtXt)'Q(zt   —       —
                                                                  BtXt).
When the CARl constraint is imposed,
                                       Bt    PQ. We estimate the likelihood
under alternative asswiptions about the behavior of 0 over time.
     Table 1 reports the maximum likelihood estimates of' the model under the
CAPM constraint and under the additional constraint that the variance matrix
be constant over time. These estimates correspond to those reported by
Franke]. (1982b) and Frankel and Engel (1984).
     Although the point estimate of p in this model is negative, its standard
error is very large, so that essentially no economically reasonable value of P
can be ruled out. In particular, p 0 is not rejected, which would say that
there is no evidence of a risk premium.
     Table 1 also reports the Lagrange Multiplier (UI) statistic for a test of
CARl. (Our calculation of the Lagrange Multiplier statistics in this paper is
described in detail in Appendix 1.) The alternative hypothesis is actually a
somewhat restricted version of the general unrestricted version of the model
in equation 2. In the test reported here, under the alternative hypothesis B
is still restricted to be symmetric, although it is no longer proportional to
the covar lance matrix. This means that a one unit increase in the supply of
                                      7
asset j has the same effect on the relative return of asset i that a one unit
increase in the supply of asset j has on the return of asset i. CAPM is
rejected at the 1% level even against this restricted form of the alternative
hypothesis. The test statistic reported is       with 14 degrees of freedom.
(We     are testing 15 proportionality restrictions while estimating the
constant of proportionality, implying 14 unique restrictions.)
       In this constant variance version there is not much encouraging news for
the CAR4 hypothesis.        However, the CARl model does not require       that 0 be
constant    over time.
                          Q   represents the variance conditional on information
available at time    t.     It is a measure of dispersion of forecast errors for
market participants. Frankel's formulation of CARl is a significant advance
on    those empirical specifications that     require   the "beta" of each asset to be
constant   over time or   else vary   in   a deterministic way. The "beta" for each
asset will, in fact, vary as the supplies of the assets change over time. But
there is another possible source of variation in the beta that Frankel does
not allow for, and that is the change over time in 0.
       The CARl hypothesis does not provide any particular clue to the source of
change in the conditional variance of forecast errors over time.               A more
complete general equilibriin model of the economy would investigate the source
of shocks to the economy and indicate what might cause fluctuations in the
forecast variance. In the absence of such a model, we will test some
plausible macroeconomic sources of variation.
     Each element of' the covariance matrix 0 could vary independently with the
macroeconomic data (subject to the synmietry constraint on 0). Thus, in our
five equation model, each of the 15 elements of 0 might be a linear function
of some variable or variables x. As a practical matter, this five equation
system with the constraint imposed between coefficients and the variance
matrix is very difficult to estimate. We find it desirable to parameterize
the process parsimoniously, at least in our             first pass at estimating the
time—varying variance model. Thus, we let the variance depend on only one
variable   at a time, and   initially we model the variance according    to
(4)

In    this equation, P is an upper triangular matrix of parameters to be
estimated and h is column vector of parameters. The macroeconomic variable
is given by x. In all cases the values of the data are positive numbers, so
                                             8
the form       of   equation   (4)   guarantees   that the estimated   0   matrix is positive
semi—definite.             In practice,       imposing   this   positive-semi-definiteness
constraint  is useful in achieving convergence of the maximum likelihood
estimates. Note that we are restricting the variance to depend only on one x
(at a time) and that only twenty parameters are used to describe the relation
between the variance and the macroeconomic data. The variance       refers to
the variance of the forecast made at time t of t+1 variables, and that this
variance is a function only of variables known at time t.
     We have chosen macroeconomic variables that seem most likely to have
influenced the variance of forecast errors of the exchange rate. We allow the
variance to depend on stationary representations of the U.S. money supply and
of the dollar price of oil. Both variables had very large economic effects
during our sample period both in the U.S. and abroad.      Furthermore, it is
likely that the size and unpredictability of these variables over this span of
time added to the variability of forecasts of many macroeconomic variables,
including      exchange rates. In tables 2 and 3 the variance is a function of the
square    of   the change in the logs of money and oil prices, respectively.
      The assumption of rational expectations mightlead one to conclude that
only unexpected changes in oil prices or the money supply would increase the
difficulty of making forecasts. In this view, consumers are able to form
expectations of the money supply and oil prices given the past behavior of
these variables. A large, but expected, change in one of them will not add
any uncertainty, or make forecasts of exchange rates more difficult. To allow
for this possibility, we fit ARIMA models to the logs of U.S. Ml and dollar
oil prices. We then squared the residuals, and allowed for the variance of
the exchange        rate                if there were a large innovation in one
                           forecast to increase
of   these variables in the previous month. Appendix 2 contains a description
of the ARIMA models.
     Table 2 reports the estimates of the model when the variance is allowed
to depend on the square of the one month change in the log of the U.S. money
supply.         Three      of the coefficients in the h vector are individually
significantly different from zero, and the chi-square test indicates that they
are jointly significant at the 5% level. Thus we can reject the constant 0
version of CAPM, in favor of a model in which the forecast variances are
greater when there are large percentage changes in the money supply.
     Given that this model is a significant improvement on the model whose
                                                   9
 estimates are reported in Table 1, we now want to test whether the
restrictions imposed by CARl are binding. In Table 5, the coefficients were
constrained to be proportional to the variance matrix 0. The unconstrained
model in this case would let the coefficient matrix B (from equation (2)) vary
over time as a function of the square of the change in the log of the money
supply, and not be constrained to be related in any way to the 0 matrix. At
the bottom of Table 5 is reported the LII statistic for the test of the CAFI
restriction against the alternative that B is symmetric but not constrained to
be proportional to the variance matrix of the residuals. The statistic has
19 degrees of freedom and, as indicated in the table, shows that the CA1
restrictions are strongly rejected. Actually, visual inspection of Table 2 is
enough to cast serious doubt on the CARl hypothesis since the point estimate
of p is negative (but not significantly different from zero).
     A note of caution is in order here. Suppose the UI test had failed to
reject the CARl restrictions in Table 5.           How should we interpret such a
failure to reject? We estimate p quite imprecisely, and in fact cannot reject
that p   is   zero. But this means   that   we cannot reject the hypothesis that our
explanatory variables have no ability to explain our dependent variables,
since all of the explanatory variables are multiplied by P. Thus, were we not
to reject CARl, probably the correct interpretation would be that we are
unable to explain relative rates of return using asset shares —— but we        seem
to do about as badly whether or not the restrictions of CARl are imposed.
     Table 3 reports the results of the estimation in which the variance of
the forecast errors is a linear function of the square of the change in the
dollar price of oil. Here we do not quite reject the hypothesis that the
macro data do not help explain changes in the variances and that 0 is constant
at the 5% level. None of the elements of the h vector are individually
significantly    different   from zero. The UI test at the bottom of the table
indicates that the CAPM restrictions are strongly rejected.
     The hypotheses that the variance in the forecast errors is related to the
size of unanticipated changes in money and oil prices are tested in Tables 4
and 5. We in fact find that the squared ARIMA residuals for oil prices do a
good job of explaining changes in the variance under the CARl restrictions (in
the sense that the likelihood is significantly improved over the constant 0
model), but the ARIMA residuals for money are not as successful. However, in
both cases the point estimate of p is negative, and in both cases the       121 test
                                            10
rejects the   CABI   restrictions in favor of the more general   model   of equation
2. It is interesting that the unexpected squared changes in the       oil prices do
a better job of explaining the variance than the squared changes in the
variable itself. However, since the restricted model is rejected, not too
much significance    can be attached to this outcome.
       Equation (4) restricts the matrix of coefficients that        multiplies   the
macroeconomic    variable to have only five    independent parameters.      We also
estimated   the general form of equation (4)   in which the matrix multiplying the
macro   variable has fifteen parameters. Specifically, we take the variance to
be given by

(5)
where   Q is an upper triangular matrix.      This formulation imposes the
constraint that 0 be positive semi-definite. The five parameter version of
this   model given by equation (4)   is a restriction on equation   (5) which forces
all but the top row of Q to equal zero -- providing ten zero restrictions.
        no case is the 15 parameter model a significant improvement on the
       In                                                                          5
parameter model of equation (4). Table 6 reports the log likelihoods, the
statistics and the p-values for the null hypothesis that all but the top row
of Q is zero. In no case is the null hypothesis rejected at the 5% level.
     In this section we have found some evidence that the variance of the
forecast error does change over time. In particular, we find that the square
of the unanticipated monthly growth rate of dollar oil prices and of the
monthly growth rate of U.S. Ml are significant explainers of the variance of
the residuals. Thus, the constant 0 version of CARl can be rejected.
However, these models offer little consolation for the more general CAW
model, since the CARl restrictions are in every case strongly rejected. The
next section considers a more time series oriented model of the variance
process — the AEJH model.




                                         11
 3. CARl with     ARCH



       Often the economist does not know the true model                 of the variance.
Without a full general equilibrliml model of the economy, we do not know
 exactly    which macroeconomic    variables   the variance    should be related to. In
such   a   case Engle's (1982) ARCH model is well-suited.
       Engle 'S   model does not require knowledge of the structure of the economy.
Instead, it makes the reasonable postulation that, for example, if the
absolute size of errors in t—1 are large, that the conditional variance at
time t would be larger than average. This is the essence of the ARCH
hypothesis.
       In this section we apply the general idea of ARCH to our five equation
CARl   system. We test two versions of ARCH. They take the general form:

(6)


where P is a constant upper triangular matrix, G is a constant syninetric
matrix and ef represents the lagged forecast error (the error made in
predicting the returns between t-1 and t). This formulation ensures that the
estimated variance matrices are positive semi-definite. (This property is not
necessarily satisfied in the ARCH formulation used by Bollerslev, Erigle and
Wooldridge.)
    Equation       (6)   represents a particular form of a first—order ARCH. In our
applications we will take G first to be diagonal                 (so   that   it   has five
independent non-zero elements) andthen we will consider the general syninetric
case for G (with fifteen independent elements). Even our "general" case is a
quite parsimonious fonn of a first order ARCH. There are 15 elements in the
time t conditional covariance matrix.            In its   most general formulation, each
of those 15 elements could be related linearly to each of the 15 elements in
the moment matrix for the lagged residual. Thus, for the general first-order

ARCH, we could postulate a model with 225 parameters relating the current
conditional variance to the lagged errors. Moreover, in generalized ARCH
models (see Bollerslev (1986)), the variance matrix is essentially related to
                                            12
a distributed lag of error moment matrices. In a multiple equation model such
as the one estimated here, the niziber of ARCH parameters increases quite
quickly with the nuaber of equations.
        Two considerations motivate our           model of     equation   (6). First,      estimation
of a five-equation ARCH system              that imposes      constraints     between    coefficients
and elements of the variance matrix is very difficult. It is made much more
manageable by choosing specifications with a low nimiber of parameters. The
less parsimoniously parameterized versions are not only more difficult to
estimate,      but given the limited data set from the floating rate period, they
also leave too few degrees of freedom for meaningful estimation. The second
advantage of our formulation is that it constrains the estimates of the
variance to      be positive definite (while the Bollerslev, Engle and Wooldridge
set-up does      not).         This turns   out   to be of great practical importance in
estimating a large multi-equation ARCH system.
        In   Table 7 we present the results of an ARCH estimation in which the
matrix G is diagonal. Thus, there are five ARCH parameters to estimate. The
constant variance model could be thought of as a constrained version of this
time-varying variance formulation, in which the five ARCH parameters are
forced       to be zero.        It is easy to perform a likelihood ratio test of this
constraint. Doubling the difference between the log likelihood for the model
reported in Table 7 and the one reported                in   Table 1 gives a           statistic with
5 degrees      of   freedom     equal to    37.78. This is easily significant at the 1%
level — so we can reject the constraint that                    the   variance    is    constant   over
time.
  The ARCH parameters range in size from about .23 to about .64, so the
variance process appears stationary over time.   (All the parameters are
significantly different from one.)    Four of the five parameters are
significantly different from           zero   at the 1% level in a two-sided t test.
        Allowing    the   variance to change over time              greatly   reduces    the   standard
error on      the estimated      coefficient of relative risk aversion. It drops from
42.7    as reported       in   Table 1 to 15.0 in the ARCH model presented in Table 10.
The point estimate of p is extremely               high -      around 13.6. In a one—sided t
test it is not significantly different from                  zero   at the 5% level.
        This model       with   the CARl    constraint       is tested against    the alternative
that    the    B matrix has the same form as 0 but is not                      constrained to be
proportional        to   the covariance       matrix.        As the UI statistic in table 7

                                                   13
indicates, CA14       is still strongly rejected at the 1% level.
        Figures    la-le are graphs of the estimated conditional variances from this
model.     Also drawn on the graph is an estimate of the unconditional variance.
In most periods the conditional variances are much smaller than the
unconditional one. Frankel (1986) argued that, given the size of his
estimates of the unconditional variance, a change in the supply of outside
assets is unlikely to generate much change in the risk premium, since the
change in the risk premium is the product of the change in the asset supply
and the variance of exchange rate forecasts (times p). Furthermore, he argues
that the conditional variance will be smaller than the unconditional variance,
so that even if the variance were allowed to vary over time the CARl model
still could not explain much of the exchange risk premium. Pagan (1986) has
pointed out that, in fact, the conditional variance need not be smaller than
the unconditional variance. The graphs in Figure 1 confirm that for some
periods the conditional variances are much larger than the unconditional
variance. However, on average they must be smaller, as Frankel (1987)
indicates.
       If the variance does vary over time, the variability of the variances
themselves might explain the observed size of risk premia within the framework
of CARI. This point is brought out in the exchange between Giovannini and
Jorion (1987a, 198Th) and Frankel (1987). The results from our ARCH
estimation and CARl tests, though, make this speculation moot. Our estimation
does allow the variance to change, but CARl is still strongly rejected.
        Because the five parameter ARCH model of CARl     is   such a large improvement
on the CARl model constrained to have a constant variance, we proceed to test
a less sparsely parameterized ARCH model. Table 8 reports the results of the
estimation in which the G matrix is allowed to be a general syimaetric matrix.
There are 15 independent elements in G.
     The 5 parameter ARCH is a restricted version of the ARCH in this model in
which all the off diagonal elements are forced to be zero. That imposes ten
restrictions on this richer specification.            The likelihood ratio test for
these   restrictions yields a       statistic with ten degrees of freedom of 43.34,
which is easily significant at the 1% level. Thus, we seem to gain a lot by
going to this more general specification.
    There     is   one troubling aspect   to   this particular form of the model.The
characteristic roots of the estimated G matrix        are —.646, .198, .305, .421 and
                                           14
1.144.      This last root indicates the         possibility of non-stationarity         in   the
variance     process.
       If   indeed the            is not stationary, Engle and Bollerslev (1986)
                          ARCH process
suggest       that the limiting distributions of the coefficients and test
statistics as reported here may not be correct. Not much is known about the
asymptotic properties of ARCH models with unit roots. We will proceed here by
reporting our     test    statistics, but   they   should be interpreted with caution.
       Figures 2a-2e show the estimates of the conditional variances for the
five relative real rates of return in this model. As in the five-parameter
ARCH   model, there are a few periods in which the conditional variances are
very large relative to the remainder of the time.                      We   do not inckde an
estimate of the unconditional variance here, because the non-stationarity of
the variance in our estimates indicates that the unconditional variance does
not exist.
       This   ARCH specification once again reduces the standard error of the
estimate of p —     from 15.0 in the 5 parameter ARCH to 9.4 here. The estimate
of p is negative and significantly different from zero. This would be very
troubling were it not for the fact that the restrictions of CM1 relative to a
formulation of asset demands with a syniDetric B are very strongly rejected.
The rejection is much stronger than in any of our earlier specifications of
the CAI1 model. So, the model reported in Table 8 is not capturing the true
behavior of investors in international financial markets.
     It is not clear why CA1 fares so badly in this case. Perhaps the
non-stationarity in the variance is distorting the test statistics, but more
likely the CAI1 restrictions are just very strong relative to a model that
allows   returns to depend     in a   relatively unrestricted way           on asset shares and
lagged   covariances.
       It   is possible that we have not considered                a    general enough ARCH
specification.       Perhaps    the   variance     is   related   to   the moment matrix of
forecast      errors at    lags greater than       1.    We tested for this         possibility
following     a suggestion of Bollersev (1986).            We performed some time-series
identification on the squared deviations from means of the relative rates of
return. We found in all cases either no serial correlation or support for the
MA1    specification.       These results are consistent with our choice of ARCH
models. In particular, there was no evidence of an AR1 component in any of
the series, which would support Bollerslev's QARCH specification.

                                              15
     In sections 2 and 3 we have estimated a variety of CAPM models with
time-varying variances.   There seems to be abundant evidence that the
explanatory power of the model is increased by letting the conditional
covariances of the asset returns to change over time.     Yet, these more
sophisticated models still provide no support for the CA1I restrictions
between coefficients and variances when tested against the more general
unconstrained asset pricing models. We perform six LII tests of the capital
asset   pricing   model in sections 2 and 3, and they all reject the restrictions.
In the next section we take up the possibility of some specific cases of
misspecification     in equation (1).




4. Measurement     Error

       The model presented in equation (1) and estimated in sections 2 and 3 is
a model in which it is assumed      that   the CM"1 equation holds exactly and all
variables are measured without error, so that the residual in the estimating
equation can be identified with the forecast error. There is a large class of
empirical macroeconomic     models that make the same assumptions in order to
exploit  "orthogonality conditions".     These assumptions are particularly
convenient because they rule out any simultaneous equations problem.        The
right hand side variables in equation (1) are uncorrelated with the error term
because under rational expectations all currently known variables are
orthogonal to forecast errors.
       Suppose that equation (1) did not exactly describe investors' behavior,
but instead it was only correct on average. Preference shocks, for example,
would be represented by a     disturbance appended to the true model of equation
(1).   Then when we replace the expectation of z1 with its realization, the
disturbance term in the estimating equation will be the sum of the forecast
error and the preference shocks. In this case, the explanatory variables —-
the asset shares —— would be correlated with the error, since we would expect
that as risk preferences change the values of the outstanding stocks of the
assets would also change. Thus, the estimation techniques undertaken here
would be rendered invalid. It should be understood, then, as Frankel and
Engel discuss, that the CARl tests discussed previously in this paper are

                                           16
tests that the CA11 equation (1) holds exactly.
      There is another problem that the addition of demand errors cause that
is special to this problem and would not necessarily appear in some other test
of "orthogonality conditions". It is also present if there is measurement
error in either the dependent or explanatory variables. When some source of
error other than the forecast error is present in the residual, it is no
longer the case that under CA11 the coefficients on the asset shares should be
proportional to the variance of the residual.                            They should only be
proportional to the variance of the forecast error.
    Although we offer no general solution to the problems of
misspecification, we can generalize the tests in one direction when forecast
errors have a time-varying variance.              We can identify and estimate equation
(1) even if there is measurement error in the rates of return.                                This
identification is possible when the variance of the forecast errors is a
function of observable data, and the variance of the measurement                          error   is
constant.
      Our economic model is still given by equation (1), but                        the   model to
estimate no longer simply replaces Etzt+i with                z1 -             We now have:


(7)                           z1 = c     +
                                             POX      +         +

where   u   is the measurement   error of z. The variance of C is given               by 0 while
the variance of u is equal       to E. We assiuoe that u is uncorrelated              with C and
A, and that E is constant.
      The likelihood for the model in this case               is given   by:

(8)        lnL = —2.51n?r
                            _.51n1+tl   _.5(zt
                                                 —    c
                                                     BtAt)'+t1(zt c BtAt),
                                                          —                —    —



where +              C      + ut+i)         + E. When the CAR4 constraint is imposed,
               Var
the   matrix of coefficients is         proportional to the variance of the forecast
errors:
            Bt p0•
      It          to consider for a moment why E is identified in this model.
            is useful
Intuitively, identification comes because the part of the variance that also
appears in the asset pricing equations                          is time-varying, while the
measurement     error    variance (E) is not. Suppose the forecast error variance
were constant as in the Frankel empirical models. Then it would be impossible
to distinguish between the forecast error variance and the measurement error
variance. Suppose we had some estimate of this hypothetically constant 0 as
                                                 17
well as estimates of p, ,           that maximized the likelihood. We could
                               arxi +
obtain the same value of the likelihood with, for example, a      20, a value
     *                     *         *
                               + - 0 , and the same estimate of +. However,
of p     .5p, a value of
when     is time-varying, we can no longer perturb its value without changing
the value of the likelihood, since the forecast error variance is the only
part of the total error variance that changes with time.
     We only consider models of the forecast error variance in which the
variance depends on macroeconomic data, as in equation (4). While we are able
to separate out the variance of the forecast errors from the variance of the
measurement error, we cannot distinguish between the forecast error and the
measurement error themselves.      The ARCH model, however, requires that the
forecast errors be identifiable, if we hypothesize that the variance of the
forecast error depends on the lagged moment matrix of realized forecast
errors. So, we must abandon ARCH as our model of the time—varying variance of
forecast errors, and instead rely on equation (4).
       The models of section 2 are restricted forms of equation (7). They force
the matrix E to be zero. As in the previous sections, we choose a form for
the variance that ensures it is positive semi-definite. Equation (4) defines
our model for        For the variance of the measurement error we impose
(9)                                      Q'Q
where  Q is an upper triangular matrix. The models of section 2 force Q to
equal zero —— a total of 15 restrictions.
      We calculate maxiirn.mi likelihood estimates for the model using the two
macroeconomic variables that seemed     to   do the best job in explaining the
variances in sections 2 and 4 of this paper -- the square of the change in the
log of money and the squared residual from the oil price ARIMA. Results of
this estimation are reported in tables 9 and 10.
       These measurement error models do not significantly improve the
explanatory power of the models estimated in section 2 where the asset pricing
equation was assumed to hold identically.       Table 9, which contains the
estimates for the model in which money helps explain forecast error variances,
reports a log likelihood of 1652.55.         The restricted form of this model,
reported in table 2, has a log likelihood of 1647.63.               While the log
likelihood of the restricted model is of necessity lower than of the
unrestricted, the   chi-square test of the 15 restrictions yields   a statistic of
9.84   which is far less than the 5% critical level of 25.0.
                                        18
       The same conclusions can be drawn from the model in which the square of
the   innovation of the oil price is a determinant of the conditional variance
of    the forecast errors, as indicated    in   Table 10.   The log of the likelihood
for this model is 1651.08, compared to the log likelihood for its
corresponding restricted model reported in Table 5 of 1645.89. The chi—square
statistic with 15 degrees of freedom is 9.38, which again is insignificant.
       In                          error model does very poorly. The point
            general, the measurement
estimates    of p are quite unappealing. There seems to be a high degree of
correlation    between the elements of P   and Q, as   evidenced by the high standard
errors on     the individual components of the two matrices (while in the
restricted    models of Tables 2   and 5, the    elements of P   are   estimated with a
great deal of precision). While the evidence of sections 2 and 3 has provided
little support for the CARl model, it is clear that the measurement error
model is not the solution to the misspecification.




                                           19
6. Conclusion
     The CA4 model is in many respects a very attractive model for pricing of
international assets.    It can be derived from a (restrictive) utility
maximizing   framework, and the asset demand equations that   it   produces are   a
special    case of those stodied in the portfolio          balance    literature.
Unfortunately, the restrictions that CAR1 places on those more general asset
demand equations -- restrictions that imply that the returns on assets are
functions not only of the supplies of assets, but also of the variances and
covar lances of the asset returns —— have universally been rejected in previous
literature. Although this paper allows for substantial generalization of the
CARl model, its restrictions are still not accepted.
     One might think of several reasons why previous papers have rejected CARl
-- but some of the most important problems with past models are taken care of
here. One of the most obvious problems, as pointed out by Giovannini and
Jorion (1987a) among others, is that in practice those who have implemented
the Frankel test have assumed the forecast error variances and covariances to
be constant over time. Given the abundant evidence of heteroskedasticity in
these errors, this seemed like a natural point of misspecification in the
empirical CARl models.     However, we test several versions of CARl with
conditionally   heteroskedastic errors but   still find little support for the
model.
     It is sometimes argued that a deficiency in the Frankel approach is that
the only way it can provide a measure of the variance of expectatiorial errors
is by extrapolating from past expectational errors. It is argued that if
there is a policy change or some other economic shock that increases
uncertainty, that there is no way to pick this up reliably from the data.
This argument carries much less weight when we allow the variance of the
forecast error to be a function of economic variables whose changes are apt to
be important generators of uncertainty —— such as money growth or oil prices.
(Xr models of sections 2 and 3 allow for just such a possibility, yet again
CARl gets no support.
   Another potential problem with the Frankel set-up is that it requires the
CAR equation to hold exactly. We have relaxed this constraint in section 4
                                      20
by allowing for sri error that is uncorrelated with the forecast error and the
right-hand-side variables. However, this model is no improvement empirically.
     This paper extends the frontiers of estimation of international CAPM to
consider some of the most important possibilities that have been suggested for
the empirical failure of that model, yet the model still does not get a shred
of support.




                                    21
                                       Appendix 1


                              Lagrange Multiplier     Test

      In several places in this paper, we have presented maximum likelihood
estimates of a model and wish to compare the model to a less restricted
model.     In every case the estimates reported could have been obtained by
estimating the less restricted model subject to some restrictions. (These are
zero restrictions exclusively in this paper.) We obtained our estimates by
maximizing the restricted likelihood:

(A)                              0R solves max
                                            0
where      is the vector of restricted maximum likelihood estimates and ZR(O) is
the log likelihood function for the restricted model.              A mathematically
equivalent way to obtain the reported estimates would be by obtaining:

(B)                        solves max Z(O) subject to° H h(O)O
                                  0
where Z represents the unrestricted log likelihood function and h(0) is the
vector valued function of constraints.             For convenience, the solutions to
problems (A) and (B) are represented by the same vector although the solution
to (B) has higher dimension than the solution to (A).

        One asymptotic test of the null hypothesis H0: h(&)O is the Lagrange
multiplier test based on the statistic:
                                                     —1

                             -
                                 ae'       ae 80'
evaluated at the restricted maximum likelihood estimate, 0R•              See Amemiya
(1985) page 142 for details.             We used a variant of the asymptotically
equivalent test statistic
                                    —1
                                                                  a2z
              T
               -1   ____    T-1 I                  whereI-
                    80'                  80                      80 80'



                                              22
discussed by   Silvey (1975), pages 118-119.              We replaced T11 with     the
following asymptotically equivalent form suggested by Berndt,        Hall,   Hall, and
Hausman (1974):

                                  T 8C        8C
                                                      t
                            T1 E
                                ti ae         ae'
where £ represents the log likelihood for observation t.

     The Lagrange multiplier test statistic used in this paper:


                     _
                     80'
                              T 8ë t
                             t1   88        80'
                                                  t
                                                          —1

                                                               _
                                                               8t

                                                               80
irns an asymptotic   distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the number
of unique restrictions imposed by H. See Silvey (1975), pp. 118-119 or Judge
et al (1985), pp. 182-184 for detailed derivations of these distribution
results.




                                       23
                                       Appendix 2

                                     Data Appendix

     Our analysis relies on rate of return and aggregate asset data for the
six countries in the study:   France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom,
and United States. The assets studied are publicly held outstanding
government debt denominated in the six currencies: francs, yen, lire, marks,
pouncLs, and dollars. The calculation method,        designed   to measure debt at the
end     of   each month, is described in detail in Frankel (1982).         We used an
updated      data   set provided by Alberto Giovannini. Our other major source of
data was the Data Resources Inc. DRIFACS data base.         (We are indebted to Ken
Froot and Susan Collins for porviding us access to this data.) We also
obtained data from the Citibank Citibase tape and the International Monetary
Fund's IFS tape.

Asset Shares

        A complete description   of how the values of the assets is calculated is
included in Frankel (1982). Briefly, for each country the asset data starts
with the value        of outstanding debt reported by each government. To this
figure       is added the cumulative value of foreign exchange purchases by the
central bank of that country (which has the effect of exchanging foreign
denominated assets for domestic denominated assets in the hands of the
public.) Subtracted from this total is the value of assets held in that
currency by central banks (a figure which is obtainable through numbers
available in the IMF Annual Report). Because no correction is made for debt
held by the central bank of its own government, these figures for the values
of the outstanding assets are the values of debt and monetary base held by the
public for each country.
     The analysis in the paper utilizes asset shares rather than the level of
assets. The asset shares were computed from the asset levels, measured in
dollars. The asset share data covered the period from June 1973 to December
1984.

                                          24
Rates of Return

     The nominal rate of return for dollar assets was taken as the average of
the bid and ask Eurodollar rates (DRIFACS series USDO1B and USDO1A) on
one—month securities, measured on the last day of the month that was not a
holiday.
       The nominal rate of return for the other five currencies was calculated
assuming covered interest parity:
                                 1   +
                                                     (St/Ft)(1 + lt+i)


where i is the interest rate for those five currencies, i is the one—month
Eurodollar rate, S is the dollars per                     unit of         foreign currency exchange rate
and F is the dollars per         unit of           foreign currency one—month forward exchange
rate, measured     on   the last day          of   the month. The interest rate calculated on
the last day of the month gives the return (known with certainty) for assets
held for the forthcoming month (hence the t+1 subscript). The exchange rates
are averages of bid and ask rates (DRIFACS series FROJOB, FRa)OA, WOCOOB,
WGCOOA,    ITCOOB, ITCOOA, JACOOB, JACOOA, UKCOOB, and UKCXJOA) as                             were the
forward    rates (DRIFACS series FRCO1B, FRCO1A, WGCO1B, WGCO1A, IltOiB, ITCO1A,
JACO1B, JACO1A, UKCO1B, and UKCO1A).
       The nominal      rates   of return           are   converted to ex—post real rates by a
cczinon   price   index., P:
                                         S                r           .         1/12
                           t                 ct+1                 +
                                                                      'ct+l
                                                              1
                                                          [            100

This forimala gives, for time t, the ex-post real return from holding the
government assets of country c from the end of period t to the end of period
t+1.

    The coninon price index, ' is computed as a geanetric mean of the
constmier price indices, IFS item 64, for the six countries at time t after
they are converted to dollars by multiplying by the end of period exchange


                                                      25
rate.

         weights used in the geometric mean are the 1984 shares of total GNP
        The
in dollars. The individual country (P are measured by IFS item 99a (except
for France where GDP, IFS item 99b, was used because current C2'JP was not
available.) These are converted into dollars by dividing by the end of period
exchange rates, IFS item ae. In 1984 the shares were:

              France           .0682847
              Germany          .0851713
              Italy            .0479105
              Japan            .181802
              United Kingdom.0568336
              United States .559998

Economic Variables


        In Section 2 we   allowed the variance of the forecast errors to be         a
function of an oil price index and the United States money supply. These data
were obtained from the Citibase data tape for the period January 1973 to
December 1984.       The money supply measure       used   was Citibase variable FM1,
United   States   Ml measured in current dollars as a seasonally adjusted     monthly
average of daily figures. The oil price index used was the Citibase variable
PW561, the producer price index for crude petroleum products (1967100), not
seasonally adjusted.


       To measure the surprise component of the money supply and oil prices, we
estimated ARIMA models         for   the natural logarithm of each series over the
period January 1973 to December 1984.            The autocorrelations of each series
indicated that       both the money supply and the oil price index were
nonstationary in levels and stationary in first differences. Identification
indicated that the money supply followed a moving average process with one and
four lags. The estimated model for the differences in natural logs,        is
shown below along with the Box-Pierce statistic calculated from the residuals
(standard     errors of the coefficients are shown in parentheses):


              0.0055398 + 0.2759634 at — 0.2574734
                                                          at4
              (0.0003996) (0.0843936)       (0.0862326)

                                            26
               R2: 0.115483       Q—Statistic (24 lags) 22.24084
     S.E. of       0.004795      S.D. of dependent var      0.005063
     144 Observations (January 1973 to December 1984)

     The first difference of the logarithm of the oil price series,
                                                                          DPt,
identified as an AR( 1).      The estimated model is presented below along with the
Box-Pierce Q statistic calculated fron         the   residuals (standard   errors   of the
coefficients   are shown in parentheses):

            0.0119926 + 0.4095051
     DPt                           DPt1 + at
           (0.0043962) (0.0766518)

               R2— 0.167357      Q—Statistic (24 lags) 21.89200
     S.E. of      0.031151      S.D. of dependent var       0.034019
     144 Observations (January 1973 to December 1984)


    Both ARD4A models appear to fit the series well.




                                          27
                                          Appendix 3
                                   Estimation Techniques


    This appendix contains a brief discussion of the techniques we used in
order to obtain the inaxinnmi likelihood estimates reported in the tables. We
used various hill-climbing methods available in the Gauss prograuining
language.      In general we found the Berndt,                Hall, Hall and Haumn (1974)
routine    led to some problems. For the models              in   which the variance depends
only on economic variables, we primarily used the               method   of   Broyden, Fletcher,
Goldfarb    and Shanno.    This   algorithm seemed      to work    quickly    and reliably. We
actually    used BHHH for the first and last iterations.                       The BHHH method
providesa consistent estimator of the information matrix, while BFGS and the
other methods available do not. Furthermore, according to the Gauss manual,
BHHH seems   to provide   more reliable numerical estimates of the Hessian matrix.
      For the ARCH   models we found the Davidon, Fletcher and                 Powell algorithm
to be more trustworthy, though very slow. Typically we would                   proceed   with the
DFP method until the likelihood was changing by small amounts. Then we would
switch to the Broyden, Fletcher, Goldfarb and Shanno algorithm, which                        seemed
to   work more quickly.        (Both the DFP       and BFGS algorithms         are described in
Dennis   and Schnabel (1983).)      We used BHHH       for   the first and last iterations.
      In all cases we used           numerical estimates of the derivatives.                    The
analytic    derivatives of the likelihood function in the ARCH models with
respect    to the parameters are expressions involving all the lagged variables
for any observation,      so   they are   quite   complicated.     Hence,     we have   to   rely on
numeric   derivatives.
      We also found it useful to give the maximization routine "good" starting
values. To estimate the models in which the variance depends only on economic
variables we picked as  starting values the 21 parameters from the constant
variance model and then more or less arbitrarily picked starting values for
the five remaining parameters. In the versions in which 15 parameters relate
the economic data to the variance, we took as starting values the 26
parameters from the version in which 5 parameters relate the variance to
economic var, and then picked arbitrary starting values for the other 10
                                                  28
variables. Analogously, to estimate the 5 parameter ARCH, we took as starting
values the estimates of the 21 parameters from the constant variance CAPM
model, and took .4 to be the starting values for the ARCH parameters. In the
15 parameter ARCH specification, our starting values were the estimates from
five parameter ARCH ,with off-diagonal elements of G equal to . 01.        We
proceeded in the same manner for the models of sections 4 and 5.
     At each iteration, an initial value for the first lagged error in the
ARCH models must be specified. This was always taken to be zero.
   All estimation was performed on a Compaq 386 computer equipped with an
Intel   80387 coprocessor.   Each   model estimated required from about 40
iterations to as many   as   400 iterations to converge.     Depending   on   the
complexity of the problem and how good the initial guesses were, the model
would take anywhere from 1 hour to 20 hours to converge.      (We actually
switched to the 80387 midway through our work.   On the 80287 coprocessor these
times are approximately doubled.)




                                      29
                                            References




Amemiya,   Takeshi,    1985. Advanced       Econometrics,         Cambridge: Harvard University
     Press.
Berndt,    Ernst; Bronwyn Hall; Robert Hall; and Jerry                          Hausman,    1974.
     "Estimation and          Inference   in Nonlinear        Structural   Models,"    Annals of
     Economic and     Social Measurement          4:   653-665.

Black, Stanley,       1973.    "International Money Markets             and   Flexible Exchange
    Rates," Studies in International Finance, no. 25, Princeton University.
Bollerslev,     Tim,       1986.            "Generalized          Autoregressive      Conthtional
     Heteroskedasticity,"        Journal of Econometrics 31, 307—327.
Bollerslev, Tim; Robert        Engle;    and Jeffrey Wooldridge, 1985. "A Capital Asset
     Pricing Model with Time            Varying    Covariances," University of California,
     San Diego.
Branson, William, 1977.          "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange             Rate
    Determination," Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen 1 (January):                   69-89.
Branson, William; Hannu        Haittunen;    and Paul Masson, 1977.           "Exchange Rates in
    the    Short Run: The       Dollar-Deutschemark Rate," European Economic Review
    10 (Cotober): 303—24.
Branson,   William; Haimu Halttunen; and Paul Masson,            Rates in
                                                                     1979. "Exchange
    the    Short Run: Some Further Results," European Economic Review 12
    (October): 395—402.
Cumby, Robert, 1986. "Consumption Risk and International Asset Returns :                    Some
   Empirical Evidence," New York University.
Cumby, Robert and Maurice Obstfeld, 1981. "A Note on Exchange-Rate
  Expectations and Nominal Interest Differentials: A Test of the Fisher
   Hypothesis," Journal of Finance 36 (June): 697—704.
Cumby, Robert and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984. "International Interest Rate and
  Price Level Linkages under Flexible Exchange Rates: A Review of Recent
  Evidence," in J. Bilson and R. Marston, eds., Exchange Rate Theory and
  Practice, University of Chicago.
Dennis and Schriabel, 1983. Numerical Methods for Unconstrained Optimization
    and Nonlinear Equations, New York: Prentice-Hall.
Diebold, F. and M. Nerlove, 1986. "The Dynamics of Exchange Rate Volatility:
    A Multivariate Latent Factor ARCH Mod" Federal Reserve Board.
                                                  30
Domowitz, Ian and Craig Hakkio, 1985.               "Conthtional   Variance and the     Risk
    Premium     in the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal of International
    Economics    19 (August): 47-66.
Dooley,     Michael and Peter Isard, 1979.    "A Portfolio Balance Rational
    Expectations    Model of the Dollar-Mark Rate," Journal    International
    Economics    12 (November):    257-76.
Dooley, Michael and Peter Isard, 1983.                "The Portfolio Balance Model of
    Exchange    Rates and Some Structural Estimates            of the Risk Premium," IMF
    Staff Papers    (December): 683-702.
Engel, Charles and Anthony Rodrigues, 1986. "A Test                of International CA1,"
    National Bureau of Economics Working Paper #2054.
Engle, Robert, 1982.         "Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with
     Estimates of the Variance of U.K. Inflation," Econometrica 50: 987-1008.
Engle, Robert     and Tim Bollerslev,        1986.      "Modelling the Persistence of
     Conditional Variances,"       University     of California, San Diego, forthcoming
     in    Econometric Reviews.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1980.           "Tests of Rational Expectations           in   the Forward
    Exchange   Market,"   Southern Economic       Journal   46 (April): 1083-1101.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1982a.      "A Test of Perfect Substitutability in the Foreign
    Exchange   Market," Southern Economic         Journal   48 : 406-416.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1982b.     "In Search of the Exchange Risk Premitin: A
    Six-Currency Test Assuming Mean-Variance Optimizat ion," Journal of
    International Money and Finance 1 (December): 255—74.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1983. "Estimation of Portfolio Balance Functions that are
    Mean-Variance Optimizing: The Mark and the Dollar," European Economic
    Review 23: 315—27.
Frankel,    Jeffrey, 1984.                   and Portfolio Balance Models of
                              "Tests of Monetary
   Exchange Rate Determination," in J. Bilson and R. Marston, eds., Exchange
   Rate Theory and Practice, University of Chicago.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1986. "The Implications of Mean-Variance Optimization for
    Four Questions in International Macroeconomics," Journal of International
    Money and Finance 5 (March): S53-S75.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1987. "Recent Work on Time-Variation in the Conditional
    Variance and in the Exchange Risk Preiniun," University of California,
    Berkeley.

                                             31
Frankel, Jeffrey and Charles Engel, 1984. "DO Asset-Demand Functions Optimize
     over the Mean and Variance of Real Returns? A Six-Currency Test," Journal
     of International Economics 17 (December): 309-323.
Geweke, John and Edgar Feige, 1979.         "Some Joint   Tests of the Efficiency of
    Markets    for Forward Foreign Exchange," Review of Economics and Statistics
    61: 334—41.
Giovannini, Alberto and Philippe Jorion, 1987a.            "Interest Rates and Risk
     Premia    in   the Stock Market and in the Foreign Exchange Market,"      Journal
     of   International Money and Finance 6 (March): 107-124,
Giovannini, Alberto and Philippe Jorion, 198Th. "Foreign-Exchange Risk Premia
     Volatility Once     Again," Coliunbia University.
Girton, Lance and Dale     Henderson,   1977.    "Central Bank Operations in Foreign
    and Domestic Assets under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," in P. Clark,
    D. L1ogue and R. Sweeney, eds.,      The    Effects of Exchange   Rate Adjusthent,
    Washington: U.S. Treasury.
Hamilton, James, 1985.           "Uncovering Financial Market Expectations of
     Inflation," Journal of Political Economy 93: 1224—1241.
Hansen, Lars arid Robert Hodri.ck, 1980. "Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal
    Predictors of Future      Spot Rates: An      Econometric Analysis," Journal of
    Political Economy 88 (Cktober): 829—853.
Hansen, Lars and Robert Hodrick, 1983. "Risk Averse Speculation in the Forward
     Exchange Market: An Econometric Analysis of Linear Models,"                in J.
     Frenkel, ed.,     Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, University
     of Chicago.
Hodrick, Robert and Sanjay Srivastava, 1984. "Risk and Return in Forward
   Foreign Exchange," Journal of International Money and Finance 3 (April):
    5—29.
Hsieh,   David, 1984.     "Tests of Rational Expectations and No Risk Premiun in
    Forward Exchange Markets,"    Journal   of   International Economics 17 (August):
    173—184.
Hsieh,   David, 1985. "The Statistical Properties of Daily Foreign Exchange
     Rates: 1974—1983," University of Chicago.
Judge, George; W.E. Griffiths; H. Carter Hill; Helmut LUtkepohl; arid
     Tsoung-Chao Lee, 1985. The Theory and Practice of Econometrics, Second
     Edition, New York: John Wiley arid Sons.



                                          32
Kainin.ky, Gracielaand Rodrigo Peruga. "Risk Preirthin and the Foreign Exchange
     Market," University of California, San Diego.
Kouri, Pentti, 1976.    "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the
    Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian Journal
    of   Economics, 78 (May): 280—308.
Lewis,   Karen, 1986.    "Testing the Portfolio Balance Model: A Multi-Lateral
     Approach ," New York University, forthcoming in Journal of International
     Economics.
Mark, Nelson, 1985. "On Time     Varying Risk   Premia   in   the Foreign Exchange
     Market," Journal   of Monetary Economics 16 (July): 3-18.
Pagan, Adrian, 1986.    "A Note on the Magnitude of Risk Premia," University of
    Rochester.
Silvey, S.D., 1975. Statistical Inference, New York: Chapnan and Hall.




                                         33
                                           Table 1
                               CARl   Estimation,   constant 0
                                        C +

                                                      p'p
                                      Vart(Ct+i)
             ***       Log Likelihood                       1639.789088   ***


The estimate of the vector      c'
           FRk          GER     ITA        JAP        UK
      .0039629      .0028871 .0044543   .0052062   .0020641
     (.016893 1) (.0172629) (.0140137) (.0173972) (.0133013)
The estimate of the     coefficient p:
   —19.287650
   (42.676856)
The estimate of the upper      triangular matrix P:
      .0322951   .0288285   .0223217   .0179637   .016112 1
     (.0019034) (.0018396) (.0024820) (.0024482) (.0025755)
      0             .0165643   .0018479   .0034280   .0046026
                   (.0010655) (.0017589) (.0030412) (.0023601)
      0            0             .0181945   .0009552   .0030412
                                (.0006800) (.0040832) (.0025898)
      0            0             0             .0270647      .0051627
                                              (.0015644)    (.0018011)
      0            0             0             0             .0237012
                                                            (.0014565)
(standard errors in parentheses)

                               Test   of CARl Restrictions
lagrange multiplier     test statistic              33.221925
marginal   significance level              0.002676      (14 d.f.)




                                              34
                                               Table 2
                                CAf1 Estimation, Variance a Function of
                                  Square    of   Change   in     Log   of   U.S. Ml
                                                  C +              + Ct41
                                         zt+1

                                      vart(Ct+i)                 P'P + hh'xt
                                        square of change in log U.S. Ml
                                 x.

               ***        Log    Likelihood                            : 1647.625183


The estimate         of   the vector c'
            FRA                 GER
                               ITA        JAP         UK
       0. 005956            0.004988
                             0.006123   0.006953   0 .003338
      (0.013681) (0.013695) (0.011231) (0.014585) (0.011425)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
    —23.934543
    (36.290540)
The estinmte         of   the upper    triangular matrix          P:
      0.030219   0.025191   0.020613   0.018436   0. 019729
     (0.002054) (0.002419) (0.002908) (0.003298) (0.003370)
           0               0.015772   0.001692   0.005086   0.009071
                          (0.001358) (0.002119) (0.003297) (0.002637)
        0                    0            0.018193   0.001027   0.003226
                                         (0.000716) (0.004228) (0 .002686)
        0                    0              0            0.026389   0.001813
                                                        (0.001625) (0.002341)
        0                    0              0                0              0.018658
                                                                            (0.002559)
The estimate of the vector h':
      1.590317             2.077879       1.201510        0.287016 —0.917194
     (0.713113) (0.645719) (0.622900) (0.607644) (0.559770)
(standard errors in parentheses)

                                        Test of CA14      Restrictions
lagrange   multiplier test statistic                           56.225719
marginal   significance           level =            0.000015            (19 d.f.)



                                                        35
                                        Table 3
                        CAI!1 Estimation, Variance a Function of
                         Square of Change in Log of Oil Prices
                                            = c +   PQX +
                              vai(e)                  P'P +           hh'x
                   x          square   of    change      in log of oil prices

            ***   Log   Likelihood                                 : 1644.831445    ***

The estimate of the vector c'
            FRA         GER                ITA               JAP          UK
       0.001267 0.000111 0.002179 0.002574 —0.000065
      (0.015653) (0.016243) (0.012810) (0.016369) (0.011975)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
    —12.116358
    (39.781602)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
      0.031925    0.029232        0.021589           0.018180          0.014923
     (0.001909) (0.001905) (0.002446) (0.002405) (0.002522)
        0         0.015851        0.002886           0.002749          0.006823
                  (0.001026) (0.002252) (0.002975) (0.002348)
        0           0             0.017783           0.001374          0.001311
                                 (0.000614)         (0.004243) (0.002801)
        0           0                  0             0.026995          0.005779
                                                    (0.001667) (0.002130)
        0           0                  0                 0             0.022210
                                                                      (0. 001541)
The estimate of the vector h':
      0.166874 —0.015146 0.222064 —0,001335 0.308111
     (0.226000) (0.294538) (0.206733) (0.264205) (0.184717)
(standard errors in parentheses)


                                Test of CAIT4        Restrictions
lagrange multiplier test       statistic                  41.783589
marginal significance level =                    0.001895           (19 d.f.)




                                                    36
                                                 Table 4
                           CARl   Estimation,    Variance   a Function of
                              Squared Residuals from U.S. Ml ARIMA
                                             c +            +
                                      Z1           PQX
                                                   °t   P'P +
                                                                  hh'x,
                          x     squared    residuals    from    U.S.   Ml ARIMA



               ***      Log Likelihood                      : 1642.882930         ***


The estimate of the vector c'
               FRA  GER        ITA        JAP        UK
       0.001309   0.000170   0.002201   0.002633 —0.000140
      (0.009329) (0.009666) (0.007950) (0.010075) (0.008103)
The estimate         of the coefficient p:
    —11.979929
    (25.283582)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
      0.029774          0.026267      0.019919      0.014512       0.017220
     (0.002634) (0.003280) (0.002598) (0.003762) (0.002958)
           0            0.016545      0.001767      0.003173       0.004906
                        (0.001151) (0.001874) (0.003399) (0.002458)
        0                  0        0.018123 0.005011 0.003619
                                   (0.000818) (0.004116) (0.002703)
        0                  0          0         0.026596 0.006513
                                               (0.001811) (0.002158)
        0                  0          0           0        0.022410
                                                          (0.001939)
The estimate of the vecthr h':
      2.809936          2.674950      2.294778      2.656054       0.137049
     (1.502476) (1.237809) (1.128216) (1.282874) (1.276563)
(standard errors in parentheses)

                                    Test of CA11 Restrictions
lagrange multiplier test           statistic       43.015021
marginal   significance       level             0.001290        (19 d.f.)

                                                   37
                                             Table 5
                        CAH1 Estimation, Variance a Function of
                         Squared   Residuals froni     Oil Price ARIMA
                                          c +            +

                                                      P'P    +
                                                                 hh'x.
                             squared   residuals     from oil price ARIMA

              ***      Log   Likelihood                           1645.886909


The   estimate of the vector c'
           FR         GER              ITA            JAP            UK
         0.007924      0.006649     0.007915       0.008725        0.005302
        (0.014236) (0.014920) (0.011401) (0.015060) (0.010897)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
      —28.590147
      (36.423752)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
        0.031231     0.029080      0.020707      0.018182         0.014499
       (0.001860) (0.001971) (0.002482) (0.002438)               (0.00257 1)
           0       0.015867 0.002965 0.002615                     0.006072
                  (0.001043) (0.002033) (0.003054)               (0.002477)
          0          0        0.017710 0.001530                   0.001757
                             (0.000666) (0.004738)               (0.002904)
          0          0          0         0.026918                0. 005706
                                         (0.001623)              (0. 001911)
          0          0          0           0                     0. 026918
                                                                 (0.001616)
The estimate   of the vector h'
        0. 288975     0.1019411 0.315394 0.060141 0.285922
       (0.250094)    (0. 238875) (0.218500) (0.368671) (0.177539)
(standard   errors    in parentheses)

                                  Test of CAI'1 Restrictions
lagrange   multiplier test statistic =                53.858668
marginal   significance level                0.000035        (19 d.f.)


                                                38
                                        Table 6
                 CAITI Estimation, General Parameterizat ion of   Variance
                          as a Function of Macroeconomic Data
                                      c +        +

                                           0 P'P + Q'QXt




Square of Change in jg of U.S.        Ml
Log of likelihood  1649.718806
Chi—square     statistic
                     (10 d.f.)   4.187246
Marginal significance level :0.93850486



Square   of Change in jg of Price of Oil
Log of likelihood : 1645.836216
Chi—square     statistic
                     (10 d.f.)   2.009542
Marginal significance level :0.99626650


Square of Residual from U.S. Ml ARIMA
Log of likelihood       1643.892504
chi—square statistic (10 d.f) 2.019542
Marginal   significance    level :0.99618817



Square   of   Residual from Oil Price AR!MAL
Log of likelihood   1646.620739
Chi—square statistic (10 d.f.)   1.467660
Marginal significance level :0.99903254




                                           39
                                         Table 7
                            CAI Estimation, 5 Parameter ARCH
                                          c   +              +

                                                       P'P    +
                                                                  Ge'G

                ***    Log Likelihood                             : 1658.682319   ***


The estimate of the vector c'
            FRA          GEE            ITA             JAP            UK
      —0.006027 —0.007428 —0.004122 —0.004009 —0.006882
      (0.006596) (0.006869) (0.005514) (0.006892) (0.005812)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
     13.270001
    (15.036330)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
      0.030631        0.027416    0.021628         0.015429         0.015644
     (0.002278) (0.002153) (0.002339) (0.003147) (0.002867)
           0           0.015277   0.002311   0.002357   0.004313
                      (0.001201) (0.001541) (0.003246) (0.002660)
        0               0         0.015184 —0.000316 0.002262
                                 (0.000578) (0.003692) (0.003157)
        0               0           0              0.022775         0.005693
                                                  (0.001720)        (0.002368)
        0               0           0                  0             0.023374
                                                                    (0.001620)
The estimates of the diagonal elements of G:
      0.425252   0.384488   0.478617   0.642844   0.227064
     (0.103266) (0.106483) (0.082283) (0.103571) (0.116554)
(standard      errors in parentheses)

                                 Test of CAIN Restrictions
lagrange multiplier test       statistic                45.846083
marginal    significance level                0.000521            (19 d.f.)




                                                  40
                                                  Table 8
                               CA11   Estimation, 15 Parameter ARCH
                                      zt+1    C + PQtA.t +

                                                  0      p'p +
                ***     Log    Likelihood                         : 1680.349931

The   estimate of the vector c'
              FRA            GER            ITA           JAP           UK
         0.005302       0.004158        0.002732        0.005903      0.001906
        (0.005211) (0.004958) (0.004468) (0.004900) (0.003912)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
      —18.815029
       (9.366542)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
        0.030750       0.028908        0.023892       0.018148      0.016024
       (0.002431) (0.002272) (0.002072) (0.003315) (0.003051)
          0            0.015238 —0.001725             0.003238      0.004367
                      (0.001211)      (0.001288) (0.003848) (0.002422)
          0              0             0.007587 0.004764 0.007590
                                      (0.001389) (0.005438) (0.004048)
          0              0              0             0.025977      0.003559
                                                    (0.001905) (0.002234)
         0               0              0              0        0.020771
                                                               (0.001922)
The estimate of the syninetric matrix G:
       0.551903        0.018319 —0.334667             0.092724 —0.106092
      (0.133893)      (0.081518) (0.083272) (0.073811) (0.086655)
       0.018319        0.276057 —0.180710    0.053321   0.033104
                      (0.103955) (0.084837) (0.075722) (0.080986)
      —0.334667       —0.180710       0.689377 —0.322378            0.349194
                                      (0.122514) (0.083084) (0.095240)
       0.092724       0.053321 —0.322378              0.251767      0.321065
                                                    (0.154097) (0.130203)
      —0.106092       0.033104        0.349194       0.321065 —0.347991
                                                               (0.155485)
(standard     errors in parentheses)
                                   Test     of CABI   Restrictions
lagrange multiplier test statistic                       88.6136637
marginal significance level     0.000000                        (29 d. f.)
                                                   41
                                                   Table 9
               Measurement Error, Variance of Forecast Error a Function of
                                  Square of Change    in      Log   of   U.S. Ml
                                           c +             + e+1         +

                                     It(et+i)                 P'P +
                                                                         hh'x.
                                             vart(ut+i)        Q'Q
                              x     square of change in log of U.S. Ml

                 ***      Log     Likelihood                          : 1652.550603     ***

The    estimate of the vector c'
               FRA            GER            ITA              JAP               UK
          0.035629        0.035035      0.040648          0.033120 —0.005391
         (0.041356) (0.034263) (0.041738) (0.033050) (0.027549)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
      —825.095579
      (991.230505)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
         0.016300        0.005168      0.009236       0.005001 —0.002644
        (0.014090) (0.012205) (0.016772) (0.005378) (0.011199)
           0             0.011229      0.004178       0.006745               0.000330
                        (0.012680) (0.018539) (0.007675) (0.012587)
           0              0             0.014596 —0.003179 —0.004776
                                       (0.013975) (0.009402) (0.012804)
           0              0              0            0.006733               0.005633
                                                     (0.011472) (0.014762)
          0               0              0                0               0.000000
                                                                         (533.9825)
The estimate of the vector h'
        0.872287         1.333254      0.487075 —0.291049 —1.271120
        (0.584745) (0.521342) (0.598958) (0.366732) (0.365828)
The   estimate of'      theupper     triangular matrix Q:
        0.026724        0.028347       0.019949       0.018372 0.023666
        (0.009158) (0.009604) (0.010363) (0.006283) (0.013799)
          0             0.004564 —0.008531 —0.011976 —0.004068
                        (0.073867) (0.203270) (0.261557) (0.159312)
          0               0            0.005144 —0.014921                    0.010971
                                      (0.362406) (1.950776) (0.399700)
          0               0              0           —0.014441 —0.004597
                                                     (2.229423)          (2.374180)
          0               0              0                0              —0.000005
                                                                         (3045.827)
(standard      errors   in parentheses)

                                                     42
                                               Table 10
              Measurement   Error, Variance of Forecast Error a Function of
                          Square Residuals from Oil Price ARIMA
                                Z1    C+              +           +

                                                    P'P +         hh'x
                                         Vart(Ut+i) Q'Q
                     x      squared residuals from oil price ARIMA
              ***   Log Likelihood                             : 1651.080910   ***
The estimate of the vector C'
              FRA         GER            ITA             JAP          UK
         0.040010     0.043604       0.044028        0.032435 —0.011706
        (0.043150) (0.035958) (0.039476) (0.031975) (0.027287)
The estimate of the coefficient p:
  —3615.193209
  (7848.353986)
The   estimate of the upper triangular matrix P:
       0.012727     0.000795      0.003390        0.001432 —0.002299
       (0.014722) (0.003466) (0.006885) (0.001774) (0.004887)
          0          0.008435   0.003630   0.002548 —0.002014
                    (0.009878) (0.005947) (0.003732) (0.004835)
         0            0          0.007502 —0.001283 —0.002294
                                 (0.009197) (0.002988) (0.005944)
         0            0              0            0.004311   0.003621
                                                 (0.005121) (0.005422)
         0            0              0               0            —0.000000
                                                                  (556.1796)
The estimate of the vector h'
       0.077217 —0.116686        0.076154 —0.005022 —0.002702
      (0.083384) (0.146096) (0.113008) (0.044544) (0.088752)
The estimate of the upper triangular matrix Q:
       0.029282     0.031929     0.022481         0.018738         0.018558
      (0.006678) (0.006995) (0.003786) (0.004458) (0.007404)
         0        0.004618 —0.012402 —0.014263 0.001691
                 (0.063832) (0.223960) (0.255834) (0.087216)
         0          0        0.008931 —0.020890 0.001934
                            (0.323567) (1.478327) (0.106485)
         0          0          0       —0.004544 —0.021624
                                        (7.615409) (35.99457)
         0          0          0           0       —0.001627
                                                                  (478.4125)
(standard errors in parentheses)
                                                43
             Figure        IA:   Variances—France
     (0
Co
(Th0
E
     c
 C)
x0
1)
C
0
  0
0 O)
>
     0)73   74   75   76   77    78    79    80   81   82   83   84   85
                                      Year
          Figure         IB: Variances—Germany
     V)
     0
     (N
                                                 Conditional
     (0                                          Un condition a L
ci
(Th°
E
Xo
'—, 0
0
ci
0
>2
     0
     73   74   75   76    77   78    79    80   81      82          83   84   85
                                    Year
                Figure     IC:     Variances—Italy
     (N
      3
     (0
     (N
00(N
E
     LI)
x
     u)
Q)
U
C
C
—Th-
     H
     0
     N73   74   75   76   77     78    79    80   81   82   83   84   85
                                      Year
                    Figure     ID:   Variances—Japan
    (N
    0')
    03
                                                       Conditional
                                                       Un con   ition a L
0v
E
U
0
    b
               ft
0 (N
> (N(0
          73   74    75   76   77    78    79    80   81        82          83   84   85
                                          Year
847.2
         Variance
         923.6
                   (xl miHion)
                 1000.0   1076.4   1 152.8




  .I                                         (Q

  _______                                    CD




iiiiT
co ___                       II
     945.6
             Variance (xl million)
             1507.5 2069.5    2631.4   3193.4


                                                -n
                                            c1J
     C)'
                                                C
                                                -3
     O)                                         CD




-<                                              0)
(b
0    (0                                         -3
                                                0)
     cc
     0
                                                C)
     cc
                                                CD
                                                (0
                                                 I
     cc
     NJ                                         m
                                                -3
     cc                                         0)
                                                :3
                                                C-)
     cc                                         CD


     cc
     01
1067.9
         Variance1471.0
         1269.4
                   (xl miHion)
                           1672.5   1874.1




                                    I
                                             0)
631.4
         Variance2583.6
         1607.5
                   (xl miHion)
                          3559.8   4535.9




     >                                       m
                                            (0




cc:        .
                    •        •
           Figure        lID: Variances—Japan
    (N
    0)
    (N
    (0
E
U
0
0
> u)
    N
    073   74   75   76   77   78    79    80   81   82   83   84   85
                                   Year
     777.6
              Variance2134.2
              1455.9
                        (xl million)
                                2812.5   3490.8




-<
CD     _
       _____________
                                          I       2.
