                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        OWNERSHIP CONCENTRATION AND STRATEGIC SUPPLY REDUCTION

                                       Ulrich Doraszelski
                                           Katja Seim
                                       Michael Sinkinson
                                        Peichun Wang

                                      Working Paper 23034
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23034


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 2017, Revised May 2019




We thank Gabbie Nirenburg, Elizabeth Oppong, and Xuequan Peng for research assistance,
Gavin Burris and Hugh MacMullan for technical assistance, and the Penn Wharton Public Policy
Initiative and Dean's Research Funds for financial support. We have benefited from conversations
with participants at the NBER Market Design meetings and Searle Center Conference on
Antitrust Economics, as well as discussions with Eric Budish, Juan Escobar, Rob Gertner, Ali
Hortaçsu, Evan Kwerel, Jonathan Levy, Greg Lewis, Rakesh Vohra, Glen Weyl, and others.
Finally, we are grateful to a co-editor and three anonymous referees whose comments have
greatly helped to improve the paper. The opinions expressed in the paper are accordingly those of
the authors and do not represent the positions of the Federal Communications Commission, the
U.S. Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ulrich Doraszelski, Katja Seim, Michael Sinkinson, and Peichun Wang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ownership Concentration and Strategic Supply Reduction
Ulrich Doraszelski, Katja Seim, Michael Sinkinson, and Peichun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23034
January 2017, Revised May 2019
JEL No. L10

                                         ABSTRACT

We explore the implications of ownership concentration for the recently-concluded incentive
auction that re-purposed spectrum from broadcast TV to mobile broadband usage in the U.S. We
document significant multi-license ownership of TV stations. We show that in the reverse
auction, in which TV stations bid to relinquish their licenses, multi-license owners have an
incentive to withhold some TV stations to drive up prices for their remaining TV stations. Using a
large-scale valuation exercise, we find that this strategic supply reduction conservatively
increases payouts to TV stations by between 7.0% and 20.7%.


Ulrich Doraszelski                              Michael Sinkinson
The Wharton School                              Yale School of Management
University of Pennsylvania                      165 Whitney Ave, Suite 3473
3620 Locust Walk                                New Haven, CT 06511
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          and NBER
and NBER                                        michael.sinkinson@yale.edu
doraszelski@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                Peichun Wang
Katja Seim                                      Microsoft AI & Research
The Wharton School                              Building 112
University of Pennsylvania                      14865 NE 36th Street
1458 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall                    Redmond, WA 98052
3620 Locust Walk                                will.wang@microsoft.com
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
kseim@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
In 2010, the Federal Communications Commission (henceforth FCC) proposed to acquire spectrum
from broadcast TV license holders and sell it to wireless carriers to be re-purposed for mobile
broadband usage. The ensuing incentive auction is the most novel auction designed since the
inception of spectrum auctions in the U.S. in the 1990s. It combines a reverse auction, in which TV
stations bid to relinquish their licenses in exchange for payment, with a forward auction, in which
wireless carriers bid for spectrum. The incentive auction closed on March 30, 2017 and re-purposed
84 MHz of spectrum, with $19.6 billion raised from wireless carriers in the forward auction and
$10.1 billion paid to TV stations in the reverse auction.
    In this paper, we study the role of ownership concentration and strategic supply reduction in the
reverse auction. We document that following the announcement of the incentive auction, a number
of private equity firms acquired TV stations, often purchasing multiple TV stations in the same
local media market. Newspaper articles and industry reports claimed that these purchases were
undertaken with the goal of “flipping” the TV stations for profit in the reverse auction.1 Politicians
also raised concerns about speculation.2 We further document that despite the attention the private
equity firms received, they account for just a small fraction of the joint ownership of TV stations.
    We argue that besides any possible speculative motives, ownership concentration gives rise to
strategic bidding in the reverse auction. We show that owners of multiple TV stations have an
incentive to withhold some of their TV stations from the reverse auction, thereby driving up the
prices for the remaining TV stations they own. This strategy of reducing supply affects a large
transfer of wealth from the government—and ultimately taxpayers—to TV stations. In addition,
strategic supply reduction can potentially cause efficiency losses if it distorts the set of TV stations
that relinquish their licenses in the reverse auction, and it can reduce the amount of spectrum that
is re-purposed in the incentive auction.
    Re-purposing spectrum from broadcast TV to mobile broadband usage is no doubt an extremely
valuable and complex undertaking and the incentive auction was very carefully designed. The
reverse auction takes the form of a deferred-acceptance clock auction. The theoretical development
and analysis of the properties of this type of auction in Milgrom and Segal (2018) is underpinned by a
so-called “single-mindedness” assumption. If, counterfactually, all TV stations were independently
owned, then it would be a dominant strategy for each TV station to truthfully bid its value as a
broadcast business in the reverse auction; we refer to this as naive bidding.3 The single-mindedness
    1
      See “NRJ Wins Bidding For WSAH New York”, TVNewsCheck, November 29, 2011; “Small TV Stations Get
Hot”, The Wall Street Journal, September 3, 2012; “Speculators Betting Big on FCC TV Spectrum Auction”,
Current.org, February 26, 2013; “TV Spectrum Speculation Nears $345 Million”, TVNewsCheck, March 1, 2013;
“Broadcast Incentive Spectrum Auctions: Gauging Supply and Demand”, SNL Kagan Broadcast Investor, November
20, 2013; and “TV Station Spectrum Deals Expand Into Major Network Affiliates as Players Stake Out Positions
Pre-Auction”, SNL Kagan Broadcast Investor, December 4, 2013.
    2
      See “Rep. LoBiondo Seeks FCC Info On Possible Spectrum Speculation”, Broadcasting & Cable, February 12,
2014.
    3
      Under the single-mindedness assumption, deferred-acceptance clock auctions have many other desirable prop-
erties. Milgrom and Segal (2018) show that they are not only strategy proof but also weakly group-strategy proof,
meaning that no coalition of bidders has a joint deviation from truthful bidding that is strictly profitable for all


                                                         2
assumption thus rules out owners internalizing the benefits of multi-license ownership.
    Our paper points to unintended consequences of the multi-license ownership that is prevalent
in the data. In particular, the rules of the reverse auction leave room for strategic supply reduction
by multi-license owners. This behavior is purely rent-seeking, as these owners attempt to increase
their share of existing wealth without creating any new wealth. Consistent with a supply reduction
strategy, we document that the private equity firms sold 40% of the acquired TV stations in
the reverse auction, off-loading another 42% of the acquired TV stations soon after. While the
private equity firms made—typically substantial—profits on the TV stations they relinquished in
the reverse auction, they incurred losses on the TV stations they sold soon after.
    In a first step, we provide a model and a series of examples to illustrate how strategic supply
reduction works in the context of the reverse auction and under what circumstances it is a profitable
strategy for multi-license owners. Our model implies that certain types of TV stations are more
suitable for a supply reduction strategy. We document that the private equity firms acquired TV
stations that are broadly consistent with this implication.
    In a second step, we quantify the payout increases caused by strategic supply reduction. To do
so, we undertake a large-scale valuation exercise to estimate reservation values for all auction-eligible
TV stations. We combine various data sources to estimate a TV station’s cash flow and use it to
infer the station’s value as a going concern. With estimates in hand, we compare the outcome of the
reverse auction under strategic bidding when we account for the ownership pattern in the data and
allow multi-license owners to engage in strategic supply reduction with the outcome under naive
bidding. We enumerate all equilibria of a simplified version of the reverse auction that limits the
geographic scope of strategic bidding and accounts for the repacking process at the regional—but
not at the full national—level.
    We show that strategic supply reduction has a large impact on prices and payouts to TV
stations. For a clearing target of re-purposing 126 MHz of spectrum, the starting point of the
incentive auction when it commenced on March 29, 2016, strategic bidding by multi-license owners
increases nationwide payouts by 20.7%. For the 84 MHz clearing target that the incentive auction
ultimately reached, strategic bidding increases nationwide payouts by 7.0%. These increases partly
go to single-license owners, who as a group witness payout increases that are almost as large as
those seen by multi-license owners.
    We do not find a sizable distortion in the set of TV stations that relinquish their licenses in the
reverse auction. Hence, strategic supply reduction has limited efficiency implications in our setting.
A particularly striking result of our simulation exercise is that the outcome of the reverse auction is
sensitive to small changes in bidding behavior: withholding even a few TV stations suffices to give
rise to equilibria that have significantly higher payouts than those under naive bidding. Reaching
these equilibria may thus not require widespread coordination of expectations between multi-license
owners.

members of the coalition. In addition, deferred-acceptance clock auctions are nearly optimal and, assuming complete
information, equivalent to pay-as-bid auctions. Dütting, Gkatzelis and Roughgarden (2017) provide both positive
and negative results on the fraction of total surplus that can be guaranteed by deferred-acceptance auctions.


                                                        3
    Our paper may be viewed as measuring the importance of the single-mindedness assumption in
Milgrom and Segal (2018) in a setting that is of immediate public policy concern. More broadly,
however, we provide a framework for evaluating the design of the reverse auction. Our paper
differs from most of the empirical literature on auctions and market design by taking an ex ante
perspective, similar to recent papers on online dating (Hitsch, Hortacsu and Ariely, 2010) and course
allocation (Budish and Cantillon, 2012). The literature typically takes an ex post perspective and
uses realized outcomes combined with assumed equilibrium behavior to recover primitives such as
preferences. In contrast, we estimate reservation values from secondary, commercially available
data and take them as an input into simulating the reverse auction. One reason for relying on
secondary data is quite pragmatically that the FCC has not released – and is not planning to
release – data on participation and bids in the reverse auction.4 Another reason for adopting an
ex ante perspective is our hope that exercises similar to ours will prove useful in designing future
auctions in the U.S. and other countries as they strive to alleviate the “spectrum crunch” resulting
from the rapid growth in data usage by smartphones users in recent years.
    We illustrate the potential usefulness of our framework in two ways. First, we propose a simple
change in the auction rules and investigate how placing a restriction on the bids of multi-license
owners affects their ability to exploit the joint ownership of TV stations. We show that this rule
change mitigates the payout increase from strategic bidding by between 62% and 80%, depending
on the clearing target.
    Second, we investigate the consequences of a particular auction design choice that the FCC
made. A key aspect to the incentive auction is a repacking process that sits between the reverse
and the forward auctions. With it, the FCC reassigns all TV stations that opt to remain on the
air post auction to new channels in order to clear a contiguous, nationwide block of spectrum
for mobile broadband usage. In the repacking process, TV stations are not homogeneous for
geographic and technological reasons related to signal interference between nearby stations. The
FCC’s choice of allowable levels of interference between stations determines how easily TV stations
can be substituted for one another. Our simulation exercise traces out the relationship between
substitutability in the repacking process and payouts in the reverse auction. By exploring how
substitutability affects the scope for strategic bidding, our paper adds a new dimension to previous
studies of strategic supply reduction in multi-unit auctions with homogeneous products in wholesale
electricity markets (e.g., Wolfram, 1998, Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, 2002, Hortacsu and
Puller, 2008).
    We highlight unintended consequences of ownership concentration for the reverse auction and
thereby also contribute to the literature on distortions induced by incentive schemes and regu-
lation in various settings such as employee compensation (Oyer, 1998), environmental regulation
(Fowlie, 2009; Bushnell and Wolfram, 2012), health care (Duggan and Scott Morton, 2006), and tax

   4
     Even if more detailed data were available, the identification challenges discussed in Cantillon and Pesendorfer
(2007) may make it difficult to extend the standard first-order conditions approach to our setting. The moment-
inequalities approach in Fox and Bajari (2013) identifies relative valuations but not the levels that we require to
quantify the effects of ownership concentration.


                                                         4
avoidance (Goolsbee, 2000). Our paper builds on the theoretical literature on strategic bidding in
multi-unit auctions (Wilson, 1979; Back and Zender, 1993, 2001; Engelbrecht-Wiggans and Kahn,
1998; Ausubel et al., 2014) that we come back to in Section 3 after illustrating how strategic supply
reduction works in the reverse auction. It complements the experimental evidence for strategic
demand reduction (List and Lucking-Reiley, 2000; Kagel and Levin, 2001; Engelmann and Grimm,
2009; Goeree, Offerman and Sloof, 2013) and case studies of past spectrum auctions (Weber, 1997;
Cramton and Schwartz, 2002; Grimm, Riedel and Wolfstetter, 2003).
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background on the FCC
incentive auction. Section 3 provides a model of the reverse auction and strategic supply reduction.
Sections 4 and 5 present data and descriptive evidence in support of ownership concentration and
strategic supply reduction. Sections 6 and 7 describe the main analysis of the reverse auction and
results. Section 8 presents extensions and argues that the assumptions underlying our analysis tend
to be conservative. Section 9 concludes.


2       The FCC incentive auction
The rapid growth in data and video usage by smartphone users has significantly increased the
demand for mobile broadband spectrum.5 At the same time, some previously allocated spectrum
is no longer used intensively. Each of approximately 7,900 currently operating TV stations in the
U.S. holds a license to a 6 MHz block of spectrum in a particular geographical area dedicated to
over-the-air transmission of programming.6 Yet, as of 2010 only about 10% of TV households use
broadcast TV, with a rapidly declining trend.7
    In its 2010 National Broadband Plan, the FCC under then-chairman Julius Genachowski pro-
posed, and received authorization by Congress in 2012, to conduct an incentive auction to reallocate
spectrum from TV stations to wireless carriers. The incentive auction consists of a reverse auction,
in which TV stations bid to relinquish their licenses in exchange for payment, and a forward auction,
in which wireless carriers bid for the cleared spectrum. The reverse and forward auctions progress
in a series of stages that are linked through a clearing target until a final stage rule terminates the
incentive auction. The format of the incentive auction was publicly announced in June 2014.8
    The FCC has used auctions to award licenses for the commercial use of spectrum since 1993,
to exploit a market-based mechanism that relies on voluntary participation and is relatively robust
    5
      According to FCC then-chairman Tom Wheeler, “America has gone mobile. Most Americans would have a hard
time imagining life without their smartphones, and tens of millions are similarly in love with their tablets. The prob-
lem is that spectrum, the lifeblood of all wireless technologies, is finite. That wasn’t a problem before the mobile web,
when most consumers were mostly watching videos or surfing the web at home. If we don’t free up more airwaves for
mobile broadband, demand for spectrum will eventually exceed the supply. If you’ve ever been frustrated by websites
that loaded slowly or videos that wouldn’t download to your phone, you have a sense what that world could look like.”
See https://www.fcc.gov/news-events/blog/2014/02/11/channel-sharing-new-opportunity-broadcasters, ac-
cessed on November 15, 2015.
    6
      As of March 31, 2016. See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-338754A1.pdf, accessed
on March 28, 2018.
    7
      “Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan”, FCC, 2010, Chapter 5, p. 89.
    8
      See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-14-50A1.pdf, accessed on November 15, 2015.


                                                           5
to legal challenges.9,10 In contrast to bilateral negotiations or take-it-or-leave-it offers, auctions are
less time consuming and do not require the FCC to estimate participants’ valuations of spectrum.
The incentive auction was the first time the FCC combined an auction to sell spectrum with an
auction to buy spectrum from existing licensees.

Forward auction. The forward auction uses an ascending-clock format similar to previous spec-
trum auctions. The FCC accepted 62 qualified bidders into the forward auction. These wireless
carriers bid for one or more licenses to contiguous blocks of spectrum in geographic areas called
Partial Economic Areas (PEAs). There are 416 PEAs in the U.S.11

Reverse auction.           The reverse auction uses a descending-clock format that we describe in detail
in Section 3. The FCC declared 2,197 TV stations as eligible for the reverse auction, but revoked
the licenses to three stations prior to the auction, reducing the number of eligible stations to 2,194.12
These TV stations are classified by type of service into UHF stations that broadcast between channel
14 and 36 or between channel 38 and 51 and VHF stations that broadcast between channel 2 and
13. They can be further classified by type of use into commercial and non-commercial stations and
by power output into full-power stations (primary and satellite stations) and low-power class-A
stations.13 Appendix A.1 summarizes the types of TV stations.
    A TV station has several options to relinquish its license: going off the air, moving channels
from a higher frequency band (UHF channels 14-36 and 38-51 or high VHF channels 7-13) to a
lower frequency band (VHF channels 2-13 for UHF or low VHF channels 2-6 for high VHF) that
is less desirable for wireless carriers, or sharing a channel with another TV station.14 The auction
rules stipulate that the payout to a VHF station for going off the air and the payouts to a UHF or
a VHF station for moving bands are fixed fractions of the payout to a UHF station for going off

    9
       FCC then-chairman Tom Wheeler puts this as follows: “Let’s start with the concept of an incentive auction.
While it has never been tried before, its power lies in how it addresses the root of all issues: economics. If it is possible
to marry the economics of demand with the economics of current spectrum holders, it should be possible to allow
market forces to determine the highest and best use of spectrum. In mid-2015 we will run the first ever incentive
auction. Television broadcasters will have the opportunity to bid in a reverse auction to relinquish some or all of their
spectrum rights, and wireless providers will bid in a forward auction on nationwide, ’repacked’ spectrum suitable for
two-way wireless broadband services.” See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-326215A1.pdf,
accessed on November 15, 2015.
    10
       Theoretically, the FCC could institute a mandatory hand-over of licenses, but TV stations would have a strong
due process claim under the 5th Amendment’s takings clause.
    11
       See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-14-759A3.pdf and https://apps.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-14-759A4.pdf, accessed on August 3, 2017.
    12
       See http://wireless.fcc.gov/auctions/incentive-auctions/Reverse_Auction_Opening_Prices_111215.
xlsx, accessed on March 7, 2018. Prior to the reverse auction, the FCC revoked the licenses of UHF stations
KLHU-CD (facility ID 30932) and DWKOG-LP (facility ID 34894) and VHF station WDHS (facility ID 15498).
The FCC excludes approximately 5,500 low-power non-class-A and translator stations from the reverse auction.
    13
       A satellite station is a relay that repeats the broadcast TV signal of its parent primary station.
    14
       The FCC has piloted a channel-sharing arrangement in Los Angeles, CA, to show that it is technologically
feasible for one high-definition video stream and one or more standard-definition video streams to share 6 MHz of
spectrum. However, 6 MHz of spectrum may no longer suffice if a TV station eventually transitions from a high-
definition to a ultra-high-definition (4K) video stream. Hence, it is unclear how attractive this relinquishment option
is.


                                                             6
the air; hence, the auction rules recognize the latter as the primary relinquishment option.
   Its license entitles a TV station to broadcast a TV signal on a particular frequency from a
particular location with a particular power output; the station cannot, on its own, choose to re-
purpose its license for a new use such as wireless service. The FCC assigns each TV station to a
local media market called a designated market area (DMA). A DMA is defined by Nielsen Media
Research based on the reach and viewing patterns of TV stations as a group of counties such that
the home market TV stations hold a dominance of total hours viewed. There are 210 DMAs in the
U.S. that vary in size from New York, NY, with over 7 million TV households, to Glendive, MT,
with 4,230 TV households. Appendix A.2 lists the top ten DMAs based on their 2015 rank. The
210 DMAs do not map neatly into the 416 PEAs that are the relevant market area in the forward
auction. For example, the New York, NY, DMA consists of 32 counties in 6 states (CT, NJ, NY,
MA, PA, and RI) whereas the New York, NY, PEA consists of 42 counties in 4 states (CT, NJ,
NY, and PA).
   Because of this divergence in market areas and because the TV stations that opt to remain on
the air may currently be located on any UHF or VHF channel, the FCC undertakes a repacking
process in which it consolidates the remaining TV stations into the lower end of the UHF band
and into the VHF band. This creates a contiguous block of spectrum for mobile broadband usage
in the higher end of the UHF band in a process that is visually similar to defragmenting a hard
drive on a personal computer. However, it is far more complex because many pairs of TV stations,
even if located in different DMAs, cannot be assigned to the same or immediately adjacent channels
without causing unacceptable levels of interference. Several factors influence interference, including
geography and the height and power output of the broadcast tower. These interference constraints
have two consequences. First, the repacking process ties together all DMAs and effectively takes
place at the national level. Second, accommodating K remaining TV stations in a DMA typically
requires far more than 6K MHz of spectrum. Throughout the remainder of the paper, we discuss
how the auction design accommodates the interference constraints and highlight the role they play
in the outcome of the reverse auction.

Clearing target and final stage rule.         The auction rules integrate the reverse and forward
auctions in a series of stages. The FCC sets an initial target for the amount of spectrum to clear
and make available to wireless carriers. It then first runs the reverse auction to determine the
payouts required to induce a set of TV stations to relinquish their licenses so that the clearing
target can be met after repacking any TV stations that opt to remain on the air. Given the
interference constraints on the repacking process, there are many different sets of TV stations that
can relinquish their licenses to meet a particular clearing target; as a consequence, the FCC’s
“demand” for any particular TV station remains elastic.
   The FCC next runs the forward auction to determine the willingness-to-pay of wireless carriers
for the cleared spectrum. If the payouts demanded by TV stations in the reverse auction exceed
the willingness-to-pay in the forward auction, then the FCC reduces the clearing target, requiring


                                                  7
fewer TV stations to relinquish their licenses in the next stage of the incentive auction. The FCC
repeats this process until proceeds in the forward auction more than cover payouts in the reverse
auction and a final stage rule is met.15

Timeline and outcome.             Technological and legal challenges resulted in several delays to the
incentive auction from original projections for early 2014 to the ultimate starting date of March
29, 2016.16 The first public version of this research paper appeared in April of 2016, before any
results of the actual auction were available.
    The FCC set the initial clearing target to 126 MHz in stage 1 of the auction. TV stations
demanded payouts of $86.4 billion in the reverse auction for relinquishing the licenses required to
meet this clearing target, whereas wireless carriers offered only $23.1 billion for the cleared spectrum
in the forward auction.
    In stage 2, the FCC reduced the clearing target to 114 MHz, with bidding commencing on
September 13, 2016. TV stations demanded $54.6 billion whereas wireless carriers offered $21.5
billion. In stage 3, the FCC reduced the clearing target to 108 MHz, with bidding commencing
on November 1, 2016. TV stations demanded $40.3 billion whereas wireless carriers offered $19.7
billion.
    In stage 4, the FCC reduced the clearing target to 84 MHz. Bidding in the reverse auction
commenced on December 13, 2016 and bidding in the forward auction closed on March 30, 2017.
The forward auction raised $19.6 billion in proceeds, covering payouts of $10.1 billion in the reverse
auction and leaving proceeds of more than $7 billion for the U.S. Treasury. The fact that the FCC
had to reduce the clearing target from 126 MHz to 84 MHz to trigger the final stage rule is widely
attributed to unexpectedly weak demand for spectrum by wireless carriers in the forward auction.17
At the time of this writing, the FCC has begun reassigning channels to the TV stations that opted
to remain on the air; this process is expected to extend into the middle of 2020.
    In the forward auction, 50 out of 62 qualified bidders acquired a total of 2,776 licenses to mobile
broadband spectrum. In the reverse auction, 175 out of 2,194 TV stations relinquished their licenses
in some form: 141 UHF stations and 4 VHF stations went off the air and a further 29 UHF stations
and 1 VHF station moved bands.18 The FCC has released the identity of and payouts to these TV
stations.19 To protect the confidentiality of individual broadcasters, the FCC has not released data

   15
      Specifically, the final stage rule requires that proceeds in the forward auction are at least $1.25 per MHz per
population (henceforth, MHz-pop) for the largest 40 PEAs and not only cover payouts in the reverse auction, but
also the reimbursements of channel relocation expenses incurred by TV stations in the repacking process, the FCC’s
administrative expenses for the incentive auction, and the funding of the First Responder Network Authority’s public
safety operations.
   16
      See https://www.fcc.gov/news-events/blog/2013/12/06/path-successful-incentive-auction-0, accessed
on November 15, 2015, and “F.C.C. Delays Auction of TV Airways for Mobile”, Edward Wyatt, The New York Times,
October 24, 2014. See also http://www.shure.com/americas/incentive-auction-resource-center, accessed on
March 7, 2018.
   17
      See “FCC Airwaves Auction Cools for Broadcasters”, Thomas Gryta and Joe Flint, The Wall Street Journal,
January 19, 2017.
   18
      See https://auctiondata.fcc.gov/public/projects/1000, accessed on March 7, 2018.
   19
      See https://auctiondata.fcc.gov/public/projects/1000/reports/reverse-winning_bids, accessed on


                                                         8
on participation or bids in the reverse auction and has not made any public plans to do so in the
future.20 We further report on the available data in Sections 5 and 7.


3     A model of the reverse auction
We illustrate the potential for strategic supply reduction in a model of the reverse auction. The
reverse auction is a deferred-acceptance clock auction. Our formalization of it draws on Appendix
D of FCC Public Notice 14-191 and Milgrom and Segal (2018).21,22 We leverage that the auction
design limits interactions between the reverse and forward auctions and take the clearing target as
given in our analysis. We follow Milgrom and Segal (2018) and focus on going off the air as the
primary relinquishment option; as shown in Kazumori (2016), modeling channel sharing or band
switching is a nontrivial undertaking.
    There are N stations that participate in the reverse auction. Let vj > 0 denote the reservation
value of TV station j that captures its value as a going concern. The reverse auction progresses in
rounds. Let Pτ ≥ 0 denote the base clock price in round τ . The base clock price decreases over the
course of the reverse auction and maps into a “personalized” price ϕj Pτ for TV station j through
its broadcast volume, defined as

                                  p
                        ϕj = M     Interf erenceF reeP opj · Interf erenceCountj .                               (1)

The FCC uses the broadcast volume to incentivize those TV stations to relinquish their licenses
that are particularly valuable as broadcast businesses or particularly difficult to assign channels
if they opt to remain on the air. The former is proxied for by the interference free population
Interf erenceF reeP opj , a measure of the population served by TV station j. The latter is proxied
for by the interference count Interf erenceCountj that is derived from the number of interference
constraints involving TV station j that the repacking process has to respect.23 Finally, the FCC
sets the scale factor M = 17.253 so that maxj∈{1,...,N } ϕj = 1, 000, 000.
    Given its personalized price ϕj Pτ in round τ , TV station j may withdraw from the reverse
auction and require a channel assignment to remain on the air. The FCC, by law, has to be able
to assign a channel to any TV station that withdraws from the reverse auction at any point. The
auction design integrates a piece of software, the feasibility checker SAT F C (Frechette, Newman
and Leyton-Brown, 2016), to ensure this is always the case. The feasibility checker SAT F C defines
an indicator function S(X, R) that equals one if a set of TV stations X ⊆ {1, . . . , N } can be
repacked into a set of available channels R and zero otherwise.24 To simplify the notation, we

March 7, 2018.
   20
      See https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-15-78A1.pdf, accessed on March 7, 2018.
   21
      See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-14-191A1.pdf, accessed on March 10, 2016.
   22
      See Bikhchandani et al. (2011) for earlier work on deferred-acceptance auctions. Bikhchandani et al. (2011), in
turn, build on the idea in Ausubel (2004; 2006) of making partial, irrevocable allocations as the auction progresses.
   23
      See Section 2.2 of Appendix D of FCC Public Notice 14-191 and footnote 2 of http://wireless.fcc.gov/
auctions/incentive-auctions/Reverse_Auction_Opening_Prices_111215.xlsx, accessed on March 7, 2018.
   24
      The feasibility checker SAT F C returns SAT to indicate that the set of TV stations X can be repacked into


                                                         9
suppress that S(X, R) depends on a set of interference constraints that codifies the pairs of TV
stations that cannot be located on the same or immediately adjacent channels. We further suppress
that R depends on the given clearing target; intuitively, R is smaller for a larger clearing target.
    The reverse auction defines an extensive-form game. In round τ ≥ 1, the set of TV stations
{1, . . . , N } is partitioned into a set of “active” TV stations Aτ , a set of “inactive” TV stations Iτ ,
and a set of “frozen” (or “conditionally winning”) TV stations Fτ . In round 1, the base clock price
is initialized as P1 = 900 and all TV stations as active, i.e., A1 = {1, . . . , N }, I1 = ∅, and F1 = ∅.
    In round τ ≥ 1, given its personalized price ϕj Pτ , active TV station j ∈ Aτ may withdraw from
the reverse auction and collect the payout P Oj = 0. Let Yτ be the set of active TV stations that
withdraw from the reverse auction in round τ . In round τ + 1, the set of inactive TV stations is
thus Iτ +1 = Iτ ∪ Yτ ; these are all TV stations that have previously withdrawn and require channel
assignments. For ease of exposition, we assume that at most one active TV station withdraws in
round τ > 1 but allow any number of stations to withdraw in round 1.25,26 The FCC then checks if
it can guarantee a channel for each remaining active TV station j 0 ∈ Aτ \ Yτ in round τ + 1. If, as
a consequence of TV station j withdrawing, the FCC cannot guarantee a channel for TV station
j 0 , then that TV station is frozen and collects the payout P Oj 0 = ϕj 0 Pτ in return for relinquishing
its license. Let Zτ = {j 0 ∈ Aτ \ Yτ |S(Iτ +1 ∪ {j 0 }, R) = 0} be the set of active TV stations that are
newly frozen in round τ because they cannot be repacked in addition to the TV stations that have
previously withdrawn.
    The next round τ + 1 sets a lower base clock price Pτ +1 and updates the set of frozen stations
to Fτ +1 = Fτ ∪ Zτ and the set of active stations to Aτ +1 = Aτ \ (Yτ ∪ Zτ ). The reverse auction
continues in this way as long as an active TV station remains and the base clock price is above its
lower bound of zero. If Aτ +1 = ∅ or Pτ +1 = 0, then the reverse auction concludes after round τ .27
    To complete the description of the extensive-form game, we specify the information sets of the
TV stations. The FCC computes and publishes the broadcast volume of all TV stations before the
start of the reverse auction. During the course of the reverse auction, the FCC releases minimal
information to and forbids communication between TV stations.28 Because a TV station observes
solely its personalized price but not the decisions of other TV stations, we assume that a strategy

the set of available channels R, U N SAT to indicates that it cannot, and T IM EOU T to indicate that it has not
succeeded in ascertaining feasibility in a pre-allotted amount of time. The FCC interprets T IM EOU T as U N SAT .
   25
      In practice, the FCC uses a random tie-breaking rule that entails our assumption that at most one active TV
station withdraws in round τ > 1 (FCC Public Notice 15-78, p. 63).
   26
      If in round 1 the TV stations that withdraw from the reverse auction cannot be repacked, then the reverse
auction fails at the outset and the payouts to all TV stations are zero.
   27
      At the conclusion of the reverse auction, we assume that any remaining active TV station j ∈ Aτ +1 is frozen at
the base clock price Pτ +1 = 0.
   28
      To be precise, in round τ of the reverse auction the FCC shows TV station j its personalized price ϕj Pτ and
which of the three intervals [0.5, 3), [3, 6], or (6, |R|] its vacancy index belongs to. The vacancy index of TV station
j in round τ is defined as                         P
                                                       k∈Gjτ ϕk max{0.5, Hkτ }/|R|
                                         V Ijτ =               P                   ,
                                                                 k∈Gjτ ϕk

where Hkτ is the total number of feasible channels for TV station k in round τ and Gjτ is the set of TV stations
that have not been repacked in round τ but interfere with TV station j.


                                                          10
for a TV station simply specifies a critical value for the base clock price above which the TV station
continues in the reverse auction and at or below which the TV station opts to remain on the air.29
In the subsequent analysis we refer to this critical value as the “bid” bj ≥ 0 of TV station j.
    Depending on whether a TV station knows the reservation values of other TV stations or not,
the game is one of complete or incomplete information. We distinguish these cases in our subsequent
analysis as needed, but do not assume that the FCC knows the reservation values of the TV stations
in either case.

3.1     Strategic supply reduction, overbidding, and underbidding
In analyzing deferred-acceptance clock auctions, Milgrom and Segal (2018) assume that bidders
are “single-minded.” This, in particular, requires that a bidder has a single object for sale. Under
this single-mindedness assumption, it is easy to see that truthful bidding is a dominant strategy
in the sense of Li (2017) or “always optimal” in the sense of Milgrom (2004, p. 50), irrespective
of whether the game is one of complete or incomplete information. In the context of the reverse
auction, this means that an independently owned TV station withdraws from the reverse auction
once its personalized price ϕj Pτ falls to its value as a going concern vj , or ϕj Pτ = vj . We henceforth
                                               vj                                        vj
refer to this strategy of bidding bj =         ϕj   as naive bidding and to sj =         ϕj   as the “score” of TV
station j.
    We use a series of examples to illustrate two points. First, we show that a firm owning multiple
TV stations may have an incentive to deviate from naive bidding. Second, we illustrate the potential
for multiple equilibria, not just in settings where bidders are single-minded, but also in settings with
jointly owned TV stations. We begin with a first example that results in strategic supply reduction
and overbidding bj > sj , before turning to a second example that illustrates underbidding bj < sj .
For simplicity, we proceed in a game of complete information.


              Table 1: Example 1: Strategic supply reduction and overbidding

                      Station ID      Firm ID       Reservation      Broadcast          Score
                                                                                            v
                          (j)                        value (vj )    volume (ϕj )      (sj = ϕjj )
                           2              2             500              1               500
                           3              1             300              1               300
                           1              1             100              1               100

Example 1: Strategic supply reduction and overbidding.                             There are N = 3 TV stations
with the reservation values and broadcast volumes given in Table 1. TV stations 1 and 3 are owned
by firm 1 and TV station 2 is owned by firm 2. The set of available channels R and the interference
constraints are such that the FCC can repack just one of the three TV stations, i.e.,

   29
     In doing so, we follow a long tradition in the auction literature of omitting the possibility that the participants
learn something during the course of an auction that may cause them to revise their critical values (Milgrom, 2004,
p. 187).


                                                          11
                                          (
                                              1 if            X = ∅, {1}, {2}, {3},
                           S(X, R) =                                                                                       (2)
                                              0 if X = {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}.

    Under naive bidding, bj = sj for all j ∈ {1, 2, 3} and TV station 2 is first to withdraw from the
reverse auction at a base clock price of Pτ = 500. As a consequence of TV station 2 requiring a
channel assignment to remain on the air, TV stations 1 and 3 can no longer be repacked and are
frozen, collecting payouts P O1 = P O3 = 500. The reverse auction concludes and firm 1’s profit
from the reverse auction is 500 − 100 + 500 − 300 = 600. Firm 2’s profit is 0 as TV station 2 remains
a going concern.
    However, naive bidding is not an equilibrium as firm 1 has an incentive to deviate. In particular,
if instead b1 = s1 and b3 = 900, then firm 1 effectively withholds TV station 3 from the reverse
auction at the initial base clock price of P1 = 900. As a consequence, TV stations 1 and 2
can no longer be repacked and are frozen, collecting payouts P O1 = P O2 = 900. The reverse
auction concludes and firm 1’s profit from the reverse auction is 900 − 100 = 800. By strategically
reducing supply, firm 1’s profit increases from 600 to 800. Firm 2’s profit also increases from 0 to
900 − 500 = 400. Indeed, it is easy to see that b1 = s1 , b2 = s2 , and b3 = 900 is an equilibrium.
Note that in this equilibrium two TV stations relinquish their licenses, just as under naive bidding.
Yet, strategic supply reduction increases payouts to TV stations from 1, 000 to 1, 800. Further
note that truthful bidding remains a dominant strategy for firm 2 even though firm 1 engages in
strategic supply reduction by withholding one of its TV stations from the reverse auction.30
    The literature has widely recognized the potential for strategic supply reduction in buying in-
stead of selling auctions involving multiple objects, starting with Wilson (1979). Back and Zender
(1993; 2001) and Engelbrecht-Wiggans and Kahn (1998) subsequently establish strategic demand
reduction in static auctions. In dynamic auctions, strategic demand reduction is shown in Menezes
(1996), Brusco and Lopomo (2002), Engelbrecht-Wiggans and Kahn (2005), and Riedel and Wolf-
stetter (2006). This literature culminates in Ausubel et al. (2014), who under fairly general con-
ditions show strategic demand reduction in static auctions, and whose arguments largely extend
to dynamic auctions. Our setting differs from this earlier literature that focused on homogeneous
products in that the interference constraints on the repacking process effectively render TV stations
differentiated products. We revisit this point in Section 7.4.
    A generalization of this example illustrates when strategic supply reduction is profitable for a
firm owning multiple TV stations. Consider arbitrary reservation values and broadcast volumes
                                                                vj
such that max {s1 , s3 } < s2 < 900, where sj =                 ϕj   is the score of TV station j. Note that TV
    30
       To show that the profit πj (bj , b−j ) of an independently owned TV station j under the truthful bid bj = sj is at
least as large as that under any alternative bid b̃j 6= sj irrespective of the vector b−j of bids of the other TV stations,
we proceed case by case. Suppose first that bids (sj , b−j ) leave TV station j on the air so that πj (sj , b−j ) = 0. Then
any b̃j < sj either continues to yield πj (b̃j , b−j ) = 0 or freezes TV station j at a base clock price below sj , yielding
πj (b̃j , b−j ) < 0. Moreover, any b̃j > sj continues to yield πj (b̃j , b−j ) = 0. Next suppose that bids (sj , b−j ) freeze
TV station j so that πj (sj , b−j ) > 0. Then any b̃j < sj freezes TV station j at the same base clock price as sj
and thus continues to yield πj (b̃j , b−j ) = πj (sj , b−j ). Moreover, any b̃j > sj either freezes TV station j at the same
base clock price as sj and thus continues to yield πj (b̃j , b−j ) = πj (sj , b−j ) or leaves TV station j on the air, yielding
πj (b̃j , b−j ) = 0.


                                                              12
stations 1 and 3 continue to be frozen at a base clock price of s2 under naive bidding. Firm 1’s
profit under naive bidding is s2 (ϕ1 + ϕ3 ) − (v1 + v3 ) whereas its profit from withholding TV station
3 from the reverse auction now is 900ϕ1 − v1 . Strategic supply reduction is more profitable than
naive bidding if
                                         (900 − s2 )ϕ1 > s2 ϕ3 − v3 .

On the right-hand side is the forgone profit from withholding TV station 3. On the left-hand side
is the additional profit consisting of the increase in the base clock price from s2 to 900, “magnified”
by the broadcast volume of TV station 1. Withholding TV station 3 is thus more likely to be
profitable if it has a low broadcast volume and a high reservation value and TV station 1 has a high
broadcast volume. Furthermore, it is more profitable for firm 1 to withhold TV station 3 rather
than TV station 1 from the reverse auction if

                                          900(ϕ1 − ϕ3 ) > v1 − v3 .

This again is more likely to be satisfied if TV station 3 has a low broadcast volume and a high
reservation value and TV station 1 has a high broadcast volume and a low reservation value. In
short, strategic supply reduction is more likely to be profitable if the “leverage” from increasing
the base clock price is large and the opportunity cost of continuing to operate the withheld TV
station is small.


                                 Table 2: Example 2: Underbidding

                    Station ID    Firm ID      Reservation     Broadcast       Score
                                                                                   v
                        (j)                     value (vj )   volume (ϕj )   (sj = ϕjj )
                                                                      1
                         3           1              100               3         300
                         2           2             1000               5         200
                         1           1              100               1         100


Example 2: Underbidding. Our next example shows that a firm owning multiple TV stations
may also engage in underbidding. There are N = 3 TV stations with reservation values and
broadcast volumes given in Table 2. We now allow the broadcast volume to vary across stations;
consequently, the payout to a TV station is the base clock price at the time of its freeze scaled by
its broadcast volume. As in Example 1, TV stations 1 and 3 are owned by firm 1 and TV station 2
is owned by firm 2. The set R of available channels and the interference constraints are now such
that the FCC can repack either just one of the TV stations or TV stations 1 and 3 together, i.e.,
                                      (
                                           1 if X = ∅, {1}, {2}, {3}, {1, 3},
                          S(X, R) =                                                                (3)
                                           0 if X = {1, 2}, {2, 3}, {1, 2, 3}.

   Under naive bidding, bj = sj for all j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. TV station 3 is first to withdraw from the
reverse auction at a base clock price of Pτ = 300. As a consequence, TV station 2 can no longer be


                                                     13
repacked and is frozen, collecting payout P O2 = 5 · 300 = 1500. TV station 1 is next to withdraw
at a base clock price of Pτ 0 = 100. The reverse auction concludes and firm 1’s profit is 0 as TV
stations 1 and 3 remain going concerns. Firm 2’s profit is 1500 − 1000 = 500.
    However, naive bidding is no longer an equilibrium as firm 1 has an incentive to deviate. In
particular, if instead b1 = s1 and b3 = 0, then TV station 2 is first to withdraw from the reverse
auction at a base clock price of Pτ = 200. As a consequence, TV stations 1 and 3 can no longer
                                                                                          200
be repacked and are frozen, collecting payouts P O1 = 200 and P O3 =                       3 .   The reverse auction
                                                      200             200
concludes and firm 1’s profit is 200 − 100 +           3    − 100 =    3 .   It is easy to see that b1 = s1 , b2 = s2 ,
                                                                                                     200
and b3 = 0 is an equilibrium. By underbidding, firm 1’s profit increases from 0 to                    3 .   In contrast,
firm 2’s profit decreases from 500 to 0.

Multiple equilibria. In illustrating the potential for multiple equilibria, we contrast the single-
mindedness assumption of Milgrom and Segal (2018) that rules out jointly owned TV stations, with
the case of jointly owned TV stations as we observe in the data. For brevity, we focus on Example
1. In Online Appendix A.5, we show that there also are multiple equilibria in Example 2.
    If we impose the single-mindedness assumption on Example 1 as though all TV stations were
independently owned, then the set of equilibria is

                            (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≥ 500, b2 ≤ 100, b3 ≤ 100
                           

                          ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≤ 300, b2 ≤ 300, b3 ≥ 500
                            

                        ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | max {b1 , b3 } < b2 , 300 ≤ b2 ≤ 500
                         

                          ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | max {b1 , b3 } ≤ 500, b2 > 500
                           

                          ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≥ 900, b2 ≥ 900, b3 ≥ 900 .
                           
                                                                                                                      (4)

The auction rules thus admit a wide range of behaviors and outcomes, although a range of behaviors
may result in identical outcomes in terms of payouts to each license.31 Focusing on truthful bidding
as a dominant strategy amounts to singling out a particular equilibrium.
    Recognizing that TV stations 1 and 3 are jointly owned, the set of equilibria in Example 1 is

                             (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 < 900, b2 ≤ 600, b3 ≥ 900
                            

                           ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≤ 500, b2 ≥ 600, b3 ≤ 500 .
                            
                                                                                                                      (5)

The fact that truthful bidding is no longer an equilibrium complicates analyzing the reverse auction.

   31
     The equilibria in the first four lines of equation (4), as well as those in the second line of equation (5), have the
property that the TV station with the high bid is indifferent across a range of bids although its bid determines the
payouts to the other TV stations. In this regard, these equilibria are reminiscent of the analysis of the combinatorial
clock auction in Levin and Skrzypacz (2016). The combinatorial clock auction has been used to award spectrum
in other countries. It combines an initial ascending clock phase during which participants state their demands in
response to the current price with a final sealed package bidding phase and links the two phases by activity rules. In
our model there is no analog to the predatory equilibria in Levin and Skrzypacz (2016) as these rely on the two-stage
nature of the combinatorial clock auction.


                                                            14
While focusing on truthful bidding as a dominant strategy for the independently owned TV station
2 shrinks the set of equilibria, it does not lead to a unique equilibrium. At the same time, the
auction rules admit a rich set of behaviors by firms owning multiple TV stations, most notably
including strategic supply reduction. Strategic supply reduction is an extreme form of overbidding
in that a firm owning multiple TV stations withholds one or more of them from the reverse auction.
There are other equilibria that entail milder forms of overbidding.
    Given the large number of participating TV stations and the complex ownership patterns and
interference constraints in the actual reverse auction, our subsequent analysis proceeds with a game
of complete information and restricts the strategy space of firms owning multiple TV stations.
Section 3.2 motivates this restriction and Section 3.3 develops the game of incomplete information
as a robustness check.

3.2     Further analysis: Complete information
We follow Milgrom and Segal (2018) by focusing on truthful bidding as a dominant strategy for an
independently owned TV station. We restrict the strategy space for a jointly owned TV station
to extreme overbidding, extreme underbidding, and truthful bidding. The strategy space of TV
station j is thus bj = sj if it is independently owned and bj ∈ {0, sj , 900} if it is jointly owned. We
argue below that this restriction on jointly owned TV stations is not overly arduous.
    We partition the vector b = (b1 , . . . , bN ) as (bj , b−j ), where bj is the bid for TV station j and
b−j is the vector of bids of the other TV stations. In the interest of simplicity, we assume that
different TV stations have different bids, i.e., bj 6= bk for all j 6= k, except that we allow multiple
TV stations to bid 0 or 900. Let πi (b) be firm i’s profit from the reverse auction. Denoting as
Ji ⊆ {1, . . . , N } the set of TV stations owned by firm i and as F ∗ ⊆ {1, ..., N } the set of frozen TV
stations at the conclusion of the reverse auction, we have
                                                         X
                                          πi (b) =                   P Oj (b) − vj ,
                                                     j∈Ji ∩F ∗ (b)


where our notation emphasizes that the payout P Oj to TV station j as well as the set of frozen
TV stations F ∗ depend on the vector of bids b.
    We motivate the restriction to bj ∈ {0, sj , 900} for a jointly owned TV station j with two
propositions. Proposition 1 tackles the case of overbidding:

Proposition 1. Suppose firm i owns multiple TV stations including TV station j, i.e., |Ji | > 1
and j ∈ Ji . Consider a vector of bids b with sj < bj < 900. If S(Y1 (b) ∪ {j}, R) = 1 and
πi (bj , b−j ) > πi (sj , b−j ), then πi (900, b−j ) ≥ πi (bj , b−j ).

    Proposition 1 assumes that it is feasible to repack TV station j in addition to any TV stations
that withdraw in round 1 of the reverse auction. It states that if a firm owning multiple TV stations
finds it more profitable to overbid bj > sj than to truthfully bid bj = sj , then the firm may as well
bid bj = 900 and withhold TV station j from the reverse auction. In this sense, restricting the

                                                             15
strategy space of the jointly owned TV station j from bj ∈ [sj , 900] to bj ∈ {sj , 900} does not make
the firm worse off. Moreover, it is easy to construct specific situations where extreme overbidding
bj = 900 ensures a strictly higher profit.
    Proposition 1 is best thought of as characterizing the best reply of firm i and differs from
the standard notion of weak dominance. While eliminating strictly (but not weakly) dominated
strategies is innocuous and does not affect the set of equilibria, the restriction to bj ∈ {0, sj , 900}
for a jointly owned TV station j may well do so (see the examples in Section 3.1). Alas, a stronger
result than Proposition 1 has eluded us. We note that the notion of dominance in Milgrom and
Segal (2018) is also weaker than strict dominance.
    Proposition 2 tackles the case of underbidding and parallels Proposition 1:

Proposition 2. Suppose firm i owns multiple TV stations including TV station j, i.e., |Ji | > 1
and j ∈ Ji . Consider a vector of bids b with 0 < bj < sj . If πi (bj , b−j ) > πi (sj , b−j ), then
πi (0, b−j ) ≥ πi (bj , b−j ).

    We prove Propositions 1 and 2 in Appendix B.

3.3     Further analysis: Incomplete information
It is well known that analyzing auctions involving multiple objects under the assumption of in-
complete information is difficult (see Chapters 5 and 6 of Milgrom (2004) and Part II, especially
Chapter 18, of Krishna (2010)). To make some headway, we recast Example 1 in Section 3.1 as
a game of incomplete information. We assume that the reservation value vj of TV station j is
privately known to its owner and specify another firm’s belief about the reservation value of TV
station j to be ṽj ∼ N (vj , σ 2 ), independent across TV stations.
    The game of incomplete information gives rise to bidding functions, rather than bids, that
depend on beliefs. As beliefs depend on σ, note that as σ goes to zero, beliefs collapse to the true
reservation values. In this way, we are able to ascertain the relationship between bidding functions
under the game of incomplete information and bids under the game of complete information. Let
b1 (v1 , v3 , σ) ≥ 0 and b3 (v1 , v3 , σ) ≥ 0 be the bidding functions of TV stations 1 and 3 that are
owned by firm 1 and b2 (v2 , σ) ≥ 0 the bidding function of TV station 2 that is owned by firm 2. In
Online Appendix B, we characterize the bidding functions as σ → 0+ . In the game of incomplete
information, we show that firm 1 always bids b1 < b3 . Its expected profit depends solely on b3
and, as σ → 0+ , closely resembles its profit under complete information. Moreover, for a wide
range of values of σ, b3 (100, 300, σ) is arbitrarily close to (but different from) b3 = 900 in the
game of complete information. Close to extreme overbidding thus arises in the game of incomplete
information. In a variant of Example 1, we also show that close to extreme overbidding arises in
the game of incomplete information when σ is large. In contrast, extreme overbidding does not
arise in the game of complete information. These results suggest that our notion of strategic supply
reduction in settings with jointly owned TV stations extends beyond complete information.



                                                   16
     While strategic supply reduction is part and parcel of the reverse auction, even our simple exam-
ples point to multiple equilibria and behavior within equilibria that depends critically on reservation
values, broadcast volumes, and interference constraints. It is therefore difficult to arrive at general
predictions about the outcome of the reverse auction and how that outcome differs between strate-
gic bidding under the actual ownership pattern and truthful bidding under the counterfactual of
independent ownership. In the subsequent analysis, we therefore combine estimated reservation
values with simulation techniques to assess the impact of ownership concentration on the reverse
auction.


4        Data sources
We first describe the various data sources we combine to estimate the reservation values of the TV
stations participating in the reverse auction and to determine their ownership structure. Then we
turn to the interference constraints on the repacking process. Finally, we describe some auxiliary
data sources. We provide further details on the data sources in Appendix A.
     From hereon, we restrict attention to TV stations located in the U.S. excluding Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands. Out of the 2,194 TV stations that the FCC has declared as eligible for the
reverse auction, 44 are located in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.32 This leaves us with 2,150
eligible TV stations.

4.1      Reservation values and ownership structure
To infer the reservation value of a TV station in the reverse auction, we use the MEDIA Access Pro
Database from 2003 to 2013 and for 2015 from BIA Kelsey (henceforth BIA) and the Television
Financial Report from 2003 to 2012 from the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB). We
model and estimate the components of the cash flow of a TV station, focusing on advertising and
non-broadcast revenue and fixed cost, as detailed in Section 6.1. BIA contains the universe of TV
stations. It provides station, owner, and market characteristics, as well as transaction histories
covering the eight most recent changes in the ownership of a TV station.
     The revenue measure in the BIA data covers revenue related to broadcasting in the form of
local, regional, and national advertising revenue, commissions, and network compensation, and we
refer to it as advertising revenue in what follows. For commercial stations, advertising revenue
is missing for 28.3% of station-year observations, and we impute it as detailed in Appendix A.3.
For non-commercial stations, including dark stations, advertising revenue is missing for 93.5% of
station-year observations, and we do not impute it. We return to the distinction between commercial
and non-commercial stations in Section 6.1.
     The BIA data excludes non-broadcast revenue, most notably retransmission fees that TV sta-
tions charge pay-TV providers to use their content. Retransmission fees are a small but growing

    32
     Out of the 145 TV stations that went off the air, 7 are located in Puerto Rico. These 7 TV stations together
claimed less than 0.5% of payouts in the reverse auction.


                                                       17
source of revenue.33 Outside estimates suggest that in 2016 advertising revenue accounts for 69%
of a typical TV station’s revenue, with a further 24% of revenue coming from retransmission fees
and 7% coming from online activities.34 Consequently, the variation in advertising revenue across
TV stations is a major, but not the only, driver of the variation in cash flow.
    To get at non-broadcast revenue, we use the NAB data. For commercial full-power stations,
NAB collects financial information. Revenue is broken down into detailed source categories from
which we are able to construct non-broadcast revenue. NAB further covers cash flow. However, for
confidentiality reasons, NAB reports only the mean as well as the first, second, and third quartile
of these measures at various levels of aggregation, resulting in “tables” of station groupings such
as “ABC, CBS and NBC affiliates in markets ranked 51-60 in 2012” or “CBS affiliates in markets
ranked 1-50 in 2012”. Appendix A.4 lists the set of 66 tables for 2012; other years are very similar.
In Section 6.1, we describe a method for combining the station-level data on advertising revenue
from BIA with the aggregated data from NAB to estimate the cash flow of a TV station.

4.2    Interference constraints
The FCC makes available the feasibility checker SAT F C it uses in the reverse auction along with a
domain file and a pairwise interference file.35 The domain file lists for each TV station the channels
it can be assigned to, accounting for restrictions due to international and military broadcasting.
Intersecting the domain file with the channels that a given clearing target leaves available for
repacking yields the set of available channels R described in Section 3.36
    The pairwise interference file lists for each TV station and each channel any other TV stations
that cannot be located on that channel or on immediately adjacent channels without causing
unacceptable levels of interference; these are the interference constraints described in Section 3
that we suppress in our notation for the indicator function S(X, R) for simplicity. In authorizing
the Incentive Auction, Congress instructed the FCC to preserve the TV stations’ populations
served prior to the auction. After public deliberations on the interpretation of this mandate,37
the FCC applied an existing standard that treats interference of more than 0.5% as unacceptable.
Accordingly, a channel assignment for a pair of TV stations j and j 0 is included in the pairwise
interference file and thus unavailable in the repacking process if transmission by TV station j would
reduce the population served of TV station j 0 by more than 0.5%.38 For most of the subsequent
   33
      See “SNL Kagan raises retrans fee forecast to $9.8B by 2020; Mediacom’s CEO complains to FCC”, FierceCable,
July 7, 2015.
   34
      See “Retrans Revenue Share Expands In Latest U.S. TV Station Industry Forecast”, Justin Nielson, S&P Global
Market Intelligence, July 14, 2016.
   35
      See http://data.fcc.gov/download/incentive-auctions/Constraint_Files/, accessed on March 7, 2018.
   36
      For example, achieving the initial clearing target of 126 MHz requires clearing 21 out of a total of 37 non-
dedicated UHF channels, leaving 16 UHF channels available for repacking; achieving the final clearing target of 84
MHz requires clearing 14 UHF channels, leaving 23 UHF channels available for repacking (FCC Public Notice 14-191,
p. 7).
   37
      See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-14-50A1.pdf, paragraphs 176-182, accessed on
November 15, 2015.
   38
      The FCC developed a piece of software, T V Study, that relies on geographically fine interference data to generate
the pairwise interference file for any given interference level. See https://www.fcc.gov/oet/tvstudy, accessed on


                                                          18
         Figure 1: Same- and adjacent-channel interference constraints for WCAU




      Notes: Each pin represents the facility location of a TV station. WCAU (NBC Philadelphia) is denoted by
      a green pin. Red pins denote TV stations that have adjacent-channel interference constraints and yellow
      pins TV stations that have same-channel interference constraints.


analysis, we rely on the pairwise interference file for the chosen 0.5% standard. We also trace out
how the ease of repacking as parameterized by the interference level affects the outcome of the
reverse auction. In Section 7.4 we rely on the pairwise interference files for an alternative, looser,
standard of 2% that the FCC considered, and for a very relaxed 10% standard.
   Under a 126 MHz clearing target with UHF channels 14-29 available for repacking, the pairwise
interference file imposes 1,729,841 restrictions on the repacking process for an interference level
of 0.5%; under an 84 MHz clearing target with UHF channels 14-36 available for repacking, the
number of restrictions grows to 2,334,334. To illustrate, Figure 1 shows the 102 TV stations that
have interference constraints with WCAU (facility ID 63153), the Philadelphia NBC affiliate, on at
least one of the 16 available channels under the 126 MHz clearing target. Of those, 65 TV stations
have same-channel constraints and 37 TV stations have adjacent-channel constraints. In Figure 1,
the green pin indicates WCAU, a yellow pin a TV station with a same-channel constraint, and a
red pin a TV station with an adjacent-channel constraint.

4.3      Auxiliary data sources
As described in “Appendix: Analysis of Potential Aggregate Interference“ of FCC Public Notice
DA 14-677, the FCC conducted its own simulations in June 2014 to assess the likely number of TV
stations in each DMA that have to relinquish their licenses for a clearing target of 84 MHz or 120


March 7, 2018.


                                                         19
MHz to be met.39 The FCC restricts its simulations to UHF stations and to going off the air as the
primary relinquishment option. Focusing on the simulations that assume full participation leaves
us with 25 simulations for the 84 MHz clearing target and 27 simulations for the 120 MHz clearing
target. For our initial descriptive analysis only, we label a DMA as a positive demand DMA if at
the median across simulations at least one TV station has to relinquish its license. There are 81
positive demand DMAs for the 84 MHz clearing target and 121 for the 120 MHz clearing target.40
Since in many DMAs no TV station has to relinquish its license for the clearing target to be met, we
expect payouts from the reverse auction to be concentrated in a relatively small number of DMAs.


5        Descriptive evidence
We provide descriptive evidence in support of ownership concentration and strategic supply re-
duction. From here on, in line with the FCC’s own simulations we restrict attention to the 1,670
UHF stations located in the U.S. excluding Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands that the FCC has
declared as eligible for the reverse auction.41

5.1      Ownership concentration
Our data shows significant ownership concentration, both across and within DMAs, consistent with
the notion of “chains” of TV stations. In 2015, the 1,670 TV stations are held by 482 owners. Of
these 482 owners, 302 hold one TV station across the U.S., 66 hold two TV stations, 33 hold three
TV stations, and the remaining 81 owners hold at least four TV stations. The 1,670 TV stations are
assigned to 204 DMAs by the FCC. Turning to ownership concentration within DMAs, 78 DMAs
have only single-license owners, meaning that all TV stations within the DMA are independently
owned, while the remaining 126 DMAs have at least one multi-license owner, meaning that at least
two TV stations within the DMA are jointly owned. Within-DMA multi-license ownership will be
the focus of our main analysis in Sections 6 and 7, although we consider ownership across DMAs
in Section 8.2.
     Table 3 provides further details on ownership concentration, juxtaposing all 204 DMAs with
the 121 positive demand DMAs for the 120 MHz clearing target and the 81 positive demand DMAs
for the 84 MHz clearing target. As the top panel shows, on average across all DMAs, 6.45 owners
hold 8.19 TV stations whereas on average across positive demand DMAs for the 120 MHz (84
MHz) clearing target, 7.17 (7.62) owners hold 9.04 (9.62) TV stations. The number of multi-license
owners is 1.25 on average for all DMAs compared to 1.40 (1.54) for positive demand DMAs for the
120 MHz (84 MHz) clearing target. The distribution over ownership configurations in the bottom
panel of Table 3 reinforces that ownership is more concentrated in positive demand DMAs. In 82

    39
      See https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-14-677A2.docx, accessed on March 10, 2016.
    40
      The FCC excludes 6 DMAs without UHF stations from its simulations. These DMAs are Bangor, ME, Glendive,
MT, Juneau, AK, Lafayette, IN, Mankato, MN, and Presque Isle, ME.
   41
      We drop 480 VHF stations from the subsequent analysis. These 480 VHF stations together claimed a mere 3.7%
of payouts in the reverse auction in spite of representing a large share of licensed broadcasters.


                                                      20
                                  Table 3: Ownership concentration

                                                All 204       121 positive demand      81 positive demand
                                                DMAs           DMAs (120 MHz)           DMAs (84 MHz)
      Average across DMAs
        Number of licenses                        8.19               9.04                       9.62
        Number of owners                          6.45               7.17                       7.62
        Number of multi-license owners            1.25               1.40                       1.54

      Percentage of DMAs with j multi-license owners
        j=0                               38.2                       32.2                       30.9
        j=1                               26.0                       25.6                       21.0
        j=2                               19.6                       25.6                       28.4
        j=3                               7.35                       6.61                       7.41
        j≥4                               8.82                       9.92                       12.4


of 121, or 68% (56 of 81, or 69%) of positive demand DMAs for the 120 MHz (84 MHz) clearing
target, there is at least one multi-license owner as compared to in 126 of 204, or 62% of all DMAs.
Taken together, this shows that multi-license ownership is prevalent, especially in DMAs that may
play a key role in the reverse auction.
    Ownership concentration has traditionally been a concern for regulators. The FCC Local TV
Ownership Rules permit joint ownership of up to two TV stations in the same DMA if either their
service contours do not overlap or at least one of them is not ranked among the top four TV stations
in the DMA, based on the most recent audience share, and there are at least eight independently
owned commercial or non-commercial full-power stations in the DMA. However, these rules do not
apply to non-commercial, low-power, and satellite stations. Moreover, waivers can be—and have
been—granted for failing or financially distressed TV stations.42 For historical reasons these rules
are oriented towards the business of operating TV stations that primarily generate revenues from
advertising and therefore prevent broadcasters from gaining excessive market power in the market
for advertising. However, as our data and analysis show, these rules do not preclude firms from
amassing market power over broadcast spectrum. As a result, some firms may have been able to
accumulate market power in the reverse auction through multi-license ownership.

5.2    Private equity firms
Some chains of TV stations are recent creations. From 2011 to 2015, three private equity firms —
LocusPoint Networks, NRJ TV, and OTA Broadcasting (henceforth, LocusPoint, NRJ, and OTA)



   42
      The rules are set out in paragraph (b) of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter I.C, Part 73.H,
Section 73.3555, with carve-outs in paragraph (f), note (5), and note (7). See https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/
text/47/73.3555, accessed on March 29, 2018. The Low Power Television (LPTV) Service Guide further exempts
low-power stations. See https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/low-power-television-lptv-service, accessed
on March 29, 2018.


                                                         21
— acquired 48 UHF stations for at least $380 million.43,44 Of the 48 TV stations, 15 are full-power
stations, 33 are low-power class-A stations, 47 are commercial stations, and one is a non-commercial
station. Few of the 48 TV stations are affiliated with major networks and many of them are failing
or in financial distress. The trade press widely claimed that the private equity firms acquired TV
stations with the goal of “flipping” them for profit in the reverse auction.45
   Most of the acquired TV stations are on the peripheries of major DMAs, ranging from Boston,
MA, to Washington, DC, on the Eastern Seaboard and from Seattle, WA, to Los Angeles, CA,
along the West Coast. The 48 TV stations are located in 22 DMAs that we refer to as private
equity active DMAs. Of the 22 private equity active DMAs, 21 are positive demand DMAs under
the 120 MHz clearing target and 18 are positive demand DMAs under the 84 MHz clearing target.
In line with a goal of flipping TV stations, the private equity firms appear to have targeted DMAs
with robust “demand”. At the same time, however, the private equity firms accumulated market
power in the reverse auction. For example, NRJ acquired four TV stations in the Los Angeles,
CA, DMA and OTA acquired nine TV stations in the Pittsburgh, PA, DMA. The 10 TV stations
acquired by LocusPoint are located in 10 different DMAs, the 15 TV stations acquired by NRJ are
located in 10 different DMAs, and the 23 TV stations acquired by OTA are located in 11 different
DMAs.
   Table 4 summarizes attributes of the 48 TV stations acquired by the three private equity firms
and contrasts them with the 286 TV stations that were part of other transactions in the four years
from 2010 to 2013. While there is considerable overlap in the distributions of transaction price and
the other attributes between the two groups, the private equity firms acquired relatively cheaper
TV stations. Moreover, these TV stations have higher broadcast volume, both because of higher
interference free population and because of higher interference count. The 48 TV stations acquired
by the three private equity firms are therefore relatively more difficult to assign to a channel in
the repacking process if they opt to remain on the air. At the same time, the base clock price is
“magnified” by the relatively high broadcast volume if these TV stations are frozen in the course
of the reverse auction.
   Perhaps even more telling, the private equity firms relinquished only 19 TV stations, or 40%
of the acquired TV stations, in the reverse auction and sold another 20 TV stations, or 42% of
the acquired TV stations, soon after the reverse auction. This appears difficult to reconcile with
the goal of flipping TV stations. Table 5 further fleshes out acquisitions and sales. Separately for
  43
      According to FCC filings, the Blackstone Group LP owns 99% of LocusPoint. NRJ is a media holding company
funded through loans from Fortress Investment Group LLC according to a recent U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission filing. Lastly, OTA is a division of MSD Capital LP, which was formed to manage the wealth of Dell
Computer founder Michael Dell.
   44
      LocusPoint acquired another 3 UHF stations for $4.8 million that it sold to HME Equity Fund
II LLC for $23.75 million before the reverse auction.        See http://www.tvnewscheck.com/article/92491/
hme-equity-closes-on-purchase-of-3-lptvs, accessed on March 17, 2018. NRJ acquired another VHF station
for $9.9 million. See http://www.tvnewscheck.com/article/89486/nrj-tv-buys-dallas-vhf-for-99-million,
accessed on April 30, 2018.
   45
      See, e.g., http://www.tvnewscheck.com/article/65850/tv-spectrum-speculation-nears-345-million and
http://current.org/2013/02/speculators-betting-big-on-fcc-tv-spectrum-auctions/, accessed on November
15, 2015.


                                                     22
Table 4: Comparison of TV stations acquired by private equity firms and other trans-
actions from 2010 to 2013

                                               Private equity firms                Other transactions
                                          Mean Std. Dev. Median               Mean Std. Dev. Median
    Transaction price ($ million)          7.91        9.74       4.55        25.20     48.90       7.73
                UHF                          1           0          1          0.80      0.40         1
             Commercial                    0.98       0.14          1          0.98      0.13         1
              Full power                   0.31        0.47         0          0.84      0.37         1
      Major network affiliation            0.04        0.20         0         0.60       0.49         1
     Broadcast volume (million)            0.28        0.16       0.28         0.17      0.13       0.14
 Inference free population (million)       3.61       3.47        2.53         1.69      2.04       1.01
         Interference count               104.10      35.41      101.50       79.44     47.35      72.50
         Number of licenses                             48                                286

          Table 5: Private equity firms’ acquisitions and sales of TV stations

                                                              TV stations
                                          acquired before   relinquished in      sold after
                                          reverse auction   reverse auction   reverse auction
              LocusPoint
                Number                         10                 2                   7
                Amount ($ million)            55.85             15.20               32.70
                Profit/loss ($ million)                          8.80              -13.70
              NRJ
                Number                          15                7                  1
                Amount ($ million)            245.25            640.00              0.65
                Profit/loss ($ million)                         526.72             -42.08
              OTA
                Number                         23                 10                12
                Amount ($ million)            78.75             441.00             38.38
                Profit/loss ($ million)                         402.26             -1.64


LocusPoint, NRJ, and OTA, the table provides the number of TV stations acquired before the
reverse auction along with the amount paid, the number of TV stations relinquished in the reverse
auction along with the amount received, and the number of TV stations sold soon after the reverse
auction along with the amount received. The table finally indicates the profit made or loss incurred
on these latter two sets of TV stations. We provide further details and the underlying data in
Online Appendix C. While the private equity firms made—typically substantial—profits on the TV
stations they relinquished in the reverse auction, they incurred losses on the TV stations they sold
soon after.
   While the activities of the three private equity firms are very salient, their contribution to
ownership concentration is small: the private equity firms are just three of 180 owners, or 2%,
that hold more than one TV station across the U.S., and they hold just 48 of 1,368 TV stations,
or 4%, that belong to one of these chains. The vast majority of ownership concentration is long


                                                      23
standing and reflects reasons that are orthogonal to the incentive auction, such as historical accident,
advertising market, content provision, etc.


6        Analysis
We first describe how we estimate the reservation value of a TV station. With reservation values in
hand, we conduct a large-scale simulation exercise to compare the outcome of the reverse auction
under the counterfactual of independent ownership and naive bidding with the outcome when we
account for the ownership pattern in the data and allow multi-license owners to engage in strategic
supply reduction.

6.1      Reservation values
In close resemblance to how market participants and industry consultants value a TV station,46 we
                                                                                              CF and
model the reservation value of TV station j in year t0 as the greater of its cash flow value vjt0
                   Stick :
its “stick” value vjt0                               n               o
                                                       CF      Stick
                                           vjt0 = max vjt0
                                                           , vjt0
                                                                       .                                           (6)

The industry standard for valuing a broadcast business as a going concern is to assess its cash
flow CFjt0 and scale it by a cash flow multiple M ultipleCF
                                                         jt0 . Hence, the cash flow value of the TV
station is
                                            CF
                                           vjt0
                                                = M ultipleCF
                                                           jt0 · CFjt0 .                                           (7)

This is the price the TV station expects if it sells itself on the private market as a going concern.
     The stick value of the TV station, on the other hand, reflects solely the value of its license and
broadcast tower, not the ongoing business. It is the default value of a non-commercial station and
is computed from the population served and the stick multiple M ultipleStick
                                                                       jt0 . The stick multiple is
traditionally expressed on a per MHz per population (henceforth, MHz-pop) basis. For a low-power
class-A station, we use interference free population to measure population served. Hence, the stick
value of a low-power class-A station is

                         Stick
                        vjt0
                               = M ultipleStick
                                          jt0   · 6 M Hz · Interf erenceF reeP opjt0 .                             (8)

Because of the must-carry provision of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, a full-power station must be carried on any cable system operating in the same
DMA.47 We therefore use DMA population to measure population served. Hence, the stick value
of a full-power station is
    46
      See “Broadcasting M&A 101: Our View of the Broadcast TV M&A Surge”, Davis Hebert and Eric Fishel,
Wells Fargo, June 26, 2013 and “Estimating the Value of TV Broadcast Licenses for the Upcoming FCC Incentive
Auction”, Mark Mondello and Arya Rahimian, Duff & Phelps, November 23, 2015.
   47
      More specifically, any cable operator offering more than 12 channels must set aside one third of its channels for
local commercial broadcasters. Any cable operator offering more than 36 channels must carry all non-commercial
and educational broadcasters.


                                                          24
                                Stick
                               vjt0
                                      = M ultipleStick
                                                 jt0   · 6 M Hz · DM AP opjt0 .                                    (9)

    While we observe the population served by a TV station, its cash flow is only available at various
levels of aggregation in the NAB data. Moreover, we observe neither the cash flow multiple nor
the stick multiple. Below we explain how we estimate these objects. We provide further details in
Appendix C.

Cash flows.       We model the cash flow CFjt of TV station j in year t as

                         CFjt = α (Xjt ; β) ADjt + RT (Xjt ; γ) − F (Xjt ; δ) + jt ,                             (10)

where α (Xjt ; β) ADjt is the contribution of advertising revenue to cash flow, RT (Xjt ; γ) is non-
broadcast revenue including retransmission fees, F (Xjt ; δ) is fixed cost, and jt ∼ N 0, σ 2 is
                                                                                                 

an idiosyncratic, inherently unobservable component of cash flow. Only advertising revenue ADjt
and station and market characteristics Xjt are directly observable in the BIA data. To estimate
the remaining components of cash flow, we specify flexible functional forms of subsets of Xjt for
α (Xjt ; β), RT (Xjt ; γ), and F (Xjt ; δ) and estimate the parameters θ = (β, γ, δ, σ) drawing on the
aggregated data from NAB.
    We proceed using a simulated minimum distance estimator. Our estimation includes all TV
stations covered by the aggregated data from NAB. The parameters θ = (β, γ, δ, σ), together with
our functional form and distributional assumptions in equation (10), imply a distribution of the
cash flow CFjt of TV station j in year t. We first draw a cash flow error term jt for each TV
station covered by the aggregated data from NAB. Then we match the moments of the predicted
cash flow and non-broadcast revenue distributions to the moments reported by NAB for different
sets of TV stations and DMAs. In particular, we match the mean along with the first, second, and
third quartile of cash flow and the mean of non-broadcast revenue for each NAB table in each year,
yielding a total of 3,313 moments.
    The correlation between the moments of the predicted distributions at our estimates and the
moments reported by NAB is 0.98 for cash flow and 0.84 for non-broadcast revenue. The estimates
indicate that major network affiliates are most profitable; that non-broadcast revenue has grown
significantly in recent years; and that there are economies of scale in fixed cost.

Multiples.      To estimate the multiples M ultipleCF
                                                   jt and M ultipleStick
                                                                   jt    , we begin with the 340
transactions for individual TV stations in the 11 years from 2003 to 2013 that BIA records.48 We
extract 133 transactions based on cash flows and 191 transactions based on stick values.49 We infer
   48
       BIA records 849 transactions with transaction prices, as opposed to station swaps, stock transfers, donations,
etc. We focus on the 340 transactions for individual TV stations in order to estimate the multiples as functions of
station and market characteristics. We use transactions from 2013 to infer the stick multiple but not to infer the cash
flow multiple because 2012 is the last year of availability for the NAB data.
    49
       To classify transactions, we proceed as follows: We first define a TV station to be a major network affiliate if
it is affiliated with ABC, CBS, Fox, or NBC. We then classify a transaction as based on stick value if it is for a


                                                          25
the cash flow multiple and stick multiple from the transaction price, the population served, and
the power output of the TV station using equations (7), (8), and (9), respectively. Because the
transacted TV stations may be a selected sample, we incorporate outside estimates of the range of
the multiples. Using these estimates as priors, we estimate a Bayesian regression model to project
multiples on station and market characteristics Xjt . We include year fixed effects in Xjt to capture
the secular decline in the use of broadcast TV. The resulting posteriors are a normal distribution
for the cash flow multiple and a log-normal distribution for the stick multiple; see Appendix C.2
for detail. This allows us to predict multiples for any TV station, not just those that were recently
transacted.

Reservation values.           The aggregated data from NAB that we use to estimate the cash flow
model in equation (10) does not cover all 1,670 UHF stations located in the U.S. excluding Puerto
Rico and the Virgin Islands that the FCC has declared as eligible for the reverse auction. The
omissions are 387 low-power class-A stations, 289 non-commercial stations, and 4 dark stations
that we henceforth subsume into non-commercial stations. We therefore extrapolate from our
estimates as follows. First, we assume that low-power class-A stations are valued in the same way
as full-power stations conditional on station and market characteristics Xjt . Second, we assume
that non-commercial stations are valued by their stick value, consistent with industry practice.
    To estimate the reservation value of TV station j going into the reverse auction, we set
t0 = 2015.50 We draw from the estimated distribution of the cash flow error term jt0 to get
                                                                                           CF
d jt . We draw from the respective posterior distributions of the multiples to get M\
CF                                                                                  ultiplejt0 and
    0
           Stick
M\
 ultiplejt0 . The reservation value vbjt0 of a commercial station is then the higher of the realized
draws of its cash flow value and its stick value as specified in equations (6)–(9); the reservation
value vbjt0 of a non-commercial station is its stick value.
    In the subsequent analysis, we simulate the reverse auction for N s = 100 draws of reservation
values. On average across simulation draws, our estimates imply that the average commercial TV
station has a cash flow value of $45.4 million and that the average TV station has a stick value of
$4.9 million. For 34.6% of TV stations, the reservation value is given by the stick value rather than
the cash flow value as the former is higher, and the average TV station has a reservation value of
$40.8 million.
    To illustrate our estimates, Figure 2 shows a sample draw of reservation values for the 23 TV
stations in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA. We label the TV stations by their network affiliation,
order them by their reservation values (left axis), and overlay their advertising revenues (right


non-major network affiliate with a cash flow of less than $1 million. Regardless of network affiliation, we also classify
a transaction as based on stick value if the TV station has a negative cash flow. Finally, we classify a transaction
that would have implied a stick value greater than $4 per MHz-pop to be based on cash flow and a transaction that
would have implied a cash flow multiple greater than 30 to be based on stick value. We drop 16 transactions that do
not fit these criteria.
   50
      Because the NAB data is only available through 2012, we cannot estimate a year fixed effect for 2015 and instead
hold it fixed at the year fixed effect for 2012.


                                                           26
Figure 2: Sample draw of reservation values for TV stations in Philadelphia, PA, DMA




axis) in 2012 from the BIA data.51 It is immediately apparent that reservation values correlate
with advertising revenues and network affiliation. In addition, it is clear that reservation values
can differ greatly across TV stations, even within a DMA.

6.2    Simulation exercise
As described in Section 2, the repacking process takes place at the national level. Through a series
of domino effects in the interference constraints, it is possible, although perhaps unlikely, that as a
TV station in New York, NY, opts to remain on the air, it freezes a TV station in Los Angeles, CA,
that can no longer be guaranteed a channel in the next round of the reverse auction. Checking the
feasibility of repacking a set X of TV stations into a set R of available channels is a computationally
challenging (NP-hard) problem that can easily take hours to run. Indeed, despite its considerable
computational resources, on June 14, 2016 the FCC had to delay round 22 of stage 1 of the reverse
auction because it failed to solve the problem on time.52
    Our goal is to enumerate all equilibria of the reverse auction in order to assess the scope for
strategic supply reduction and quantify its impact on the outcome of the reverse auction. To do so,
we have to simulate the reverse auction under the very large number of strategy profiles that arise
because of the large number of jointly owned TV stations, each of which has the strategy space

  51
      WPVI-TV (facility ID 8616), the Philadelphia ABC affiliate, is a VHF station and therefore not included in
Figure 2.
   52
      See https://auctiondata.fcc.gov/public/projects/1000/reports/reverse_announcements, accessed on
December 9, 2016.


                                                      27
bj ∈ {0, sj , 900} (see Section 3). Moreover, we have to repeat these simulations for N s draws of
reservation values to account for randomness; below we choose N s = 100 . In contrast, the FCC
ran the reverse auction only one time, pausing occasionally to move to the forward auction and
assess the final stage rule.
    As a step towards making the analysis computationally feasible, we take a regional approach
to the repacking problem as follows: given a “focal” DMA, we define its “region” as the set of all
DMAs in which at least one TV station has an interference constraint with at least one TV station
in the focal DMA. We simulate the reverse auction restricting the repacking problem to TV stations
in the region.53 This breaks up the national problem into multiple regional problems, one for each
focal DMA. Our regional approach is in line with the fact that the FCC’s feasibility checker SAT F C
prioritizes local solutions to the repacking problem, holding fixed the assignments of TV stations
with no direct interference constraint with a TV station that is being repacked while looking for a
new solution (Frechette, Newman and Leyton-Brown, 2016, Section 4.1).54 Throughout, the object
of interest is the outcome of the reverse auction in the focal DMA, which we then aggregate to the
national level and take statistics across our draws of reservation values.
    We base our definition of a region on the interference constraints for the 1,670 UHF stations
and UHF channels 14-29 that are available for repacking under the 126 MHz clearing target. This
definition is invariant to alternative clearing targets. Figure 3 shows the 127 TV stations located in
the Philadelphia, PA, region. Of those, 23 are in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA (denoted by red pins
in Figure 3), while 104 are located outside the Philadelphia, PA, DMA (yellow and green pins) in
one of the following DMAs: Baltimore, MD, Binghamton, NY, Elmira, NY, Harrisburg-Lancaster-
Lebanon-York, PA, Harrisonburg, VA, Hartford-New Haven, CT, Johnstown-Altoona, PA, New
York, NY, Providence, RI-New Bedford, MA, Salisbury, MD, Washington, DC, and Wilkes Barre-
Scranton, PA. Moreover, 26 of the TV stations located outside the Philadelphia, PA, DMA do not
have an interference constraint with any TV station located inside the Philadelphia, PA, DMA
(green pins); they are nevertheless part of the Philadelphia, PA, region and may thus affect the
price for a TV station in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA.
    Table 6 covers all 204 DMAs and shows that a region is generally much larger than a DMA. We
compare a focal DMA to its region in terms of number of TV stations and area in square miles.55
On average, a region covers about 10 DMAs and has about 15 as many TV stations and is about
15 times larger in area than the focal DMA.56
    Beyond repacking regions, a further input into the simulations is the set of participating stations.

  53
      To speed up the computations and decrease the amount of memory overhead required for large-scale parallel
computing, we use Perl scripts to create region-specific domain and pairwise interference files.
   54
      See also http://conference.nber.org/confer/2017/AIf17/Milgrom_Tadelis.pdf, accessed on March 18,
2018.
   55
      See Sood (2018) for crosswalk between DMAs and zip codes. We obtain zip code area from the Missouri Cen-
sus Data Center, MABLE/Geocorr14: Geographic Correspondence Engine, at http://mcdc.missouri.edu/websas/
geocorr14.html, accessed on July 22, 2018.
   56
      Eleven DMAs coincide with their region. These are El Paso, TX, Medford-Klamath Falls, OR, Missoula, MT,
Grand Junction-Montrose, CO, Casper-Roverton, WY, Eureka, CA, Laredo, TX, North Platte, NE, Anchorage, AK,
Honolulu, HI, and Fairbanks, AK.


                                                      28
                Figure 3: Repacking region for Philadelphia, PA, DMA




Notes: Each pin represents the facility location of an auction-eligible UHF broadcast TV station in the
Philadelphia, PA, repacking region. Red pins denote stations in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA; yellow pins
stations in other DMAs that have at least one interference constraint with a Philadelphia station; and
green pins stations in the repacking region that do not have any interference constraint with a Philadelphia
station.




                      Table 6: Repacking regions for all 204 DMAs

                                                                       Quartile
                                         Mean Min              First   Second Third          Max
           Number of DMAs per region      9.8  1                 5       10     14            24
           Ratio between region and focal DMA:
           Number of TV stations          15.7 1                5.7      10.4       18.9      127
           Area (square miles)            14.9 1                6.3      11.4       18.1     142.8




                                                    29
We assume that all 1,670 UHF stations participate in the reverse auction. This likely overstates
participation. The FCC has long worried that potentially “sentimental” owners, in particular, of
religious or college-affiliated stations may be motivated by considerations besides profitability and
not participate in the reverse auction.57 In the popular press, several chains of commercial TV
stations have shown little interest in the reverse auction, with the CEO of Sinclair Broadcasting
Group, which operates 98 of the 1,670 UHF stations in 2015, declaring that he “hasn’t heard of
any broadcaster who has said they have anything for sale.”58 In Section 8.1 we show that reduced
participation can easily double payouts in the reverse auction, even in the absence of strategic
supply reduction. The assumption of full participation underlying in our main results is therefore
very conservative.
    Our baseline is the outcome of the reverse auction under naive bidding, where we ignore the
ownership patterns in the data and counterfactually treat all TV stations as independently owned.
                                              vj
Hence, TV station j bids bj = sj =            ϕj ,   where vj is its reservation value and ϕj its broadcast
volume. We simulate the reverse auction under naive bidding for N s = 100 draws of reservation
values. In Online Appendix D, we provide pseudo code for our algorithm.
    We contrast naive bidding with strategic bidding, where we account for the ownership patterns
in the data and allow the owner of a jointly owned TV station j located inside the focal DMA to
either bid truthfully bj = sj or overbid bj = 900.59 To limit the number of strategy profiles that
arise, we assume that a TV station j located outside the focal DMA bids truthfully bj = sj .60 This
assumption is conservative in that it restricts a multi-license owner’s ability to strategically reduce
supply to the focal DMA. In Section 8.2 we show that abandoning this assumption and allowing
for multi-market strategies can greatly increase the scope for strategic supply reduction and the
payouts in the reverse auction.
    To simulate the reverse auction under strategic bidding, we modify our algorithm. Recall that,
as the reverse auction progresses, each time an active TV station opts to remain on the air, the
FCC invokes SAT F C to check if it can still repack any remaining active TV station. We limit
this check to any remaining active TV station located in the focal DMA. We further pre-assign to
frozen status any TV station located outside the focal DMA that has been frozen at the conclusion
of the reverse auction under naive bidding; these TV stations therefore cannot freeze another TV
station. In Online Appendix D, we provide pseudo code for the modified algorithm. The primary
advantage of this limited repacking is that the computational burden, while still significant as we
discuss below, falls by a factor of nearly 10 relative to full repacking.61 In Appendix D we show

  57
      See http://www.tvnewscheck.com/article/73196/wheeler-auction-onceinalifetime-chance, accessed on
March 18, 2018.
   58
      “FCC can auction spectrum, but will broadcasters sell?”, Joe Flint, The Los Angeles Times, February 17, 2012.
   59
      Example 2 in Section 3.1 shows that underbidding bj = 0 can also be part of an equilibrium of the reverse
auction. In Online Appendix E, we investigate the importance of underbidding for the computationally manageable
Washington, DC, DMA. We show that underbidding is not essential for spanning the set of equilibrium payouts and
we thus rule it out as a strategy going forward. This restriction greatly reduces the computational burden.
   60
      We further assume that a multi-license owner does not overbid bj = 900 on all its TV stations j that are located
inside the focal DMA.
   61
      For comparison, the average time for a simulation of the reverse auction under naive bidding and full repacking


                                                         30
                  Table 7: Top ten computationally most demanding DMAs

                                          TV        Multi-license     Jointly owned   Strategy
                      DMA               stations      owners           TV stations     profiles
                 Pittsburgh, PA            20            3                  13          4,599
               Santa Barbara, CA           16            4                  12          2,205
                  Yakima, WA               16            4                  12          1,953
               San Francisco, CA           23            6                  13          1,701
                Los Angeles, CA            28            4                  11           945
                Philadelphia, PA           23            6                  12           729
                Fort Smith, AR             14            3                  10           567
                   Austin, TX              16            1                   9           511
                  Norfolk, VA              14            2                   9           281
                  Honolulu, HI             20            3                   9           315


that nationwide payouts under limited repacking differ from those under full repacking by 0.2%
under naive bidding and the 126 MHz clearing target and by 3.2% under naive bidding and the
84 MHz clearing target, reflecting the larger amount of repacking that occurs under the 84 MHz
clearing target as more TV stations remain on the air. Simulations for select DMAs under strategic
bidding and the 126 MHz clearing target suggest a similar error.
    Given a draw of reservation values, we determine that a strategy profile is an equilibrium of
the reverse auction if no multi-license owner can unilaterally and profitably deviate to another
strategy profile. We use the same N s = 100 draws of reservation values as above. With no or
one multi-license owner in a DMA, there is a unique equilibrium by construction. With more than
one multi-license owner, there may be multiple equilibria, and we enumerate all of them. Given
the large number of equilibria and the fact that many of them entail identical payouts to all TV
stations despite possibly differing bids, we limit attention to “payout-unique equilibria.” That is,
we collapse multiple equilibria with identical payouts to all TV stations into a single payout-unique
equilibrium. We illustrate this concept further in discussing our results in Section 7.
    Despite the numerous assumptions and simplifications, our simulation exercise is near the bound
of what can be achieved in a reasonable amount of time. The 1,670 TV stations are located in 204
DMAs. Table 7 lists the top ten computationally most demanding DMAs. It provides the number
of TV stations, the number of multi-license owners and the number of jointly owned TV stations
in the focal DMA and its region, along with the number of strategy profiles to be considered. The
Pittsburgh, PA, DMA has 4,599 strategy profiles, each of which requires a run of the “regionalized”
reverse auction for each simulation draw. Across all 204 DMAs, the total number of strategy profiles
is 17,316. Scaling this up by N s = 100 draws of reservation values requires 1,731,600 runs of the
reverse auction. To give a sense of the computational burden of our exercise, we note that simulating
the reverse auction under the 84 MHz clearing target for those 1,731,600 runs alone took a total of
6,533 CPU-days.


is 941.80 seconds, but only 131.71 seconds under limited repacking.


                                                        31
7        Results
7.1      Case study: Philadelphia, PA, DMA
We use the Philadelphia, PA, DMA as a case study to illustrate how we compare the outcome of
the reverse auction under naive bidding with the outcome under strategic bidding and to highlight
important features of the subsequent analysis. Figure 4 shows a sample draw of reservation values
for the 23 TV stations in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA along with the outcomes of the reverse
auction under naive bidding and the 126 MHz clearing target and in two equilibria under strategic
bidding. All three panels show reservation values and payouts (in $ million) in light and dark gray,
respectively, on the left axis. As in Figure 2, we label the TV stations by their network affiliation
and order them by their reservation values. On the right axis, we account for the broadcast volumes
of the TV stations and display their corresponding bids and payouts in terms of the base clock price
(in $) as rectangles and triangles, respectively. Recall from Section 3 that a bid is the critical value
of the base clock price above which a TV station continues in the reverse auction.
     Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows the outcome under naive bidding. As can be seen, 15 TV stations
relinquish their licenses in exchange for payment. Panels (b) and (c) visualize the two equilibria,
where we identify TV stations that are withheld from the reverse auction with bids of $900. The
first equilibrium highlights that strategic supply reduction by multi-license owners can lead to a
larger number of TV stations being sold under strategic bidding than under naive bidding. The
second equilibrium highlights that strategic supply reduction can lead to the same TV stations
being sold, but at higher prices. In what follows, we provide further details on these equilibria.

Equilibrium 1. In the first equilibrium, displayed in Panel (b) of Figure 4, NRJ withholds
AM1 (facility ID 74464, reservation price $34.80 million) from the reverse auction and LocusPoint
withholds its independent station (facility ID 72278, reservation price $49.82 million). A larger
number of TV stations sells than under naive bidding: while AM1 sells under naive bidding but
not under strategic bidding, three TV stations—MdF, MyNetwork TV, and UniMas (facility IDs
167540, 73879, and 74216)—sell under strategic bidding but not under naive bidding.
     Both NRJ and LocusPoint increase their profits, the total proceeds from the auction less the
reservation values of any surrendered stations, through strategic supply reduction. Relative to naive
bidding, NRJ foregoes a payout of $72.3 million, translating into foregone profit of $37.5 million,
on AM1. In return, the firm collects an additional payout and thus profit of $43.5 million on its
independent station (facility ID 55305, reservation price $46.5 million), driven by an increase in
the freezing base clock price from $221.79 to $298.15.
     LocusPoint, by withholding its independent station, raises the freezing base clock price for
its Atlantic City NBC affiliate (facility ID 61111, reservation price $2.10 million) from $72.66 to
$221.79, an equivalent payout and profit increase of $23.8 million.62 This equilibrium exemplifies
    62
     The forgone profit to NRJ on AM1 is calculated as ($221.79·.33−$34.80) million=$37.5 million, where .33 is
AM1’s broadcast volume in millions, and the increased profit on its independent station as ($298.15−$221.79)·.57
million=$43.5 million. The increased profit to LocusPoint on its Atlantic City NBC affiliate is calculated as


                                                      32
two sources of gains from strategic supply reduction: in NRJ’s case, strategic supply reduction
reduces the number of TV stations that the multi-license owner sells. In LocusPoint’s case, in
contrast, the multi-license owner withholds a TV station that does not sell regardless, which is
nevertheless valuable as it changes the repacking process from the beginning of the reverse auction,
relative to naive bidding. Strategic supply reduction also increases payouts to several other TV
stations. Payouts in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA go from nearly $1.7 billion for 15 TV stations
under naive bidding to over $2.5 billion for 17 TV stations in this equilibrium under strategic
bidding.

Equilibrium 2. In the second equilibrium, displayed in Panel (c) of Figure 4, LocusPoint again
withholds its independent station (facility ID 72278) and Univision withholds UniMas (facility ID
74216, reservation price $25.7 million) from the reverse auction. The same TV stations sell as
under naive bidding, but at weakly higher prices. LocusPoint experiences an increased payout and
profit to its Atlantic City NBC affiliate (facility ID 61111) by $4.4 million. While Univision does
not witness an increased payout, overall, payouts in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA increase from $1.7
billion to $1.8 billion for the same 15 TV stations as under naive bidding.

    Figure 4 illustrates the reverse auction for a sample draw of reservation values and two of the
multiple equilibria that arise under strategic bidding. In the Philadelphia, PA, DMA, the average
number of payout-unique equilibria across simulation draws is 2.2, ranging from one to five. In
the subsequent analysis, we therefore repeat the above exercise for all 204 DMAs, accounting for
randomness in the estimated reservation values via simulation and enumerating all payout-unique
equilibria.

7.2    Naive versus strategic bidding
In comparing the outcomes of the reverse auction under naive and strategic bidding across all 204
DMAs, we have to account for the fact that there may be multiple payout-unique equilibria in a
given DMA under strategic bidding. Under the 84 MHz clearing target, there are 1.09 payout-
unique equilibria on average across DMAs and simulation draws, ranging from 1 to 18. For the
125 DMAs with multi-license owners, the average number of payout-unique equilibria is 1.14. On
average, one payout-unique equilibrium summarizes 46.5 underlying equilibrium strategy profiles.63
    In many of the equilibria under strategic bidding, strategic supply reduction plays no role: on
average across DMAs and simulation draws, there are just 0.22 payout-unique equilibria that have
payouts that differ from those under naive bidding. At the same time, however, there is significant
heterogeneity across DMAs in the prevalence of equilibria that are sustained only by strategic supply
reduction, in line with our result below that the impact of strategic supply reduction on payouts
is concentrated in a select set of DMAs. Consider, for example, Pittsburgh, PA, the DMA with

($221.79−$72.66)·.16 million=$23.8 million.
   63
      In 0.06% of runs of the reverse auction, corresponding to up to three out of 100 simulation draws in seven out
of 204 DMAs, there is no pure strategy equilibrium under strategic bidding and we thus revert to naive bidding.


                                                        33
Figure 4: Sample outcomes for Philadelphia, PA, DMA, 126 MHz clearing target

                               (a) Naive Bidding




                      (b) Strategic Bidding, Equilibrium 1




                      (c) Strategic Bidding, Equilibrium 2




                                      34
              Table 8: Payouts to TV stations nationwide and by owner type

                                                                                                   Payout
                               Naive                        Strategic bidding                    increase at
    Payouts ($ billion)       bidding             Mean       Min      Median         Max          mean (%)
    Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
    Nationwide (204 DMAs) 17.008                 20.530      17.678     20.447     23.300            20.7
                              (0.740)            (0.898)     (2.087)    (1.127)    (1.686)
    Single-license owners     12.014             14.323      12.115     14.235     16.558            19.2
                              (0.498)            (0.693)     (1.564)    (0.751)    (1.487)
    Multi-license owners       4.993              6.208       5.503      6.225      6.866            24.3
                              (0.358)            (0.379)     (0.583)    (0.458)    (0.436)
    Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
    Nationwide (204 DMAs)      4.003              4.281       4.186      4.280      4.381             7.0
                              (0.204)            (0.258)     (0.251)    (0.261)    (0.283)
    Single-license owners      3.005              3.197       3.133      3.195      3.265             6.4
                              (0.174)            (0.217)     (0.206)    (0.217)    (0.240)
    Multi-license owners       0.998              1.084       1.048      1.084      1.121             8.6
                              (0.092)            (0.105)     (0.108)    (0.106)    (0.112)
 Notes: Payouts to single- and multi-license owners add to nationwide payouts for mean (up to rounding error) but
 not for min, median, and max. Payout increase at mean calculated as percent difference between mean payouts
 under strategic and naive bidding.


the largest number of strategy profiles. Out of 4,599 strategy profiles, on average across simulation
draws, 450.4 are equilibria. These 450.4 equilibria amount to an average of 3.34 payout-unique
equilibria, 2.92 of which have payouts that differ from those under naive bidding.
    To account for multiple payout-unique equilibria in a given DMA, we report on an aggregate
outcome of interest such as nationwide payouts, payouts to different types of owners, or the number
of TV stations acquired by the FCC as follows: for a given DMA, we first record the mean,
minimum, median, and maximum of the outcome of interest across all payout-unique equilibria
for a given draw of reservation values. We then sum these moments across DMAs as needed to
get a national level. Finally, we average these sums across simulation draws. We also calculate
standard deviations across simulation draws. Comparing the min and the max gives a sense of the
importance of multiple equilibria. For the sake of brevity, in what follows we often just report the
mean of an outcome of interest.

Payouts.      Table 8 shows payouts to TV stations in the reverse auction under naive and strategic
bidding and both the 84 MHz and the 126 MHz clearing targets, first nationwide and then broken
down for single- and multi-license owners.64 Independent of the clearing target, strategic bidding
raises nationwide payouts in the reverse auction. At the mean, strategic bidding increases nation-
wide payouts from $17.008 billion to $20.530 billion for the 126 MHz clearing target, an increase

  64
     In contrast to Section 5.1, in what follows we define a multi-license owner as a firm owning more than one TV
station within the focal DMA.


                                                       35
of 20.7%, and from $4.003 billion to $4.281 billion for the 84 MHz clearing target, an increase of
7.0%.
   The reduced scope for strategic bidding to raise nationwide payouts under the 84 MHz clear-
ing target reflects the skewed distribution of reservation values we illustrate in Figure 2 for the
Philadelphia, PA, DMA. Under the lower clearing target, the number of TV stations acquired falls:
we find that under strategic bidding on average across payout-unique equilibria and simulation
draws, 378.5 TV stations are acquired to meet the 126 MHz clearing target, but only 186.7 TV
stations are acquired to meet the 84 MHz clearing target. Under the lower clearing target, the
“marginal” TV station is in a flatter portion of the distribution of reservation values; as a result,
withholding a TV station from the reverse auction has a smaller impact on payouts.
   The remaining rows in Table 8 break down payouts for single- and multi-license owners. The
payout increase from strategic bidding for multi-license owners is 24.3% and 8.6% under the 126
MHz and 84 MHz clearing targets, respectively. This spills over to single-license owners, who do
not engage in strategic supply reduction, but see a payout increase of 19.2% or 6.4% depending on
the clearing target.

Heterogeneity in payouts.       There is significant heterogeneity in payouts across DMAs. First of
all, in many DMAs the FCC does not acquire any TV stations: there are an average of 90 and 140
DMAs that see payouts of zero across simulation draws under naive bidding and the 126 MHz and
84 MHz clearing targets respectively. Among the remaining DMAs, payouts are highly skewed. To
illustrate, the 18 private equity active DMAs contribute 79.4% of nationwide payouts under naive
bidding and the 84 MHz clearing target. The ten DMAs listed in Table 9 similarly account for $3.3
billion, or 82.7% of nationwide payouts.
   The payout increases due to strategic bidding are equally concentrated, as Table 9 shows. The
table displays the top ten DMAs in terms of gains from strategic bidding under the 84 MHz clearing
target. The Philadelphia, PA, DMA accounts for 26.2% of the average gains from strategic bidding;
the next three most significant DMAs contribute 42.7%. In all, the top ten markets generate 95.0%
of the average gains from strategic bidding. Private equity firms are active in seven of these ten
DMAs, with the exception of Milwaukee, WI, Washington, DC, and Hartford-New Haven, CT,
although these markets are adjacent to other DMAs where they control licenses. While we do
not present the breakdown, payouts and gains from strategic bidding under the 126 MHz clearing
target are similarly concentrated in a small number of DMAs.
   To further investigate the sources of gains from strategic bidding, we decompose the DMA-level
and nationwide gains into gains accruing to TV stations that sell under both naive and strategic
bidding (labeled “always selling” in Table 10), to TV stations that sell only under strategic bidding
(“newly selling”), and to TV stations that sell only under naive bidding (“no longer selling”). Table
10 reports this decomposition for the 84 MHz clearing target along with the number of TV stations
in each of the three categories, averaged across payout-unique equilibria and simulation draws.
Across the ten DMAs listed, TV stations that sell under both naive and strategic bidding account


                                                 36
Table 9: Payout gains from strategic bidding in top ten DMAs, 84 MHz clearing target

                                                Payouts ($ billion)          Cumulative
                                                Naive         Payout           payout
                           DMA                 bidding       increase       increase (%)
                    Philadelphia, PA            0.516          0.073            26.162
                    Los Angeles, CA             1.254          0.063            48.599
                   San Francisco, CA            0.383          0.040            62.892
                     Milwaukee, WI              0.107          0.017            68.862
                    Washington, DC              0.066          0.016            74.658
                      Chicago, IL               0.201          0.016            80.453
                      Hartford, CT              0.097          0.016            86.152
                     New York, NY               0.585          0.013            90.831
                     Pittsburgh, PA             0.029          0.006            92.997
                      Boston, MA                0.074          0.006            95.000
                     Top ten DMAs               3.312          0.265            95.000
                      Nationwide                4.003          0.279
   Notes: Payout increase due to strategic bidding calculated as difference between mean payouts under
   strategic and naive bidding. Cumulative payout increase is the cumulative share of nationwide payout
   increases due to strategic bidding in the DMA under consideration and all DMAs with larger payout
   increases.


for between 56.96% and 99.44% of payout increases, with an average of 79.39% across DMAs.
Similarly, at the national level, always selling TV stations garner 81.67% of payout increases. The
right panel of Table 10 shows that there are very few TV stations that sell only under strategic
bidding or only under naive bidding; the vast majority of TV stations (96.49% of the TV stations
that sell under naive bidding at the national level) sell under both forms of bidding.
   This suggests that in many equilibria strategic supply reduction does not significantly change
the number and identity of the TV stations that sell, but increases the price at which these TV
stations sell, similar to the second equilibrium in Section 7.1. Indeed, the average freezing base
clock price indicates such price increases: we find that under naive bidding and the 84 MHz clearing
target, the average freezing base clock price is $48.02, compared to $51.52 under strategic bidding.
Under the 126 MHz clearing target, the respective prices are $109.23 and $128.80.

Model fit. We use the available data on the TV stations that relinquished their licenses in the
reverse auction to investigate our simulations’ ability to predict the auction’s outcome. Our model
correctly predicts a DMA as either having a positive payout or a zero payout with a probability
of 0.84 on average across simulation draws under the 84 MHz clearing target and either naı̈ve or
strategic bidding. This “hit rate” can be decomposed into a probability of 0.76 that we predict a
DMA to have a positive payout conditional on the DMA actually having a positive payout in the
reverse auction and a probability of .88 that we predict a DMA to have a zero payout conditional
on the DMA actually having a zero payout. To put these probabilities in perspective, randomly

                                                      37
Table 10: Decomposition of payout gains from strategic bidding in top ten DMAs by
type of TV station, 84 MHz clearing target

                                    Payout change ($ billion)                        Number of UHF TV stations
                                       Always      Newly           No longer              Always      Newly      No longer
         DMA               Overall     selling     selling          selling     Total     selling     selling     selling
  Philadelphia, PA          0.073       0.042       0.049           −0.018        23       10.558      1.302        0.352
  Los Angeles, CA           0.063       0.050       0.022           −0.009        28       11.129      0.299        0.231
 San Francisco, CA          0.040       0.038       0.010           −0.008        23       10.277      0.326        0.273
   Milwaukee, WI            0.017       0.015       0.004           −0.002        13        4.910      0.155        0.160
  Washington, DC            0.016       0.012       0.008           −0.004        16        5.072      0.555        0.398
    Chicago, IL             0.016       0.015       0.003           −0.002        21        6.225      0.105        0.075
    Hartford, CT            0.016       0.014       0.007           −0.006        11        4.811      0.505        0.369
   New York, NY             0.013       0.013       0.002           −0.002        24        8.695      0.030        0.035
   Pittsburgh, PA           0.006       0.005       0.004           −0.003        20        4.625      0.594        0.635
    Boston, MA              0.006       0.006       0.003           −0.003        20        6.090      0.326        0.250
   Top ten DMAs             0.265       0.210       0.112           −0.057        199      72.392      4.198        2.778
    Nationwide              0.279       0.228       0.126           −0.075       1671     179.378      7.340        6.522
 Notes: Payout change due to strategic bidding calculated as difference between mean payouts under strategic and
 naive bidding. For a given simulation draw and payout-unique equilibrium, we classify a TV station as always
 selling if it sells under both naive and strategic bidding, as newly selling if it sells only under strategic bidding, and
 as no longer selling if it only sells under naive bidding.


drawing 175 TV stations (the actual number that relinquished their licenses, see Section 2) yields
a hit rate of 0.56. Turning from DMAs to the TV stations themselves, we correctly predict a TV
station as either selling or not selling with a probability of .89 on average under both naı̈ve and
strategic bidding. Taken together, this suggests that our model has some predictive ability.

Efficiency.     There are potential efficiency losses from strategic bidding by multi-license owners to
the extent that such behavior distorts the set of TV stations that relinquish their licenses in the
reverse auction. As we cannot easily ascertain the social value of the re-purposed spectrum, we
adopt a notion of constrained efficiency, similar to Milgrom and Segal (2018). In comparing two
outcomes of the reverse auction for the same clearing target, we treat as the more efficient one the
outcome that has the lower total reservation value of acquired TV stations or, equivalently, the
higher total reservation value of TV stations that remain on the air.65 Not surprisingly, given the
results in Table 10, we find that the total reservation value of acquired TV stations under naive and
strategic bidding are very similar under both the 84 MHz and the 126 MHz clearing target. This
reflects in part that approximately the same number of TV stations sell in the reverse auction under
naive and strategic bidding, averaging across simulation draws to 185.90 under naive bidding and

   65
     This notion of constrained efficiency suffers of a number of shortcomings. We use the estimated private reservation
value of a TV station in lieu of its social value. This in particular neglects consumer surplus, e.g., due to broadcast
variety, to the extent that it is not appropriated by the TV station.


                                                              38
                               Table 11: Number of essential TV stations

                                                                       Strategic bidding
                                                             Mean        Min       Median        Max
                  Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
                  Number of essential TV stations           30.023      16.450     29.850      44.080
                                                            (3.828)     (3.264)    (3.791)     (6.093)
                  Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
                  Number of essential TV stations           17.324      10.130     17.265      24.640
                                                            (3.414)     (3.212)    (3.476)     (4.794)


the 84 MHz clearing target and averaging across payout-unique equilibria and simulation draws
to 186.72 under strategic bidding. Under the 126 MHz clearing target, the average number of
TV stations that sell is 378.90 under naive bidding and 378.50 under strategic bidding. While
we thus do not find a sizable distortion in the set of TV stations that relinquish their licenses in
the reverse auction, there is of course a substantial transfer from the government—and ultimately
taxpayers—to TV stations. There is furthermore a risk that strategic bidding by multi-license
owners causes a stage of the incentive auction to fail, leading to a reduction of the clearing target
and thus the amount of spectrum that is re-purposed in the incentive auction.66

Bidding behavior.            The results so far highlight the payout implications of strategic supply re-
duction. They do not, however, speak to the changes in behavior that underpin these gains.
Investigating how different the behavior under strategic bidding is from that under naive bidding
is difficult because many TV stations do not sell, regardless of whether they bid truthfully bj = sj
or overbid bj = 900. Hence, simply counting the number of withheld TV stations in a given equi-
librium is not a meaningful measure of differences in behavior. We therefore say that a TV station
is essential to a payout-unique equilibrium if and only if that TV station overbids bj = 900 in all
equilibria underlying that payout-unique equilibrium. If a TV station is not essential, then there
are some underlying equilibria where the TV station is withheld and some where it is not, and yet
the payouts to all TV stations remain the same.
   Of the 1,670 UHF stations, 344 belong to a chain within the same DMA and can thus be part
of a supply reduction strategy. Table 11 shows that in comparison, the number of essential TV
stations is small, even for the payout-unique equilibria with the most essential TV stations. On
average across payout-unique equilibria and simulation draws, there are 17.32 and 30.02 essential
TV stations under the 84 MHz and 126 MHz clearing targets. Thus, withholding even a few TV
stations from the reverse auction suffices to give rise to equilibria that have significantly higher
payouts than those under naive bidding. In this sense, the outcome to the reverse auction is
sensitive to small changes in bidding behavior.
  66
       As the forward auction is outside of the scope of this paper, we cannot further quantify this risk.


                                                           39
Private equity firms. The private equity firms acquired TV stations that frequently set the
price for other TV stations in the reserve auction. The private equity firms own 2.6% of the 1,670
UHF stations. Under naive bidding and the 84 MHz clearing target, their TV stations set the
price for, on average across simulations, 16.14 other TV stations, or 8.7% of all frozen TV stations.
As we document in Section 5.2, the private equity firms acquired TV stations with relatively high
broadcast volumes, interference free populations, and interference counts. The unexpectedly large
number of freezes may therefore reflect station characteristics. We investigate this possibility by
regressing the average number of freezes at the station-level on flexible polynomial expansions of the
TV station’s broadcast volume and interference free population, along with an indicator for whether
the TV station is owned by a private equity firm. Even after controlling for station characteristics,
the private equity firms own TV stations that are responsible for an additional 0.19 freezes over
the average TV station, a sizable effect amounting to 0.61 standard deviations in the number of
freezes. We find a comparable effect under strategic bidding.
   We also find that the private equity firms we study were likely to acquire essential licenses that
were pivotal in changing equilibrium payouts. Ranking licenses descendingly by the frequency with
which they are essential to a payout-unique equilibrium under the 84 MHz clearing target, we find
that the private equity firms, in particular NRJ and OTA, own eight of the top 15 licenses. These
amount to 28.6 percent and 20 percent of NRJ and OTA’s overall license holdings.
   Not surprisingly, the private equity firms benefit significantly from the reverse auction under
both forms of bidding. Even under naive bidding, as Table 12 shows, we estimate that NRJ and
OTA recover most or all of their acquisition costs with payouts from the reverse auction, while
selling about one third of the acquired TV stations. LocusPoint recovers 35.9% of its acquisition
costs from the sale of 19% of the acquired TV stations. Payouts from the reverse auction plus
the value of unsold licenses thus substantially exceed the firms’ total acquisition costs. Table 12
also shows that the private equity firms experience sizable payout increases from strategic bidding,
ranging from 5.2% to 47.0% across firms. Taken together, the private equity firms garner 14.52%
of the gains from strategic bidding, despite the fact that they own 2.6% of the 1,670 UHF stations.

7.3   Auction design: Restriction on multi-license owners
We have so far shown that strategic supply reduction leads to a substantial transfer from the
government to TV stations. To highlight how our model can be used in designing future auctions,
we consider a simple change in the auction rules that mitigates the payout increase from strategic
bidding. In particular, we investigate how a restriction on the bids of multi-license owners affects
their ability to exploit the joint ownership of TV stations.
   Example 1 in Section 3.1 suggests that strategic supply reduction is more likely to be profitable
if the increase in the base clock price from withholding a TV station can be leveraged by selling
another TV station with high broadcast volume. To weaken this mechanism, we stipulate that to
withhold a TV station with a lower broadcast volume, a multi-license owner must also withhold any
other TV station with a higher broadcast volume. This restriction exploits the fact that broadcast


                                                 40
Table 12: Private equity firms’ payouts and sales of TV stations, 84 MHz clearing
target

                 Purchase                Naive bidding                 Strategic bidding               Payout
                    price         Number TV         Payout        Number TV         Payout           increase at
                ($ million)       stations sold ($ million)       stations sold ($ million)           mean (%)
    NRJ           235.51               5.40        198.711             5.40         225.878            13.672
                  (n=14)             (1.24)        (41.065)          (1.23)        (51.250)
 LocusPoint        54.75               1.72         19.668             2.10          28.917               47.030
                   (n=9)             (0.95)        (22.682)          (1.08)        (25.940)
    OTA            77.05               6.26        110.843             5.93         116.559               5.157
                  (n=20)             (1.52)        (24.703)          (1.38)        (22.663)
   Notes: Payout increase due to strategic bidding calculated as difference between mean payouts under
   strategic and naive bidding.


volume is observable and contractible, in the spirit of the literature on regulation (Laffont and
Tirole, 1986). However, we set aside legal considerations the FCC may face in implementing a
similar rule change.
   Table 13 shows how the rule change affects our main results in Table 8. The payout increase
from strategic bidding is between 62% and 80% less than in Table 8, depending on the clearing
target. The rule change mitigates payout increases by requiring that multi-license owners first
withdraw TV stations with higher broadcast volumes that likely also have higher reservation values.
Our estimates imply that, on average across simulation draws, the correlation between broadcast
volume and reservation value is 0.47 for the 1,670 UHF stations. Interestingly, the rule change also
renders the two equilibria discussed in Section 7.1 for the Philadelphia, PA, DMA infeasible, since
there both multi-license owners withhold the TV station with the lower broadcast volume from the
reverse auction.
Table 13: Payouts to TV stations nationwide and by DMA type under restriction on
multi-license owners

                                                                                                 Payout
                              Naive                        Strategic bidding                   increase at
   Payouts ($ billion)       bidding             Mean       Min      Median        Max          mean (%)
   Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
   Nationwide (204 DMAs) 17.008                 17.734     17.088     17.825      18.343            4.3
                             (0.740)            (0.753)    (0.738)    (0.840)     (0.833)
   Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
   Nationwide (204 DMAs)      4.003              4.118      4.093      4.116       4.145            2.9
                             (0.204)            (0.233)    (0.228)    (0.231)     (0.244)
 Notes: Payout increase at mean calculated as percent difference between mean payouts under strategic and naive
 bidding.




                                                      41
Figure 5: Payouts to TV stations in Philadelphia, PA, DMA under alternative inter-
ference levels and clearing targets




7.4   Auction design: Relaxing repacking constraints
In designing the reverse auction, the FCC had to make a number of choices. One such choice was
the maximum loss in population served that a TV station may suffer in the repacking process, as
discussed in Section 4.2. While the FCC settled on a 0.5% interference level, the alternative, looser
standards of 2% and 10% would have eliminated some interference constraints on the repacking
process and thus made TV stations more substitutable.
   To understand the role of the interference level and the implied degree of substitutability,
we simulate the reverse auction for the Philadelphia, PA, DMA under 12 different scenarios, each
requiring 72,900 simulations of the reverse auction. Each scenario pairs one of the three interference
levels (0.5%, 2%, and 10%) with one of the four clearing targets (126 MHz, 114 MHz, 106 MHz,
and 84 MHz) that the FCC considered. Under these three interference levels, the average number
of interference constraints for a TV station in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA drops from 69.60 for the
0.5% interference level to 52.35 and 30.12 for the 2% and 10% interference levels, respectively. The
results are shown in Figure 5, where we display payouts (in $ million) under naive bidding as black
bars and payouts under strategic bidding as white bars, with 95% confidence intervals in red.
   There are a few conclusions to draw from Figure 5. First, in line with the nationwide results
in Table 8, payouts decline in the clearing target, irrespective of the form of bidding and the
interference level. Second, payouts tend to decline in the interference level. Third, also as in the
nationwide results, the scope for strategic supply reduction, as measured by the payout increase


                                                 42
from strategic bidding, tends to decline in the clearing target. Finally, the scope for strategic supply
reduction is low at the 2% interference level for all but the 114 MHz clearing target and very low
at the 10% interference level for all clearing targets. As TV stations become more substitutable in
the repacking process, in the extreme it is unlikely that withholding a TV station from the reverse
auction has a large effect on payouts.
     Strategic supply reduction has been explored in previous work on multi-unit auctions in whole-
sale electricity markets (e.g., Wolfram, 1998, Hortacsu and Puller, 2008). Borenstein, Bushnell and
Wolak (2002) note that the effect of such an exercise of market power can be large when demand or
supply is inelastic. In contrast to electricity, TV stations are not homogeneous in the repacking pro-
cess because of interference constraints. We show that product differentiation amplifies the impact
of strategic supply reduction, even though the FCC’s demand for TV stations is elastic. Our results
thus complement the earlier literature by highlighting the interaction of product differentiation and
strategic supply reduction.


8        Extensions
As discussed in Section 2, payouts in the actual reverse auction amounted to $10.1 billion at the 84
MHz clearing target. Conservatively assuming full participation and a limited geographic extent of
strategic bidding, we predict payouts of $4.28 billion, on average across payout-unique equilibria
and simulation draws. In this section, we investigate the sensitivity of our main results to these
two assumptions.

8.1      Reduced participation
So far, we have conservatively assumed full participation of the 1,670 UHF stations. The FCC has
not committed to release any data on actual participation, despite obvious question around the
role of participation in outcomes. We now consider the sensitivity of our main results to reduced
participation. In line with the prospective nature of our analysis, we focus on TV stations that
were ex-ante expected to be less likely to participate in the reverse auction. We assume that all
108 religious stations and a random subset of 50% of non-commercial stations do not participate,
for a total of 253 non-participating TV stations.67
     Table 14 compares full and reduced participation under naive bidding for both the 84 MHz and
the 126 MHz clearing target. With fewer participating TV stations, the reverse auction is more
likely to fail at the outset (see footnote 26). The results for reduced participation in Table 14
condition on the 95.8% and 99.9% of the 20,400 runs of the reverse auction for the 126 MHz and
84 MHz clearing targets, that avoid failure at the outset. Because payouts under full participation
for these subsets of runs remain within 99.8% of payouts for all runs, we continue displaying

    67
     Ultimately, 15 out of 108 religious stations and 34 out of 289 non-commercial stations relinquished their licenses
in the reverse auction. As the FCC has not published information on participation, we cannot further assess the
participation by these two groups of TV stations.


                                                          43
Table 14: Payouts to TV stations nationwide and in Philadelphia, PA, DMA under
reduced participation

                                     Payout ($ billion)                      Payout increase (%) from
                                                     Strategic                            Reduced
                                Naive bidding         bidding                            + Strategic
                                Full   Reduced       Reduced                 Reduced       bidding
    Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
    Nationwide (204 DMAs) 17.008        33.869            −                     99.1             −
                              (0.740) (2.005)
    Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
    Nationwide (204 DMAs) 4.003          7.633            −                     90.7             −
                              (0.204) (1.056)
    Philadelphia, PA, DMA      0.516     1.068          1.565                 107.0%          203.3%
                              (0.057) (0.266)         (0.585)
 Notes: Payout increase at mean calculated as percent difference between mean payouts under strategic and naive
 bidding relative to full and reduced participation.


our main results from Table 8 for full participation. Table 14 highlights the importance of full
participation for the success of the reverse auction, as previously pointed out by Milgrom and Segal
(2018). Under reduced participation, payouts nearly double, irrespective of the clearing target. In
particular, payouts amount to $7.6 billion under reduced participation and the 84 MHz clearing
target, which—while considerably closer—is still less than payouts in the actual reverse auction.
   Because analyzing strategic bidding under reduced participation for all 204 DMAs is computa-
tionally taxing, we consider the Philadelphia, PA, DMA as a case study. We withhold the same
TV stations that we select as non-participating in the above nationwide results. As the bottom
row of Table 14 shows, under naive bidding and the 84 MHz clearing target, payouts double in
moving from full to reduced participation in line with the above nationwide results. When we fur-
ther account for strategic bidding, payouts rise to be three times the payouts under naive bidding
and full participation. As the Philadelphia, PA, DMA contributes approximately 25% of the gains
from strategic bidding under full participation (see Table 9), a back-of-the-envelope calculation sug-
gests that the combination of strategic bidding and reduced participation would result in payouts
similar to the $10.1 billion in the actual reverse auction. Since the FCC will not release data on
participation, this is our best estimate of the effect of reduced participation.
   One likely reason why many small TV stations may choose to remain on the air is the must-carry
provision of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (see Section
6.1), which greatly broadens their reach and potential advertising audience. One simple measure
to increase participation, therefore, would be to allow TV stations to relinquish their licenses but
retain their must-carry status, so that they can continue to operate as businesses and reach viewers
through cable systems.




                                                       44
                   Figure 6: Service contours of WGCB-TV and WTVE




8.2    Multi-market strategies
Strategic bidding may extend beyond market boundaries if multi-license owners withhold a TV
station in a DMA from the reverse auction to drive up the freezing base clock price for another
TV station they own in a neighboring DMA. Regional cross-market multi-license ownership is
pronounced. Consider, for example, the private equity firms. LocusPoint holds licenses in eight
focal DMAs and additional licenses outside of the focal DMA but in the focal DMA’s repacking
region in four instances. NRJ and OTA hold licenses in the surrounding repacking region of four
and five of the nine focal DMAs in which they are each present. We illustrate how such multi-
market strategies may work, continuing with Philadelphia, PA, DMA as a case study in the interest
of computational tractability.
   In late 2012, NRJ purchased WGCB-TV (facility ID 55350) in the Harrisburg, PA, DMA for $9
million. WGCB-TV is located in Red Lion, PA, towards both the Philadelphia, PA, and Baltimore,
MD, DMAs. While NRJ owns no other TV station in the Harrisburg, PA, DMA, it had previously
purchased WTVE and WPHY-CD (facility IDs 55305 and 74464) in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA in
late 2011 and early 2012 for $30.4 million and $3.5 million, respectively. Figure 6 shows the overlap
between the service contours of WGCB-TV (in red) and WTVE (in blue).68 WGCB-TV has a very
high interference count and may interfere with 161 TV stations in the repacking process. Hence,
if NRJ withholds WGCB-TV from the reverse auction, this may affect prices in the Philadelphia,
PA, DMA and potentially other DMAs as well; alternatively, withholding a Philadelphia station
may increase the payout to WGCB-TV.

  68
    We obtain service contours from the FCC’s TV Query Broadcast Station Search at https://www.fcc.gov/
media/television/tv-query, accessed on March 15, 2018.


                                                  45
Table 15: Payouts to TV stations in Philadelphia, PA, DMA under multi-market
strategy

                                                                                                    Payout
                                Naive                         Strategic bidding                   increase at
     Payouts ($ billion)       bidding               Mean      Min      Median        Max          mean (%)
     Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
     Base case                  2.172                2.481      2.320     2.499      2.614            14.2
                               (0.241)              (0.466)    (0.450)   (0.548)    (0.637)
     Multi-market strategy      2.172                4.065      2.141     3.995      6.190            87.2
                               (0.241)              (0.201)    (0.322)   (0.258)    (0.525)
     Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
     Base case                  0.516                0.589      0.576     0.587      0.605            14.1
                               (0.057)              (0.113)    (0.117)   (0.113)    (0.123)
     Multi-market strategy      0.516                0.603      0.584     0.599      0.627            16.8
                               (0.057)              (0.106)    (0.112)   (0.107)    (0.123)
     Notes: Payouts under multi-market strategy exclude WGCB-TV for comparability to base case. Payout
     increase at mean calculated as percent difference between mean payouts under strategic and naive bidding.


     To investigate, we allow NRJ to bid strategically on WGCB-TV in concert with its TV stations
in the Philadelphia, PA, DMA under both the 126 MHz and the 84 MHz clearing target. Allowing
for this multi-market strategy increases the number of strategy profiles for the Philadelphia, PA,
DMA from 729 in our base case to 1,701. Table 15 compares payouts to TV stations in the
Philadelphia, PA, DMA under the multi-market strategy to payouts in our base case. Under the
126 MHz clearing target, payouts can increase dramatically under the multi-market strategy; under
the 84 MHz clearing target, the effect is much more muted. Similar to the main results, where
small changes in bidding behavior have larger effects for higher clearing targets, NRJ’s additional
strategic lever appears to be more valuable when there are more constraints on the repacking
process.


9         Conclusions
In this paper, we explore the implications of ownership concentration for the recently-concluded
incentive auction that re-purposed spectrum from broadcast TV to mobile broadband usage. Own-
ership concentration is a policy concern as the FCC has welcomed the acquisitions of TV stations
by private equity firms and other outside investors in the run-up to the incentive auction. The
FCC worried about encouraging a healthy supply of TV stations in the reverse auction and viewed
outside investors as more likely to part with their TV stations than potentially “sentimental” own-
ers.69 At the same time, as our paper shows, ownership concentration is likely to give rise to strategic
supply reduction.
     Using a large-scale valuation exercise to estimate reservation values for all auction-eligible TV

    69
         See “FCC Makes Pitch for TV Stations’ Spectrum”, The Wall Street Journal, October 1, 2014.


                                                         46
stations, we compare the outcome of the reverse auction under strategic bidding when we account
for the ownership pattern in the data with the outcome under naive bidding. We show that strategic
supply reduction has a large impact on prices and payouts to TV stations. For the 126 MHz clearing
target, strategic bidding by multi-license owners increases nationwide payouts by 20.7% on average;
for the 84 MHz clearing target, strategic bidding increases nationwide payouts by 7.0%.
   Our simulation exercise affords several additional conclusions. First, while single-license owners
do not themselves engage in strategic supply reduction, as a group they witness payout increases
that are almost as large as those seen by multi-license owners. Second, there is significant hetero-
geneity in payouts as well as in payout increases due to strategic bidding across DMAs. Third,
strategic supply reduction has limited efficiency implications. Fourth, the outcome of the reverse
auction is sensitive to small changes in bidding behavior in that withholding even a few TV sta-
tions suffices to give rise to equilibria that have significantly higher payouts than those under naive
bidding.
   Our main results are likely to understate the impact of strategic supply reduction on prices and
payouts to TV stations because we make several conservative assumptions. We show that allowing
strategic bidding to extend beyond market boundaries has the potential to further exacerbate pay-
out increases. Perhaps even more important, we show that moving from our baseline assumption of
full participation to reduced participation substantially increases both naive payouts and the gains
from strategic bidding. Indeed, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the combination
of strategic bidding and reduced participation would result in payouts similar to the $10.1 billion
in the actual reverse auction.
   Our paper differs from most of the empirical literature on auctions and market design by taking
an ex ante perspective. We illustrate the usefulness of this approach in two ways. First, we
propose a simple change in the auction rules and investigate how placing a restriction on the bids
of multi-license owners affects their ability to exploit the joint ownership of TV stations. Second,
we trace out the relationship between the interference level that the FCC chooses—and the implied
degree of substitutability between TV stations in the repacking process—and payouts in the reverse
auction. We hope that the framework we provide proves useful in designing future auctions geared
at re-purposing spectrum toward more efficient uses.




                                                  47
References
Ausubel, Lawrence M. 2004. “An Efficient Ascending-Bid Auction for Multiple Objects.” American
  Economic Review 94(5):1452–1475.

Ausubel, Lawrence M. 2006. “An Efficient Dynamic Auction for Heterogeneous Commodities.”
  American Economic Review 96(3):602–629.

Ausubel, Lawrence M., Peter Cramton, Marek Pycia, Marzena Rostek and Marek Weretka. 2014.
  “Demand Reduction and Inefficiency in Multi-Unit Auctions.” Review of Economic Studies
  81(4):1366–1400.

Back, Kerry and Jaime Zender. 1993. “Auctions of Divisible Goods: On the Rationale for the
  Treasury Experiment.” Review of Financial Studies 6(4):733–764.

Back, Kerry and Jaime Zender. 2001. “Auctions of Divisible Goods with Endogenous Supply.”
  Economics Letters 73(1):29–34.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, Sven de Vries, James Schummer and Rakesh Vohra. 2011. “An Ascending
  Vickrey Auction for Selling Bases of a Matroid.” Operations Research 59(2):400–413.

Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market Ineffi-
  ciencies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.” American Economic Review
  92(5):1376–1405.

Brusco, Sandro and Giuseppe Lopomo. 2002. “Collusion via Signalling in Simultaneous Ascending
  Bid Auctions with Heterogeneous Objects, with and without Complementarities.” Review of
  Economic Studies 69(2):407–436.

Budish, Eric and Estelle Cantillon. 2012. “The Multi-Unit Assignment Problem: Theory and
  Evidence from Course Allocation at Harvard.” American Economic Review 102(5):2237–2271.

Bushnell, James B. and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2012. “Enforcement of Vintage Differentiated Regu-
  lations: The Case of New Source Review.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
  64(2):137–152.

Cantillon, Estelle and Martin Pesendorfer. 2007. “Combination Bidding in Multi-Unit Auctions.”
  CEPR Working Paper DP6083.

Cramton, Peter and Jesse A. Schwartz. 2002. “Collusive Bidding in the FCC Spectrum Auctions.”
  Contributions in Economic Analysis & Policy 1(1):1–20.

Duggan, Mark and Fiona M. Scott Morton. 2006. “The Distortionary Effects of Government
  Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 121(1):1–30.


                                              48
Dütting, Paul, Vasilis Gkatzelis and Tim Roughgarden. 2017. “The Performance of Deferred-
  Acceptance Auctions.” Mathematics of Operations Research 42(4):897–914.

Engelbrecht-Wiggans, Richard and Charles Kahn. 1998.       “Multi-Unit Auctions with Uniform
  Prices.” Economic Theory 12(2):227–258.

Engelbrecht-Wiggans, Richard and Charles Kahn. 2005. “Low-Revenue Equilibria in Simultaneous
  Ascending-Bid Auctions.” Management Science 51(3):508–518.

Engelmann, Dirk and Veronika Grimm. 2009. “Bidding Behaviour in Multi-Unit Auctions - An
  Experimental Investigation.” Economic Journal 119(537):855–882.

Fowlie, Meredith. 2009. “Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and Emis-
  sions Leakage.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2):72–112.

Fox, Jeremy T. and Patrick Bajari. 2013. “Measuring the Efficiency of an FCC Spectrum Auction.”
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5(1):100–146.

Frechette, Alexandre, Neil Newman and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2016. “Solving the Station Repacking
  Problem.” Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .

Goeree, Jacob K., Theo Offerman and Randolph Sloof. 2013. “Demand Reduction and Preemptive
  Bidding in Multi-Unit License Auctions.” Experimental Economics 16(1):52–87.

Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
  Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy 108(2):352–378.

Grimm, Veronika, Frank Riedel and Elmar Wolfstetter. 2003. “Low Price Equilibrium in Multi-
  Unit Auctions: the GSM Spectrum Auction in Germany.” International Journal of Industrial
  Organization 21(10):1557–1569.

Hitsch, Günter J., Ali Hortacsu and Dan Ariely. 2010. “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating.”
  American Economic Review 100(1):130–163.

Hortacsu, Ali and Steven Puller. 2008. “Understanding Strategic Bidding in Multi-Unit Auctions:
  A Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market.” Rand Journal of Economics 39(1):86–114.

Kagel, John H. and Dan Levin. 2001. “Behavior in Multi-Unit Demand Auctions: Experiments
  with Uniform Price and Dynamic Vickrey Auctions.” Econometrica 69(2):413–454.

Kazumori, Eiichiro. 2016. “Generalized Deferred Acceptance Auctions with Multiple Relinquish-
  ment Options for Spectrum Reallocation.” Working Paper, State University of New York, Buffalo,
  NY.

Krishna, Vijay. 2010. Auction Theory. 2nd ed. New York: Academic Press.



                                              49
Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole. 1986. “Using Cost Observation to Regulate Firms.” Journal
  of Political Economy 94(3):614–641.

Levin, Jonathan and Andrzej Skrzypacz. 2016. “Properties of the Combinatorial Clock Auction.”
  American Economic Review 106(9):2528–2551.

Li, Shengwu. 2017.     “Obviously Strategy-Proof Mechanisms.” American Economic Review
  107(11):3257–3287.

List, John A. and David Lucking-Reiley. 2000. “Demand Reduction in Multiunit Auctions: Evi-
  dence from a Sportscard Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 90(4):961–972.

Menezes, Flavio. 1996. “Multiple-Unit English Auctions.” European Journal of Political Economy
  12(4):671–684.

Milgrom, Paul. 2004. Putting Auction Theory to Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Milgrom, Paul and Ilya Segal. 2018. “Clock Auctions and Radio Spectrum Reallocation.” Journal
  of Political Economy forthcoming.

Oyer, Paul. 1998. “Fiscal Year Ends and Nonlinear Incentive Contracts: The Effect on Business
  Seasonality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1):149–185.

Riedel, Frank and Elmar Wolfstetter. 2006.    “Immediate Demand Reduction in Simultaneous
  Ascending-Bid Auctions: A Uniqueness Result.” Economic Theory 29(3):721–726.

Sood, Gaurav. 2018. “Geographic Information on Designated Media Markets.”.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/IVXEHT

Weber, Robert J. 1997. “Making More from Less: Strategic Demand Reduction in the FCC
  Spectrum Auctions.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 6(3):529–548.

Wilson, Robert. 1979. “Auctions of Shares.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(47):675–689.

Wolfram, Catherine D. 1998. “Strategic Bidding in a Multiunit Auction: An Empirical Analysis of
  Bids to Supply Electricity in England and Wales.” Rand Journal of Economics 29(4):703–725.




                                              50
Appendix
A     Data sources
In this appendix, we discuss several details of the data sources we rely on and describe how we
construct our sample and primary variables.

A.1    TV stations
We restrict attention to TV stations located in the U.S. excluding Puerto Rico and the Virgin
Islands that the FCC has declared as eligible for the reverse auction. Table A1 breaks down these
2, 150 TV stations by type of service, type of use, and power output.

    Table A1: TV station counts by type of service, type of use, and power output

                                               Full-power        Low-power
                                           Primary Satellite      Class-A      Total
                          Commercial         947        56          378
                 UHF                                                           1,670
                         Non-commercial      282        0            7

                          Commercial          294           56        24
                 VHF                                                            480
                         Non-commercial       105           0          1
                Total                               1,740            410       2,150



A.2    DMAs
DMAs are ranked annually according to market size as measured by the number of homes with at
least one television (henceforth, TV households, measured in thousand). Table A2 lists the top ten
DMAs in 2015 along with some characteristics from the BIA data. DMA population is measured
as number of people (in million) as opposed to number of TV households. Income is average per
capita disposable personal income (in $). The number of TV station covers the 2,150 TV stations
located in the U.S. excluding Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands that the FCC has declared as
eligible for the reverse auction.

A.3    BIA data
After restricting to full-power stations (primary and satellite stations) and low-power class-A sta-
tions, the BIA data provides us with 25,544 station-year observations from 2003 to 2013 and for
2015. Commercial stations make up 20,574 observations and non-commercial stations, including
dark stations, 4,970 observations.
    The BIA data provides station, owner and market characteristics, as well as transaction histories
covering the eight most recent changes in the ownership of a TV station. Advertising revenue and
DMA rank are provided for each year from 2003 to 2013 and for 2015. DMA population is provided

                                                 51
                                     Table A2: Top ten DMAs in 2015

                                                TV households         DMA population          Income        TV
        Rank            DMA                      (thousand)             (million)                ($)      stations
         1          New York, NY                    7,368                 21.4                57,769         28
         2        Los Angeles, CA                   5,490                 16.3                 44,678        32
         3           Chicago, IL                    3,475                  9.8                46,976         24
         4        Philadelphia, PA                  2,918                  8.1                 48,620        28
         5      Dallas Fort Worth, TX               2,646                  7.7                 44,590        21
         6       San Francisco, CA                  2,485                  7.3                 64,442        26
         7         Washington, DC                   2,444                  6.9                56,362         20
         8           Boston, MA                     2,411                  6.5                56,463         23
         9           Atlanta, GA                    2,386                  6.8                38,275         19
         10          Houston, TX                    2,374                  6.9                49,255         19


for 2007, 2008, 2012, 2013, and 2015. We use the data for 2007 and 2008 to extrapolate DMA
population linearly to earlier years and the data for 2008 and 2013 to interpolate linearly to the
years in-between. With few exceptions, other characteristics are provided only for 2012 and for
2015.70 Transaction histories are provided from 2003 to 2013.
    For commercial stations, advertising revenue is missing for 5,814, or 28.3%, station-year obser-
vations. Table A3 shows the share of station-year observations with missing advertising revenue
for commercial stations. Advertising revenue is missing for almost all satellite stations because
BIA subsumes their advertising revenues into those of their parent primary stations.71 Missing
values are further concentrated among low-power class-A stations, among TV stations affiliated
with Spanish-language networks (Azteca America, Independent Spanish, Telemundo, Unimas, and
Univision) and other minor networks, and among independent stations. There are no discernible
patterns in missing values along other dimensions of the data such as market size.
    We impute missing advertising revenue for all commercial stations apart from satellite stations
as follows. We regress the log of advertising revenue (in $ thousand) ln ADjt on station, owner,
and market characteristics Xjt . We run this regression separately for each year from 2003 to 2013
and for 2015 and use it to predict advertising revenue ADjt . We include in Xjt the log of the
interference free population coverage (in thousand) of the TV station, an indicator for whether the
TV station has multicast sub-channels, an indicator for full-power stations, fixed effects for the
eleven network affiliations in Table A3, fixed effects for the interaction of affiliation groups (see
Appendix C.1.1) with U.S. states, an indicator for whether the owner owns more than one TV
station in the same DMA, ownership category fixed effects (whether the owner owns between two
and ten, or more than ten TV stations across DMAs), the number of TV stations in the DMA,

   70
       An “on air date” is provided and we drop observations for a TV station before it went on the air. A previous
affiliation and the date of the affiliation change are provided. We manually fill in historical affiliations, including the
merger of United Paramount and Warner Bros in 2006 to form CW and the creation of MyNetwork TV in 2006.
    71
       We enforce this convention for the 54 station-year observations where a satellite station has non-missing adver-
tising revenue. We manually link the 112 satellite stations in Table A1 to 78 primary stations because BIA does not
provide this information.


                                                            52
the number of major network affiliates in the DMA, the wealth and competitiveness indices for the
DMA (see Appendix C.1.1), and the log of DMA population (in thousand). Finally, we account for
the contribution of any satellite stations to advertising revenue by including in Xjt the number of
                    SAT that belong to the primary station. The adjusted R2 is 0.99 in all years in
satellite stations Njt
logs and 0.75 on average in levels, suggesting that we capture most of the variation in advertising
revenue across stations and years. We report the parameter estimates in Online Appendix F.
   With the parameter estimates in hand, we impute advertising revenue ADjt , where missing,
                       2
             ADjt + σ̂2
   d jt = eln\
as AD                    to account for the non-zero mean of the log-normally distributed error
term with estimated variance σ̂ 2 . We proceed as follows: First, for a primary station we impute
advertising revenue ADjt as AD
                            d jt . We further net out the contribution of satellite stations, if
any, to the advertising revenue of their parent primary station by replacing advertising revenue
                          SAT
ADjt with ADjt /eβ̂SAT Njt                                                     SAT . Second, we impute
                                , where β̂SAT is the estimated coefficient on Njt
advertising revenue for a satellite station by first computing the contribution of all satellite stations
                         SAT
as ADjt − ADjt /eβ̂SAT Njt      and then allocating each satellite station’s contribution in proportion
to its interference free population.

             Table A3: Missing advertising revenue for commercial stations

                                                                Missing advertising revenue
                                               Station-year     Station-year count     %
                                                  count
           Full-power
             Primary                              14,672                958            6.53
             Satellite                            1,346                1,292           96.0
           Low-power class-A                      4,556                3,564           78.2
           Major networks
             ABC                                   2,669                412            15.4
             CBS                                   2,640                339            12.8
             Fox                                   2,443                344            14.1
             NBC                                   2,656                395            14.9
           Minor networks
             CW                                     930                  94            10.1
             MyNetwork TV                           829                 143            17.3
             United Paramount                       266                  34            12.8
             Warner Bros                            264                  21            7.95
             Spanish-language networks             1,844                553            30.0
             Other                                3,206                1,635           51.0
           Independent                            2,827                1,844           65.2
           Total                                  20,574               5,814           28.3



A.4    NAB data
NAB collects financial information on cash flow and revenue broken down into detailed source
categories for commercial full-power stations. We define advertising revenue as the sum of local,

                                                   53
regional, national, and political advertising revenue, commissions, and network compensation. We
further define non-broadcast revenue as the sum of total trade-outs and barter, multicast revenue,
and other broadcast related revenue.
    NAB reports the data at various levels of aggregation. Table A4 shows the resulting 66 tables
in 2012.72 The number of tables fluctuates slightly year-by-year because NAB imposes a minimum
of ten TV stations per aggregation category to ensure confidentiality.73,74 Note that a TV station
may feature in more than one table. For example, WABC-TV (facility ID 1328), the New York
ABC affiliate, is used in calculating statistics for (1) markets of rank 1 to 10; (2) major network
affiliates; (3) all ABC affiliates; and (4) ABC affiliates in markets with rank 1 to 25.
    For each aggregation category, NAB reports the mean as well as the first, second, and third
quartile for cash flow and detailed revenue source categories. Because we do not observe correlations
between the detailed revenue source categories, we can construct the mean of advertising revenue
and non-broadcast revenue but not the quartiles. We present a sample of the NAB data for select
aggregation categories in Table A5.
    To validate the data, we compare the mean of advertising revenue from the NAB data to suitably
averaged advertising revenue from the BIA data. The resulting 662 pairs of means from the two
data sources exhibit a correlation of 0.980. To investigate the consequences of imputing advertising
revenue, where missing, in the BIA data, we equally split the sample into two groups based on
the amount of imputation. For each of the 662 NAB tables, we calculate the share of stations in
the BIA data that qualify for the table and have imputed advertising revenue. The 329 pairs of
means with below-median amounts of imputation exhibit a correlation of 0.981 and the 333 pairs
of means with above-median amounts of imputation exhibit a correlation of 0.972. This suggests
that imputing advertising revenue does not significantly diminish the validity of the BIA data.




  72
      We exclude 15 aggregation categories that are defined by total revenue because the BIA data is restricted to
advertising revenue.
   73
      In 2012, NAB received 785 responses to 1,288 questionnaires, a response rate of 60.9%.
   74
      Some years, in particular, break out United Paramount and Spanish-language networks but not other minor
networks. We conclude that the response rate of other minor networks is very low and thus exclude other minor
networks from the cash flow estimation in Section C.1.2.


                                                       54
                         Table A4: NAB tables in 2012

Table   Description                           Table   Description
  1     All Stations, All Markets              34     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC,
                                                      Markets 176+
 2      All Stations, Markets 1-10             35     ABC, All Markets
 3      All Stations, Markets 11-20            36     ABC, Markets 1-25
 4      All Stations, Markets 21-30            37     ABC, Markets 26-50
 5      All Stations, Markets 31-40            38     ABC, Markets 51-75
 6      All Stations, Markets 41-50            39     ABC, Markets 76-100
 7      All Stations, Markets 51-60            40     ABC, Markets 101+
 8      All Stations, Markets 61-70            41     CBS, All Markets
 9      All Stations, Markets 71-80            42     CBS, Markets 1-25
 10     All Stations, Markets 81-90            43     CBS, Markets 26-50
 11     All Stations, Markets 91-100           44     CBS, Markets 51-75
 12     All Stations, Markets 101-110          45     CBS, Markets 76-100
 13     All Stations, Markets 111-120          46     CBS, Markets 101+
 14     All Stations, Markets 121-130          47     FOX, All Markets
 15     All Stations, Markets 131-150          48     FOX, Markets 1-50
 16     All Stations, Markets 151-175          49     FOX, Markets 51-75
 17     All Stations, Markets 176+             50     FOX, Markets 76-100
 18     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, All Markets        51     FOX, Markets 101+
 19     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 1-10       52     NBC, All Markets
 20     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 11-20      53     NBC, Markets 1-25
 21     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 21-30      54     NBC, Markets 26-50
 22     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 31-40      55     NBC, Markets 51-75
 23     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 41-50      56     NBC, Markets 76-100
 24     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 51-60      57     NBC, Markets 101+
 25     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 61-70      58     CW, All Markets
 26     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 71-80      59     CW, Markets 1-25
 27     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 81-90      60     CW, Markets 26-50
 28     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 91-100     61     CW, Markets 51-75
 29     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 101-110    62     MNTV, All Markets
 30     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 111-120    63     MNTV, Markets 1-50
 31     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 121-130    64     MNTV, Markets 51+
 32     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 131-150    65     Independent, All markets
 33     ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, Markets 151-175    66     Independent, Markets 1-25




                                      55
            Table A5: Sample NAB data for select aggregation categories in 2012

                                           Advertising                        Cash flow                     Non-broad-
                                             revenue                         ($ million)                    cast revenue
                                           ($ million)                            Quartile                   ($ million)
                                              Mean            Mean         First Second Third                   Mean
  All Stations, All Markets                   16.96           7.798        1.243     3.752 9.178                2.977
  All Stations, Markets 101-110               8.267           4.120        1.704     3.619 6.444                2.102
  ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC,
      All Markets                              19.05          9.244        1.936         4.929   10.901          3.326
  ABC, Markets 1-25                            67.78         32.400       15.090        27.150   42.460          7.596
  NBC, Markets 101+                            7.568          3.652        1.293         3.283   5.901           1.883
  CW, All Markets                              13.35          3.929        0.355        1.798     3.224          2.884
  MNTV, Markets 1-50                           9.495          3.124        1.270         1.799   3.215           2.507
  Independent, All Markets                     13.43          2.786       -0.020        1.288     4.327          2.195


B        Proofs
In this appendix, we prove Propositions 1 and 2. We first state and prove two lemmas characterizing
the impact of bj on the payout to TV station j and on the profit of its owner, firm i. In a slight
abuse of notation, we partition the vector b = (b1 , . . . , bN ) of bids as (bi , b−i ), where bi is the vector
of bids of firm i and b−i is the vector of bids of the other firms, and as (bj , b−j ), where bj is the
bid of TV station j and b−j is the vector of bids of the other TV stations. Let τ (j) ≥ 1 denote the
round of the reverse auction where TV station j first opts to remain on the air (unless it has already
been frozen), i.e., Pτ (j)−1 > bj ≥ Pτ (j) (and we set P0 = ∞). Partition the set of frozen TV stations
at the conclusion of the reverse auction as F ∗ (b) = j∈{1,...,N } Fj∗ (b), where Fj∗ (b) ⊆ {1, ..., N } is
                                                         S

the (possibly empty) set of TV stations that are frozen by TV station j given the vector of bids
b.75 Note that TV station j determines the payout P Ok (b) = Pτ (j) ϕk to all TV stations k ∈ Fj∗ (b).
Finally, denote the set of inactive TV stations at the conclusion of the reverse auction as I ∗ (b).

Lemma 3. If j ∈ Ji and j ∈ F ∗ (b), then πi (b) = πi (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j ≤ bj .

Proof. Because j ∈ F ∗ (b), it must be that j ∈ Fl∗ (b) for some TV station l with bl > bj , i.e., TV
station l freezes TV station j under the vector of bids b. Note that j ∈ Fl∗ (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j ≤ bj
and thus Fj∗ (b) = Fj∗ (b̃j , b−j ) = ∅, i.e., TV station l continues to freeze TV station j under the
vector of bids (b̃j , b−j ) and TV station j does not freeze another TV station. Hence, we have to
show that

                    X        X                             X            X
         πi (b) =                    (Pτ (k) ϕm − vm ) =                            (Pτ (k) ϕm − vm ) = πi (b̃j , b−j )
                    k6=j m∈Ji ∩Fk∗ (b)                     k6=j m∈Ji ∩F ∗ (b̃j ,b−j )
                                                                       k



    75
    If a TV station k ∈ Z1 (b) is frozen at the outset of the reverse auction, then we assign it to a TV station l ∈ Y1 (b)
and say that k ∈ Fl∗ (b).


                                                             56
                      Figure A1: Case 1 and subcases in proof of Lemma 4




for all b̃j ≤ bj . It suffices to show that Fk∗ (b) = Fk∗ (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j ≤ bj and k 6= j. First
consider any TV station k with bk > bj . It is obvious that Fk∗ (b) = Fk∗ (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j ≤ bj .
Consider next any TV station k with bk < bj . Because Fτ (l)+1 (b) = Fτ (l)+1 (b̃j , b−j ) and Aτ (l)+1 (b) =
Aτ (l)+1 (b̃j , b−j ), the reverse auction progresses the same from round τ (l) + 1 on under the vector
of bids b as under the vector of bids (b̃j , b−j ). Hence, Fk∗ (b) = Fk∗ (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j ≤ bj . This
completes the proof.

Lemma 4. If j ∈ I ∗ (b) and S(Y1 (b) ∪ {j}, R) = 1, then F ∗ (b) = F ∗ (b̃j , b−j ) and P Ok (b) ≤
P Ok (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j > bj and k ∈ {1, ..., N }.

Proof. The condition S(Y1 (b) ∪ {j}, R) = 1 guarantees that the reverse auction does not fail at the
outset for any vector of bids (b̃j , b−j ). Consider first TV station j. Because j ∈ I ∗ (b), it must be
that j ∈ I ∗ (b̃j , b−j ) and thus P Oj (b) = 0 = P Oj (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j > bj . Next consider any TV
station k 6= j. If k ∈ I ∗ (b), then k ∈ I ∗ (b̃j , b−j ) for all b̃j > bj and thus P Ok (b) = 0 = P Ok (b̃j , b−j ).
Assuming k 6∈ I ∗ (b) and therefore bk < 900, we proceed in two cases, depending on whether or not
there exists any inactive TV station with its bid between bj and ebj .
    Case 1: There does not exist any inactive TV station with its bid between bj and ebj , i.e.,
{l|l ∈ I ∗ (b), bj < bl < ebj } = ∅. Consider a TV station k 6= j. Figure A1 illustrates the possible
subcases.
     Subcase 1a: If bj < bk , then k ∈ Fl∗ (b) for some TV station l with bl ≥ ebj . Thus k ∈
F ∗ (ebj , b−j ) ∪ F1 (ebj , b−j ) and P Ok (b) = Pτ (l) ϕk = P Ok (ebj , b−j ).
 l
   Subcase 1b: If bk < bj and k ∈ Fj∗ (b), then k ∈ Fj∗ (ebj , b−j )∪F1 (ebj , b−j ) and P Ok (b) = Pτ (j) ϕk <
P Ok (ebj , b−j ).


                                                           57
                    Figure A2: Case 2 and subcases in proof of Lemma 4




     Subcase 1c: If bk < bj and k ∈ Fl∗ (b) for some TV station l ∈ I ∗ (b) \ {j}, then k ∈ Fl∗ (ebj , b−j ) ∪
F1 (ebj , b−j ) and thus P Ok (b) = Pτ (l) ϕk = P Ok (ebj , b−j ).
     Case 2: There exists at least one inactive TV station with its bid between bj and ebj , i.e.,
M = {m|m ∈ I ∗ (b), bj < bm < ebj } 6= ∅. Let M = {m1 , ..., mn } and enumerate its members such
that bj < bm1 < bm2 < ... < bmn < ebj . It suffices to show that F ∗ (b) = F ∗ (bm1 + , b−j ) and
P Ok (b) ≤ P Ok (bm1 + , b−j ) for all k 6= j and any sufficiently small  > 0; it then follows that
F ∗ (b) = F ∗ (bm1 + , b−j ) = ... = F ∗ (bmn + , b−j ) = F ∗ (ebj , b−j ), where the last equality follows
from Case 1, and P Ok (b) ≤ P Ok (bm1 + , b−j ) ≤ ... ≤ P Ok (bmn + , b−j ) ≤ P Ok (ebj , b−j ) for all
k 6= j for the same reason.
   Consider a TV station k 6= j. Figure A2 illustrates the possible subcases.
     Subcase 2a: If k ∈ Fl∗ (b) for some TV station l with bm1 < bl , then k ∈ Fl∗ (bm1 + , b−j ) ∪
F1 (ebj , b−j ) and P Ok (b) = Pτ (l) ϕk = P Ok (bm1 + , b−j ).
   Subcase 2b: If k ∈ Fl∗ (b) for some TV station l with bl < bj , then k ∈ Fl∗ (bm1 + , b−j ) and
P Ok (b) = Pτ (l) ϕk = P Ok (bm1 + , b−j ).
                                 ∗ (b), then k ∈ F ∗ (b
   Subcase 2c: If k ∈ Fj∗ (b) ∪ Fm 1
                                                                     ∗
                                                  j m1 + , b−j ) ∪ Fm1 (bm1 + , b−j ) ∪ F1 (bj , b−j )
                                                                                              e
and P Ok (b) ≤ Pτ (m1 ) ϕk = P Ok (bm1 + , b−j ).
   This completes the proof.

   We are now ready to prove Proposition 1:

Proof of Proposition 1. We first show that j ∈ I ∗ (b). Suppose to the contrary that j ∈
                                                                                       / I ∗ (b).
Then j ∈ F ∗ (b) and Lemma 3 implies πi (b) = πi (sj , b−j ), contradicting πi (b) > πi (sj , b−j ). Hence,



                                                     58
j ∈ I ∗ (b) and it follows from Lemma 4 that
                                                 X
                                πi (b) =                 (P Ol (b) − vl )
                                             l∈Ji ∩F ∗ (b)
                                                    X
                                         ≤                       (P Ol (900, b−j ) − vl )
                                             l∈Ji ∩F ∗ (900,b−j )

                                         = πi (900, b−j ).




    The proof of Proposition 2 largely parallels that of Proposition 1:

Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose to the contrary that πi (0, b−j ) < πi (b). Then it must be that
j ∈ I ∗ (b); otherwise, j ∈ F ∗ (b) and it follows from Lemma 3 that πi (0, b−j ) = πi (b). Hence,
j ∈ I ∗ (b) and it follows from Lemma 4 that
                                                  X
                                  πi (b) =                   (P Ol (b) − vl )
                                              l∈Ji ∩F ∗ (b)
                                                     X
                                          ≤                         (P Ol (sj , b−j ) − vl )
                                              l∈Ji ∩F ∗ (sj ,b−j )

                                          = πi (sj , b−j ),

contradicting πi (b) > πi (sj , b−j ).




                                                               59
C     Reservation values
In this appendix, we provide details on how we estimate the reservation value of a TV station going
into the reverse auction.

C.1     Cash flows
C.1.1     Functional forms

In the cash flow model in equation (10), we parameterize α (Xjt ; β), RT (Xjt ; γ), and F (Xjt ; δ) as
functions of station and market characteristics Xjt as

                  9
                  X                                      2012
                                                         X
  α (Xjt ; β) =         β0a 1(Affiliation jt   = a) +            β0s 1(t = s) + β1 Foxjt · t + β2 CompIndexjt ,
                  a=1                                   s=2003

RT (Xjt ; γ) = exp(γ0 + γ1 t + γ2 ln(P opServedjt ),
                                                 3
                                                 X
  F (Xjt ; δ) =δ0 + δ1 WealthIndexjt +                 1(Group jt = h)(δ2h ln(P opServedjt ) + δ3h ln(P opServedjt )2 ),
                                                 h=1

where 1 (·) is the indicator function and we use the shorthand

         P opServedjt = 1 (P owerOutputjt = F ullP ower) · DM AP opjt
                           + 1 (P owerOutputjt = LowP owerClassA) · Interf erenceF reeP opjt .

Af f iliationjt refers to nine of the eleven affiliations76 in Table A3 and Groupjt to groupings of
affiliations (detailed below). W ealthIndexjt and CompIndexjt are the wealth and competitiveness
indices for the DMA.77
    We allow the share α (Xjt ; β) of advertising revenue retained as cash flow to vary flexibly by year
and network affiliation. We allow for a separate time trend for Fox affiliates as their profitability
grew substantially over time. The competitiveness index CompIndexjt accounts for differences in
the competitive environment across DMAs.
    76
       We normalize the parameter on the indicator for Spanish-language networks to zero. We exclude any TV station
affiliated with other minor networks from the estimation in line with footnote 74. To predict the cash flow for such
a TV station, we use its station and owner characteristics Xjt and the estimated parameter on the indicator for
Independent.
    77
       To parsimoniously capture market characteristics, we conduct a principal component analysis of the log of the
market-level variables prime-age (18-54) population, average per capita disposable personal income, retail expendi-
tures, total market advertising revenues, number of primary TV stations, and number of major network affiliates.
We define the time-varying number of primary TV stations and major network affiliates based on auction-eligible
TV stations contained in the BIA data from 2003 to 2013 and for 2015 but rely on the BIA data for 2015 for the
remaining market-level characteristics. The first principal component, denoted as CompIndexjt , loads primarily on
to prime-age population, advertising revenues, number of primary TV stations, and number of major network affili-
ates. The second principal component, denoted as W ealthIndexjt loads primarily on to average disposable income
and retail expenditures.


                                                                 60
   We specify RT (Xjt ; γ) as an exponential function of DMA population and interference free
population for full-power stations and low-power class-A stations, respectively, and a time trend,
in light of the rapid growth of retransmission fees. We make no attempt to separately estimate
an error term for non-broadcast revenue and assume it is one part of jt in equation (10) due to
additivity.78
   Lastly, we let fixed cost F (Xjt ; δ) vary flexibly with DMA population and interference free
population for full-power stations and low-power class-A stations, respectively, as well as the net-
work affiliation. To streamline the specification, we subsume the affiliations in Table A3 into three
groups with similar cost structures: (1) ABC, CBS, and NBC; (2) Fox, CW, and Warner Bros; (3)
My Network TV, United Paramount, Spanish-language networks, and Independents. We include
the wealth index W ealthIndexjt in the fixed cost to reflect the differential cost of operating in
different DMAs.

C.1.2       Data and estimation

We combine the station-level data on advertising revenue, station characteristics, and market char-
acteristics from BIA with the aggregated data from NAB. The NAB data yields 3,313 moments
across aggregation categories and the ten years from 2003 to 2012. We drop the years 2013 and
2015 from the BIA data as 2012 is the latest year of availability for the NAB data. There are a
total of 11,731 station-year observations from the BIA data that meet NAB’s data collection and
reporting procedure and therefore map into a table of a NAB report.
   We use a simulated minimum distance estimator for the parameters θ = (β, γ, δ, σ) of the cash
flow model in equation (10). We draw N s = 100 vectors of cash flow error terms s = sjt , where
sjt is the cash flow error term of TV station j in year t in draw s. Denote by CF gt , CFgt
                                                                                          1 , CF 2 ,
                                                                                                gt
      3 the mean, first, second, and third quartiles of the cash flow distribution reported by NAB
and CFgt
in year t for aggregation category g = 1, . . . , Gt , where Gt is the number of aggregation categories
                                d (θ; s ), CF
in year t. Similarly, denote by CF gt
                                               d 1 (θ; s ), CF
                                                             d 2 (θ; s ), and CF
                                                                               d 3 (θ; s ) the analogous
                                                   gt            gt               gt
moments of the predicted cash flow distribution for the TV stations that feature in aggregation
category g in year t. Our notation emphasizes that the latter depend on the parameters θ and the
vector of cash flow error terms s in draw s; we suppress their dependence on advertising revenue
and characteristic data from BIA. We use similar notation, replacing CF with RT , for the mean
of the non-broadcast revenue distributions. To estimate θ, we match the moments of the predicted
and actual distributions across aggregation categories and years. Formally, we solve


                     2012   Gt          Ns
                                                         !2  3           Ns
                                                                                           !2
                     X      X        1 Xd              s
                                                            X     q    1 X dq           s
    θ̂ = arg min             CF gt − s      CF gt (θ;  ) +     CFgt − s     CF gt (θ;  )
              θ                     N                                 N
                 t=2003 g=1            s=1                  q=1          s=1

                                      d (θ) 2 .
                                            
                            + RT gt − RT gt


  78
       We obtain very similar estimates when we separately estimate such an error term.


                                                         61
We constrain the standard deviation of the error term to be positive. Our interior-point minimiza-
tion algorithm terminates with a search step less than the specified tolerance of 10−12 . We use
multiple starting values to guard against local minima.

C.1.3    Results

Table A6 reports the parameter estimates for the retained share α(Xjt ; β), non-broadcast revenue
RT (Xjt ; γ), and fixed cost F (Xjt ; δ). They are in line with our expectations: major network
affiliates retain a higher share of advertising revenue than minor networks, with Fox having a
positive trend; independent and WB stations retain the highest share of advertising revenues,
albeit with the smallest revenue base; the retained share falls over time, bottoming out in 2009
before bouncing back in recent years; the retained share is lower in more competitive markets.
Finally, non-broadcast revenue has grown significantly in recent years and there are economies of
scale in fixed cost.
   Figure A3 plots the distributions of the predicted retained share α(Xjt ; β) (left panel), non-
broadcast revenue RT (Xjt ; γ) (middle panel), and fixed cost F (Xjt ; δ) (right panel) for the 1,168
commercial full-power stations surveyed by NAB in 2012. Reassuringly, without imposing restric-
tions, we predict the retained share to be between 0.2 and 0.7 in 2012, with an average of 0.53;
non-broadcast revenue is predicted to be between $0.22 million and $10.9 million; fixed cost is
predicted to be positive for 95% of TV stations, averaging $4.4 million, with the highest predicted
fixed cost of $24.2 million.

Figure A3: Predicted retained share α(Xjt ; β), non-broadcast revenue RT (Xjt ; δ), and
fixed cost F (Xjt ; δ) in 2012




   The cash flow model fits the data well. Figure A4 plots the distributions of predicted cash flow
for a sample draw of the vector of cash flow error terms s (left panel) and non-broadcast revenue


                                                 62
                         Table A6: Cash flow parameters estimates

                                                              Estimate
                         Retained share α(Xjt ; β)
                           ABC                                  -0.032
                           CBS                                  -0.050
                           Fox                                  -0.383
                           NBC                                  -0.049
                           CW                                   -0.116
                           MyNetwork TV                         -0.344
                           United Paramount                     -0.352
                           Warner Bros                           0.010
                           Independent                          -0.103
                           Fox × Trend                           0.018
                           2003                                  0.693
                           2004                                  0.665
                           2005                                  0.642
                           2006                                  0.629
                           2007                                  0.599
                           2008                                  0.568
                           2009                                  0.534
                           2010                                  0.601
                           2011                                  0.622
                           2012                                  0.638
                           CompIndexjt                          -0.019
                         Non-broadcast revenue RT (Xjt , γ) (log $)
                           Intercept                             6.248
                           ln (P opServedjt )                    0.510
                           Trend                                 0.135
                         Fixed cost F (Xjt ; δ) ($ million)
                           Intercept                            81.747
                           W ealthIndexjt                        1.133
                           Group 1 × ln (P opServedjt )        -15.071
                           Group 2 × ln (P opServedjt )        -13.526
                           Group 3 × ln (P opServedjt )        -12.229
                           Group 1 × ln (P opServedjt )2         0.690
                                                          2
                           Group 2 × ln (P opServedjt )          0.561
                           Group 3 × ln (P opServedjt )2         0.468
                         σ ($ million)                           0.854


(right panel) for the 1,168 commercial full-power stations surveyed by NAB in 2012. We predict cash
flow of between $-8.8 million and $126 million across TV stations, with an average of $7.2 million,
compared to $7.8 million reported by NAB. The first quartile ($1.6 million), second quartile ($3.5
million), and third quartile ($7.8 million) of the distribution of predicted cash flow are overlaid in
red lines (dashed, dotted, and dash-dotted, respectively). The black lines of the same patterns refer
to the corresponding moments in the NAB data (table “All Stations, All Markets”). Non-broadcast


                                                 63
 Figure A4: Predicted cash flow and non-broadcast revenue with moments in 2012




   Notes: In logs. Cash flow is shifted by $15 million to avoid negative numbers.


revenue is predicted to average $3.04 million, compared to $2.98 million reported by NAB.
   To further assess the fit of the cash flow model, Table A7 compares the cash flow and non-
broadcast revenue moments reported in the NAB data to the corresponding predicted moments,
broken down by type of moment, affiliation, year, and market rank. It provides three different mea-
sures of fit: the correlation between predicted and data moments and the mean absolute deviation
in levels in $ million and as a percent of the data moments. Overall, our cash flow model predicts
the 3,313 moments with a 0.98 correlation. The fit between data and predicted moments is better
for the 1,995 moments pertaining to major network affiliates than for the 110 moments pertaining
to independent stations. Similarly, the fit is better for moments pertaining to larger markets. The
330 predicted moments for 2012 have a 0.98 correlation with the data moments; on average, our
predicted moments miss the data moments by $1.11 million, or 16.4%. Other years are comparable.




                                                   64
       Table A7: Cash flow and non-broadcast revenue moments and fit measures

                                               Number of                     Mean abs. deviation
                                               moments       Correlation     $ million    %
         All moments                             3313           0.98           0.90      18.04
         Moments by type
           Cash flow, mean                         663           0.99          0.89        13.17
           Cash flow, first quartile               662           0.97          0.90        35.05
           Cash flow, second quartile              663           0.98          0.89        17.61
           Cash flow, third quartile               663           0.98          1.35        15.02
           Non-broadcast revenue, mean             662           0.84          0.49        29.01
         Moments by affiliation
           Major network                          1995           0.98          1.00        16.16
           Minor network                          350            0.93          0.97        37.60
           Independent                            110            0.77          0.94        61.56
         Moments by year
           2003                                    329           0.98          1.06        19.94
           2004                                    325           0.99          0.88        15.23
           2005                                    330           0.98          0.96        19.39
           2006                                    310           0.98          0.98        16.59
           2007                                    344           0.98          0.88        19.30
           2008                                    350           0.98          0.83        19.77
           2009                                    330           0.98          0.65        22.74
           2010                                    330           0.98          0.83        16.10
           2011                                    335           0.98          0.88        18.22
           2012                                    330           0.98          1.11        16.44
         Moments by market rank
           1-25                                    460           0.98          2.36        14.67
           26-50                                   385           0.95          0.96        16.36
           51-100                                  930           0.92          0.63        20.14
           101+                                    799           0.88          0.46        31.82


C.2     Multiples
C.2.1    Priors

Industry analysts give a range of $0.15 to $0.40 per MHz-pop for the stick multiple and a range
of 10 to 12 for the cash flow multiple.79 While the stick multiple is believed to be much larger for
larger markets, the cash flow multiple is believed to be symmetrically distributed. Therefore, our
prior is that the stick multiple is distributed log-normally with mean µStick
                                                                        prior = −1.4 and standard
           Stick = 0.5 (corresponding to a mean of $0.25 per MHz-pop and a standard deviation of
deviation σprior
$1 per MHz-pop, thereby covering $0.15 to $0.40 per MHz-pop with probability 0.68) and that the
cash flow multiple is distributed normally with mean µCF                                 CF
                                                      prior = 11 and standard deviation σprior = 1.



  79
     See “Opportunities and Pitfalls on the Road to the Television Spectrum Auction”, Bond & Pecaro, December
12, 2013.


                                                     65
C.2.2    Data and estimation

Our data consists of 133 transactions between 2003 and 2012 based on cash flow and 191 transactions
between 2003 and 2013 based on stick value. For cash flow transactions, we infer the cash flow
multiple from the transaction price and the cash flow CF
                                                      d jt predicted using equation (7), setting
jt = 0. For stick value transactions, we infer the stick multiple from the transaction price, the
population served, and the power output of the TV station using equations (8) and (9).
   For cash flow transactions, we estimate the following model for the multiple to construct its
conditional likelihood function:

                                      M ultipleCF
                                               jt =β
                                                     CF
                                                        Xjt + CF
                                                               jt ,                                 (A1)

where Xjt includes owner, station, and market characteristics. Specifically, we include in Xjt
an indicator of whether the TV station has multicast sub-channels, DMA population interacted
with an indicator for a full-power station, interference free population interacted with an indicator
for a low-power class-A station, a low-power class-A fixed effect, ownership category fixed effects
(whether the owner owns between two and ten, or more than ten TV stations across DMAs), the
wealth and competitiveness indices for the DMA, fixed effects for the ten affiliations in Table A3
except for other minor networks, and a full set of year fixed effects.
   For stick value transactions, we estimate the following model:

                                   ln M ultipleStick
                                               jt    =β Stick Xjt + Stick
                                                                     jt    ,                        (A2)

where we include in Xjt the log of the output power of the TV station, the log of DMA population
interacted with an indicator for a full-power station, the log of interference free population interacted
with an indicator for a low-power class-A station, a low-power class-A fixed effect, ownership
category fixed effects, the wealth and competitiveness indices for the DMA, a dark station fixed
effect, affiliation fixed effects, and year fixed effects.

C.2.3    Estimates and posteriors

Table A8 reports parameter estimates for the cash flow and stick value multiples. The model for
the cash flow multiple has an adjusted R2 of 0.72, and from the residuals we estimate a standard
               CF
deviation of σ̂likelihood = 4.02. The model for the stick multiple has an adjusted R2 of 0.66, and
              Stick
we estimate σ̂likelihood = 1.06. With the estimates in hand, we can predict multiples for any TV
station. To obtain the posterior for the cash flow and stick multiple, we update our prior with the
conditional likelihood function using Bayes rule as
                                                       2
                                               µprior σlikelihood               2
                                                                  +µlikelihood σprior
                                µposterior =              2
                                                        σprior     2
                                                               +σlikelihood
                                                                                      ,

                                                          2
                                                         σlikelihood  2
                                                                     σprior
                                        2
                                       σposterior =                         ,
                                                         2        2
                                                        σprior +σlikelihood



                                                        66
          Table A8: Cash flow and stick value multiples parameter estimates


                                                          Cash flow multiple                     Stick multiple
                                                        Estimate      Std. Err.               Estimate Std. Err.
Multicast                                                -0.0101        1.0044
ln(OutputP owerjt )                                                                           0.1745***     0.0525
1 (F ullP owerjt ) · DM AP opjt                      5.405 · 10−7 ***     1.892 · 10−7
1 (F ullP owerjt ) · ln (DM AP opjt )                                                        -0.4832***     0.1774
1 (LowP owerClassAjt ) · IntF reeP opjt               −9.121 · 10−8       3.122 · 10−7
1 (LowP owerClassAjt ) · ln (IntF reeP opjt )                                                -0.5905***      0.1581
1 (LowP owerClassAjt )                                      -0.2862          2.1471             0.7136       2.5621
Owns 2-10 stations across DMAs                               2.3114          1.4404             0.3597       0.2320
Owns > 10 stations across DMAs                             3.5031**          1.3985          0.8842***       0.2276
W ealthIndexjt                                              0.8943*          0.5112            -0.1319       0.1221
CompIndexjt                                                  0.7099          0.5314           0.2515**       0.1246
2003                                                        -0.4700          2.8612            3.9827*       2.3837
2004                                                         1.0119          2.4967            4.5252*       2.3789
2005                                                        5.2167*          2.8837             3.8847       2.4077
2006                                                        4.2471*          2.5095           4.8581**       2.4052
2007                                                         3.2069          2.4819            4.1905*       2.3560
2008                                                         2.1453          2.8200             3.6902       2.4267
2009                                                         3.2956          2.7741             3.3563       2.3545
2010                                                         0.2000          2.6595             2.5437       2.3988
2011                                                        -0.7009          2.3943             3.8630       2.4416
2012                                                        -2.0504          2.2970            4.0255*       2.3941
2013                                                                                           4.2716*       2.4125
Dark                                                                                           -0.1393       0.4415
ABC                                                        4.9792**          2.2317          1.6082***       0.4716
CBS                                                        4.3053*           2.3181           1.1402**       0.5639
Fox                                                         3.3855           2.0626           1.5267**       0.6096
NBC                                                          3.3133          2.3356            0.3905        0.4648
Independent                                                 -1.1178          1.7898             0.1710       0.2501
CW                                                          -0.0499          1.9789             0.1208       0.3972
MyNetwork TV                                                 0.2442          2.7894            -0.5563       0.4761
United Paramount                                           9.4293*           5.1732            0.8315*       0.4334
Warner Bros                                                 1.6820           2.8562            -1.0249       0.7108
Spanish-language networks                                   -0.7115          2.8345            0.1728        0.3092
Adjusted R2                                                         0.7168                            0.6643
N                                                                    133                                191

  Notes: To save space, we use the shorthand 1 (F ullP owerjt ) for 1 (P owerOutputjt = F ullP ower),
  1 (LowP owerClassAjt ) for 1 (P owerOutputjt = LowP owerClassA), and IntF reeP opjt for
  Interf erenceF reeP opjt .




                                                      67
                             CF                                                           Stick
where µCF            \                                           Stick           \
       likelihood = M ultiplejt0 for cash flow transactions and µlikelihood = ln M ultiplejt0     for stick
value transactions, and we set t0 = 2015. The posterior standard deviation of the cash flow multiple
is 0.97 and that of the stick multiple is 0.45. For the 1,670 UHF stations, Figure A5 illustrates
a sample draw from the posterior distribution conditional on Xjt for the cash flow multiple (left
panel) and the stick multiple (right panel). The corresponding unconditional prior distribution is
overlaid in red dashed lines.
     Figure A5: Prior and posterior distribution of cash flow and stick multiples




D     Robustness to full repacking
We perform two exercises to assess the effect of the limited repacking described in Section 6.2. First,
we compare limited to full repacking for all 204 DMAs under naive bidding and both the 84 MHz
and the 126 MHz clearing target. The top panel of Table A10 shows that moving to full repacking
reduces total payouts by 0.2% under the 126 MHz clearing target and by 3.2% under the 84 MHz
clearing target. This payout reduction is driven by the smaller number of TV stations that are
acquired in the reverse auction under the more flexible full repacking, as the bottom panel of Table
A10 shows. A lowering of the clearing target, and the smaller number of TV stations that need to
be acquired to meet it, amplifies this effect. Closer inspection shows that the difference in payouts
between limited and full repacking are concentrated in minor markets; the largest market with a
discrepancy of more than $1 million is the Pittsburgh, PA, DMA. At the same time, the correlation
between payouts under full and limited repacking is 0.9997 for the 126 MHz clearing target and
0.9866 for the 84 MHz clearing target across all 20,400 runs of the reverse auction, suggesting that
limited repacking captures the distribution of payouts well.
    Second, we compare limited to full repacking under strategic bidding for two important DMAs,
New York, NY, and Washington, DC, as doing so for all 204 DMAs is not computationally feasible.


                                                  68
Table A10: Nationwide payouts to TV stations and number of TV stations acquired
under naive bidding and full repacking

                                                     Naive bidding
                                                                Number of TV
                                       Payouts ($ billion)     stations acquired
                 Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target
                 Limited repacking           17.008                   378.9
                                             (0.740)                (6.292)
                 Full repacking              16.966                  365.24
                                            (0.7330)                (4.870)
                 Panel B: 84 MHz clearing target
                 Limited repacking            4.003                   185.9
                                             (0.204)                (7.859)
                 Full repacking               3.877                   143.8
                                             (0.192)                (4.047)


The 189 strategy profiles in the New York, NY, DMA, require 18,900 runs of the reverse auction
across simulation draws, and the 27 strategy profiles for the Washington, DC, DMA require 2,700
runs. Table A11 shows the results of this exercise, and affirms that the impact of limited repacking
on payouts in the New York, NY, and Washington, DC, DMAs is not significant under strategic
bidding for the 126 MHz clearing target. We also find that for the Washington, DC, DMA under the
84 MHz clearing target, payouts under full repacking are approximately 1.2% lower than those under
limited repacking in the case of naive bidding and 1.1% lower than payouts under limited repacking
in the case of strategic bidding. In sum, therefore, while limited repacking likely introduces an
upward bias in payouts, we do not have any evidence to suggest that it systematically biases the
gains to strategic bidding.




                                                69
Table A11: Payouts to TV stations in select DMAs under strategic bidding and full
repacking

                                                                                              Payout
                           Naive              Strategic bidding                             increase at
                          bidding      Mean     Min     Median                  Max          mean (%)
    Panel A: 126 MHz clearing target, New York, NY, DMA
    Limited repacking      2.363       3.086   2.363     3.096                  3.893           30.6
                          (0.216)     (0.295) (0.216) (0.330)                  (1.013)
    Full repacking         2.363       3.056   2.363     3.040                  3.950           29.3
                          (0.216)     (0.288) (0.216) (0.372)                  (1.171)
    Panel B: 126 MHz clearing target, Washington, DC, DMA
    Limited repacking      0.290       0.327   0.317     0.328                  0.338           12.9
                          (0.071)     (0.065) (0.063 (0.067)                   (0.085)
    Full repacking         0.290       0.328   0.316     0.328                  0.339           13.1
                          (0.071)     (0.066) (0.063) (0.067)                  (0.087)
    Panel C: 84 MHz clearing target, Washington, DC, DMA
    Limited repacking      0.066       0.082   0.079     0.082                  0.085           24.5
                          (0.025)     (0.032) (0.032)    0.032                 (0.034)
    Full repacking         0.065       0.081   0.079     0.081                  0.084           24.8
                          (0.026)     (0.031) (0.032)    0.031                 (0.032)
   Notes: Payout increase at mean calculated as percent difference between mean payouts under strategic and
   naive bidding.




                                                     70
Online Appendix
A      A model of the reverse auction under complete information
A.1     Example 1 imposing independently owned TV stations
We derive the set of equilibria for Example 1 in Section 3.1 whilst imposing that all TV stations
are independently owned. Assuming a random tie-breaking rule for bids above 0 and below 900 in
line with footnote 25, the profit of TV station 1 is
                         
                         
                                              0                    if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b1 , b3 } ≥ 900
                         
                                                                                  ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                               0                    if             b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ,
                         
                         
                         
                         
  π1 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =       min {max {b2 , b3 } , 900} − 100 if                   b1 < max {b2 , b3 } ,
                         
                                 1
                                     (max {b2 , b3 } − 100)         if     b1 = max {b2 , b3 } > min {b2 , b3 } ,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                2
                                        2
                                            (b2 − 100)              if              b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                       3
                                             −100                   if              b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,
                         


where we assume that the relevant case is given by the first applicable if statement. In particular,
the first if statement covers the case where the reverse auction fails at the outset because at least
two TV stations bid 900 or more. Consequently, in the subsequent if statements at most one TV
station bids 900 or more. In the second if statement, TV station 1 is first to opt to remain on the
air. In the third if statement, TV station 1 is frozen as either TV station 2 or 3 is first to opt to
remain on the air. The remaining if statements cover ties. The profits of the remaining TV stations
are analogous.
    In Tables S1-S7, we divide the strategy space of TV station 2 into 8 regions, namely [0, 100),
100, (100, 300), 300, (300, 500), 500, (500, 900), and [900, ∞). We further divide the strategy spaces
of TV stations 1 and 3 as needed to either show that there is no profitable deviation for any
TV station (indicated by X in the respective cell) or give an example of a profitable deviation.S1
Combining the cells marked with X, the set of equilibria is as stated in equation (4).

                                                   Table S1: b2 ∈ [0, 100]

                           b1 \ b3       [0, b2 )      [b2 , 100]   (100, 500)      [500, ∞)
                            [0, b2 )    b3 = 900       b2 = 900      b2 = 900          X
                          [b2 , 300]    b2 = 900       b2 = 900      b2 = 900          X
                         (300, 500)     b2 = 900       b2 = 900      b2 = 900        b3 = 0
                          [500, ∞)         X               X          b1 = 0     max {b1 , b3 } = 0




  S1
     The notation max {b1 , b3 } = 0 in Table S1 means that the TV station with the higher bid has a profitable
deviation to zero, and similarly for the remaining tables.


                                                                i
               Table S2: b2 ∈ (100, 300)

  b1 \ b3        [0, b2 )    [b2 , 500)        [500, ∞)
   [0, b2 )     b3 = 900     b2 = 900             X
 [b2 , 300]     b2 = 900     b2 = 900             X
(300, 500)      b2 = 900     b2 = 900           b3 = 0
 [500, ∞)        b1 = 0       b1 = 0        max {b1 , b3 } = 0


                  Table S3: b2 = 300

  b1 \ b3       [0, 300)     [300, 500)        [500, ∞)
  [0, 300)          X         b2 = 900            X
    300        b2 = 900       b2 = 900            X
(300, 500)     b2 = 900       b2 = 900          b3 = 0
 [500, ∞)        b1 = 0        b1 = 0       max {b1 , b3 } = 0


               Table S4: b2 ∈ (300, 500)

  b1 \ b3       [0, b2 )    [b2 , 500)        [500, ∞)
   [0, b2 )       X         b2 = 900           b3 = 0
 [b2 , 500)    b2 = 900     b2 = 900           b3 = 0
 [500, ∞)       b1 = 0       b1 = 0        max {b1 , b3 } = 0


                  Table S5: b2 = 500

         b1 \ b3      [0, 500)         [500, ∞)
         [0, 500)        X              b3 = 0
        [500, ∞)       b1 = 0       max {b1 , b3 } = 0


               Table S6: b2 ∈ (500, 900)

   b1 \ b3      [0, 500]    (500, b2 ]        (b2 , ∞)
   [0, 500]        X         b2 = 0            b3 = 0
  (500, b2 ]     b2 = 0      b2 = 0            b3 = 0
  (b2 , ∞)       b1 = 0      b1 = 0       max {b1 , b3 } = 0


               Table S7: b2 ∈ [900, ∞)

       b1 \ b3      [0, 500]     (500, 900)     [900, ∞)
       [0, 500]        X           b2 = 0        b2 = 0
     (500, 900)      b2 = 0        b2 = 0        b2 = 0
      [900, ∞)       b2 = 0        b2 = 0          X




                               ii
A.2     Example 1 with joint ownership
We derive the set of equilibria for Example 1 in Section 3.1. The profit of firm 1 owning TV stations
1 and 3 is
                          
                          
                                                         0                           if    min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900
                          
                                                                                           ∨ min {b1 , b3 } ≥ 900
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                                                                           ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                              min {b1 , 900} − 300                    if    b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                             2 min {b2 , 900} − 400                   if    b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
   π1 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =                    min {b3 , 900} − 100                       if    b3 > max {b1 , b2 } ,           (S1)
                          
                                      1                  1
                                      2 (2b2 − 400) + 2 (b2 − 300)                    if          b1 = b2 > b3 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                       1                1
                                       2 (b1 − 100) + 2 (b1 − 300)                    if          b1 = b3 > b2 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                      1                  1
                                      2 (2b2 − 400) + 2 (b2 − 100)                    if          b2 = b3 > b1 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                              1                 1              1
                              3 (2b2 − 400) + 3 (b2 − 100) + 3 (b2         − 300) if         b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                                     −400                             if     b1 = b2 = b3 = 0
                          


and the profit of firm 2 owning TV station 2 is

                          
                          
                                               0                    if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b1 , b3 } ≥ 900
                          
                                                                                     ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                                0                    if               b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
  π2 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =        min {max {b1 , b3 } , 900} − 500 if                     b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ,
                          
                                  1
                                      (max {b1 , b3 } − 500)         if      b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                 2
                                         2
                                             (b1 − 500)              if                b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                        3
                                              −500                   if                b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,
                          


where we again assume that the relevant case is given by the first applicable if statement.
   In Tables S8-S10, we again divide the strategy spaces of firms 1 and 2 as needed to either
show that there is no profitable deviation for any firm or give an example of a profitable deviation.
Combining the cells marked with X, the set of equilibria is as stated in equation (5).

                                                 Table S8: b2 ∈ [0, 600)

       b1 \ b3              [0, b2 )                        b2                   (b2 , 900)                [900, ∞)
        [0, b2 )    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)                X
          b2        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)                X
      (b2 , 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)                X
      [900, ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)




                                                               iii
                                                  Table S9: b2 = 600

    b1 \ b3            [0, 500]           (500, 600)                 600                  (600, 900)                [900, ∞)
    [0, 500]               X                 b2 = 0                b2 = 0           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
  (500, 600)            b2 = 0               b2 = 0                b2 = 0           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
      600               b2 = 0               b2 = 0                b2 = 0           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
  (600, 900)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)   (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)   (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
   [900, ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)   (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)   (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)


                                              Table S10: b2 ∈ (600, ∞)

  b1 \ b3            [0, 500]               (500, b2 )                  b2                  (b2 , 900)              [900, ∞)
  [0, 500]               X                   b2 = 0                 b2 = 0             (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
 (500, b2 )           b2 = 0                 b2 = 0                 b2 = 0             (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
     b2               b2 = 0                 b2 = 0                 b2 = 0             (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
 (b2 , 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
 [900, ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)


A.3     Example 1 with different reservation values
We derive the set of equilibria for Example 1 in Section 3.1 whilst replacing the reservation value
of TV station 2 by v2 = 700. We came back to this variant of Example 1 in Section B. The profit
of firm 1 owning TV stations 1 and 3 is
                          
                          
                                                       0                               if     min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900
                          
                                                                                             ∨ min {b1 , b3 } ≥ 900
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                                                                             ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                           min {b1 , 900} − 300                         if     b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                          2 min {b2 , 900} − 400                        if     b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
   π1 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =                    min {b3 , 900} − 100                         if     b3 > max {b1 , b2 } ,           (S2)
                          
                                      1                  1
                                      2 (2b2 − 400) + 2 (b2 − 300)                      if        b1 = b2 > b3 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                       1                1
                                       2 (b1 − 100) + 2 (b1 − 300)                      if        b1 = b3 > b2 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                      1                  1
                                      2 (2b2 − 400) + 2 (b2 − 100)                      if        b2 = b3 > b1 ,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                              1                 1              1
                              3 (2b2 − 400) + 3 (b2 − 100) + 3 (b2          − 300) if          b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                                                     −400                               if      b1 = b2 = b3 = 0
                          




                                                                iv
and the profit of firm 2 owning TV station 2 is
                         
                         
                                                 0                         if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b1 , b3 } ≥ 900
                         
                                                                                             ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                                  0                         if                 b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                         
                         
                         
                         
  π2 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =       min {max {b1 , b3 } , 900} − 700 if                               b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ,
                         
                                 1
                                     (max {b1 , b3 } − 700)                 if        b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } ,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                2
                                        2
                                            (b1 − 700)                      if                 b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                         
                         
                         
                         
                                       3
                                             −700                           if                 b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,
                         


where we again assume that the relevant case is given by the first applicable if statement.
   In Tables S11-S14, we again divide the strategy spaces of firms 1 and 2 as needed to either
show that there is no profitable deviation for any firm or give an example of a profitable deviation.
Combining the cells marked with X, the set of equilibria is

                                 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 < 900, b2 ≤ 600, b3 ≥ 900
                                

                               ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≤ 700, b2 > 700, b3 ≤ 700
                                 

                          ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | max {b1 , b3 } < b2 , 600 ≤ b2 ≤ 700 .
                           


Note that firm 1 never bids b3 = 900 as long as firm 2 truthfully bids b2 = 700.

                                                  Table S11: b2 ∈ [0, 600)

       b1 \ b3              [0, b2 )                         b2                         (b2 , 900)               [900, ∞)
        [0, b2 )    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)         (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)          (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
          b2        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)         (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)          (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
      (b2 , 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)         (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)          (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)               X
      [900, ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)         (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)          (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 900)


                                                      Table S12: b2 = 600

                           b1 \ b3            [0, 600)               [600, 900)                   [900, ∞)
                           [0, 600)               X               (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)                  X
                         [600, 900)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)       (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)                  X
                          [900, ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)       (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)


                                              Table S13: b2 ∈ (600, 700]

                                      b1 \ b3                [0, b2 )                  [b2 , ∞)
                                       [0, b2 )                 X                (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                                      [b2 , ∞)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)




                                                                   v
                                                Table S14: b2 ∈ (700, ∞)

                         b1 \ b3              [0, 700]             (700, b2 )              [b2 , ∞)
                         [0, 700]                 X                 b2 = 0           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                        (700, b2 )             b2 = 0               b2 = 0           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                         [b2 , ∞)       (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)   (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)    (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)


A.4     Example 2 imposing independently owned TV stations
We derive the set of equilibria for Example 2 in Section 3.1 whilst imposing that all TV stations
are independently owned. The profit of TV station 1 is
                             
                             
                                               0               if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                             
                                                0               if                  b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                     min {b2 , 900} − 100       if                  b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                                0               if           b3 > max {b1 , b2 } ∧ b1 > 0,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                              −100              if           b3 > max {b1 , b2 } ∧ b1 = 0,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                         1
      π1 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =               2   (b2 − 100)         if                     b1 = b2 > b3 ,
                             
                                                0               if                     b1 = b3 > b2 ,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                         1
                                             (b2 − 100)         if                  b2 = b3 > b1 > 0,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                        2
                                 1                   1
                                     (b2 − 100) + (−100) if                         b2 = b3 > b1 = 0,
                             
                             
                                 2                   2
                             
                             
                             
                                         1
                                             (b2 − 100)         if                  b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                             
                             
                                         3
                             
                             
                             
                                              −100              if                  b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,
                             


where we assume that the relevant case is given by the first applicable if statement. In particular,
the first if statement covers the case where the reverse auction fails at the outset because either
TV stations 1 and 2 or TV stations 2 and 3 bid 900 or more. Consequently, in the subsequent if
statements at most a single TV station or TV stations 1 and 3 bid 900 or more. In the second if
statement, TV station 1 is first to opt to remain on the air. In the third if statement, TV station
1 is frozen as TV station 2 is first to opt to remain on the air. In the fourth and fifth if statement,
TV station 2 is frozen as TV station 3 is first to opt to remain on the air; then TV station 1 opts
to remain on the air if b1 > 0 or is frozen at the conclusion of the reverse auction if b1 = 0 in line
with footnote 27. The remaining if statements cover ties. The profit of TV station 2 is
                     
                     
                     
                                       0                             if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                       0                             if                 b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                     
                      5 min {max {b , b } , 900} − 1000
                                      1 3                             if                 b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ,
π2 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =       1
                           2 (5 max {b1 , b3 } − 1000)                if      b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } ,
                     
                     
                     
                                 2
                     
                                 3 (5b1 − 1000)                       if                 b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                    −1000                            if                  b1 = b2 = b3 = 0




                                                               vi
and the profit of TV station 3 is
                            
                            
                                                     0                  if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                            
                                                      0                  if                   b3 > max {b1 , b2 } ,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                    1
                                         min {b2 , 900} − 100            if                   b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                    3
                                                      0                  if              b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ∧ b3 > 0,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                                −100                     if              b1 > max {b2 , b3 } ∧ b3 = 0,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                           1   1
                                                              
     π3 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =                  2   3 b2   − 100              if                      b2 = b3 > b1 ,
                            
                                                      0                  if                      b1 = b3 > b2 ,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                           1   1
                                                              
                                               3 b2   − 100              if                   b1 = b2 > b3 > 0,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                          2
                                1     1              1
                                                      
                                      3 b2 − 100 + 2 (−100)              if                   b1 = b2 > b3 = 0,
                            
                            
                                2
                            
                            
                            
                                          1 1
                                                       
                                          3 3 b2 − 100                   if                   b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                                −100                     if                   b1 = b2 = b3 = 0.
                            


    In Tables S15-S23, we again divide the strategy spaces of the three TV stations as needed to
either show that there is no profitable deviation for any firm or give an example of a profitable
deviation. A blank cell indicates that the case cannot arise. Combining the cells marked with X,
the set of equilibria is

                                  (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≤ 200, b2 ≥ 300, b3 ≤ 200
                                

                             ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≥ 200, b2 ≤ 100, 0 < b3 ≤ 100
                               

                            ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 ≥ 200, b2 < b3 , 100 < b3 < 200
                              

                             ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 > 0, b2 < b3 , 200 ≤ b3 ≤ 300
                                

                                 ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 > 0, b2 ≤ 300, b3 > 300
                                   

                               ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 > b2 , 300 < b2 < b3 < 900
                                 

                            ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 |b1 > b2 , 300 < b2 < 900, b3 ≥ 900 .
                              



                                                            Table S15: b3 = 0

  b1 \ b2         0                 (0, 100)                100             (100, 300)           300         (300, 900)         [900, ∞)
                                                                     b1 ≥ b2       b1 < b 2
     0        b2 = 900              b3 = 900              b3 = 900                b3 = 900       X                X                X
  (0, 100)    b2 = 900      min {b1 , b2 } = 900          b3 = 900                b3 = 900       X                X                X
    100       b2 = 900              b2 = 900              b2 = 900                b3 = 900       X                X                X
 (100, 200)   b2 = 900              b2 = 900              b2 = 900   b2 = 900     b3 = 900       X                X                X
    200        b3 > 0                b3 > 0                b3 > 0    b1 < 100     b3 = 900       X                X                X
 (200, 300)    b3 > 0                b3 > 0                b3 > 0    b1 < 100     b3 = 900    b2 < 200        b2 < 200          b2 < 200
    300        b3 > 0                b3 > 0                b3 > 0    b1 < 100                 b2 < 200        b2 < 200          b2 < 200
 (300, 900)    b3 > 0                b3 > 0                b3 > 0    b1 < 100                 b1 < 300   max {b1 , b2 } < 300   b2 < 200
 [900, ∞)      b3 > 0                b3 > 0                b3 > 0    b1 < 100                 b1 < 300        b1 < 300          b2 < 200




                                                                      vii
                                                     Table S16: b3 ∈ (0, 100)

 b1 \ b2          [0, b3 ]         (b3 , 100)            100          (100, 300)              300           (300, 900)          [900, ∞)
                                                                 b1 ≥ b2       b1 < b 2
  [0, b3 ]      b2 = 900           b3 = 900           b3 = 900                 b3 = 900        X                 X                   X
(b3 , 100)      b2 = 900      min {b1 , b2 } = 900    b3 = 900                 b3 = 900        X                 X                   X
   100          b2 = 900           b2 = 900           b2 = 900                 b3 = 900        X                 X                   X
(100, 200)      b2 = 900           b2 = 900           b2 = 900   b2 = 900      b3 = 900        X                 X                   X
   200              X                   X                X       b1 < 100      b3 = 900        X                 X                   X
(200, 300)          X                   X                X       b1 < 100      b3 = 900     b2 < 200         b2 < 200           b2 < 200
   300              X                   X                X       b1 < 100                   b2 < 200         b2 < 200           b2 < 200
(300, 900)          X                   X                X       b1 < 100                   b1 < 300    max {b1 , b2 } < 300    b2 < 200
[900, ∞)            X                   X                X       b1 < 100                   b1 < 300         b1 < 300           b2 < 200



                                                       Table S17: b3 = 100

             b1 \ b2         [0, 100]            (100, 300)                   300             (300, 900)             [900, ∞)
                                             b1 ≥ b2     b1 < b2
           [0, 100]          b2 = 900                   b3 = 900              X                    X                      X
         (100, 200)          b2 = 900       b2 = 900 b3 = 900                 X                    X                      X
             200                X           b1 < 100 b3 = 900                 X                    X                      X
         (200, 300)             X           b1 < 100 b3 = 900            b2   < 200           b2 < 200               b2   < 200
             300                X           b1 < 100                     b2   < 200           b2 < 200               b2   < 200
         (300, 900)             X           b1 < 100                     b1   < 300       max {b1 , b2 } < 300       b2   < 200
          [900, ∞)              X           b1 < 100                     b1   < 300           b1 < 300               b2   < 200


                                                 Table S18: b3 ∈ (100, 200)

  b1 \ b2              [0, b3 )         b3                 (b3 , 300)                 300              (300, 900)              [900, ∞)
                                                      b1 ≥ b2      b1 < b2
   [0, b3 )        b2 = 900        b2   = 900                     b3 = 900            X                  X                          X
     b3            b2 = 900        b2   = 900                     b3 = 900            X                  X                          X
 (b3 , 200)        b2 = 900        b2   = 900        b2 = 900 b3 = 900                X                  X                          X
    200               X            b1   < 100        b1 < 100 b3 = 900                X                  X                          X
(200, 300)            X            b1   < 100        b1 < 100 b3 = 900           b2   < 200         b2 < 200                   b2   < 200
    300               X            b1   < 100        b1 < 100                    b2   < 200         b2 < 200                   b2   < 200
(300, 900)            X            b1   < 100        b1 < 100                    b2   < 200     max {b1 , b2 } < 300           b2   < 200
 [900, ∞)             X            b1   < 100        b1 < 100                    b2   < 200         b1 < 300                   b2   < 200




                                                                  viii
                                             Table S19: b3 = 200

  b1 \ b2     [0, 200)         200        (200, 300)                  300         (300, 900)            [900, ∞)
      0        b1 > 0    b3    = 900       b3 = 900                    X                X                  X
  (0, 200)       X       b3    = 900       b3 = 900                    X                X                  X
    200          X       b3    = 900       b3 = 900                    X                X                  X
(200, 300)       X       b1    < 200   max {b1 , b2 } < 200        b2 < 200        b2 < 200             b2 < 200
    300          X       b1    < 200       b1 < 200                b2 < 200        b2 < 200             b2 < 200
(300, 900)       X       b1    < 200       b1 < 200                b1 < 300    max {b1 , b2 } < 300     b2 < 200
 [900, ∞)        X       b1    < 200       b1 < 200                b1 < 300        b1 < 300             b2 < 200


                                       Table S20: b3 ∈ (200, 300)

  b1 \ b2     [0, b3 )        b3           (b3 , 300)                 300         (300, 900)           [900, ∞)
      0       b1 > 0     b3   = 900        b3 = 900                b2 < 200        b2 < 200            b2 < 200
  (0, b3 )      X        b3   = 900        b3 = 900                b2 < 200        b2 < 200            b2 < 200
     b3         X        b3   = 900        b3 = 900                b2 < 200        b2 < 200            b2 < 200
 (b3 , 300)     X        b1   < 200    max {b1 , b2 } < 200        b2 < 200        b2 < 200            b2 < 200
    300         X        b1   < 200        b1 < 200                b2 < 200        b2 < 200            b2 < 200
(300, 900)      X        b1   < 200        b1 < 200                b1 < 300    max {b1 , b2 } < 300    b2 < 200
 [900, ∞)       X        b1   < 200        b1 < 200                b1 < 300        b1 < 300            b1 < 200


                                             Table S21: b3 = 300

                     b1 \ b2      [0, 300)       300         (300, 900)              [900, ∞)
                         0         b1 > 0     b2 < 300        b2 < 300               b2 < 300
                     (0, 300)         X       b2 < 300        b2 < 300               b2 < 300
                       300            X       b2 < 300        b2 < 300               b2 < 300
                   (300, 900)         X       b1 < 300    max {b1 , b2 } < 300       b2 < 300
                    [900, ∞)          X       b1 < 300        b1 < 300               b2 < 300


                                       Table S22: b3 ∈ (300, 900)

       b1 \ b2      [0, 300]         (300, b3 )               b3              (b3 , 900)        [900, ∞)
                                b1 > b2 b1 ≤ b2
           0        b1 > 0               b3 < 300        b3   < 300        b2 < 300             b2   < 300
       (0, 300]       X                  b3 < 300        b3   < 300        b2 < 300             b2   < 300
      (300, b3 )      X            X     b3 < 300        b3   < 300        b2 < 300             b2   < 300
          b3          X            X     b2 < 300        b2   < 300        b2 < 300             b2   < 300
      (b3 , 900)      X            X                     b1   < 300    max {b1 , b2 } < 300     b2   < 300
      [900, ∞)        X            X                     b1   < 300        b1 < 300             b2   < 300




                                                     ix
                                                      Table S23: b3 ∈ [900, ∞)

                                     b1 \ b2              [0, 300]       (300, 900)               [900, ∞)
                                                                     b1 > b2 b1 ≤ b2
                                       0                  b1 > 0               b3 < 300           b3   < 900
                                   (0, 300]                 X                  b3 < 300           b3   < 900
                                 (300, 900)                 X           X      b3 < 300           b3   < 900
                                  [900, ∞)                  X           X                         b2   < 900


A.5      Example 2 with joint ownership
We derive the set of equilibria for Example 2 in Section 3.1. The profit of firm 1 owning TV stations
1 and 3 is
                             
                             
                             
                                                     0                     if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                                    4
                             
                             
                             
                                    3   min {b2 , 900} − 200               if                  b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                                     0                     if        b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ∧ min {b1 , b3 } > 0
                             
                                               −100                        if        b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ∧ min {b1 , b3 } = 0,
      π1 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =                 1   4
                                                               
                             
                             
                                          2   3 b2   − 200                 if    b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } > 0,
                                 1   4              1
                                                     
                                     3 b2 − 200 + 2 (−100)                  if    b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } = 0,
                             
                             
                             
                                2
                                         1 4
                                                     
                                         3 3 b2 − 200                       if                  b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                             
                             
                             
                             
                             
                                               −200                        if                  b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,

and the profit of firm 2 owning TV station 2 is
                     
                     
                     
                                       0                                        if min {b1 , b2 } ≥ 900 ∨ min {b2 , b3 } ≥ 900,
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                       0                                        if                 b2 > max {b1 , b3 } ,
                     
                      5 min {max {b , b } , 900} − 1000
                                      1 3                                        if                 b2 < max {b1 , b3 } ,
π2 (b1 , b2 , b3 ) =       1
                           2 (5 max {b1 , b3 } − 1000)                           if        b2 = max {b1 , b3 } > min {b1 , b3 } ,
                     
                     
                     
                                 2
                     
                                 3 (5b1 − 1000)                                  if                    b1 = b2 = b3 > 0,
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                    −1000                                       if                    b1 = b2 = b3 = 0,

where we again assume that the relevant case is given by the first applicable if statement.
   In Tables S24-S28, we again divide the strategy spaces of the three TV stations as needed to
either show that there is no profitable deviation for any firm or give an example of a profitable
deviation. Combining the cells marked with X, the set of equilibria is

                     (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | min {b1 , b3 } > 0, max {b1 , b3 } ≥ 200, b2 ≤ 150
                    

                          ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | max {b1 , b3 } < b2 , 150 ≤ b2 ≤ 200
                             

                             ∪ (b1 , b2 , b3 ) ∈ [0, ∞)3 | max {b1 , b3 } ≤ 200, b2 > 200 .
                                 




                                                                        x
                                                Table S24: b2 ∈ [0, 150)

              b1 \ b3                   0                              (0, b2 ]            (b2 , 200)     [200, ∞)
                  0        (b1 , b3 ) = (900, 900)           (b1 , b3 ) = (900, 900)       b2 = 900        b1 = 1
               (0, b2 ]    (b1 , b3 ) = (900, 900)           (b1 , b3 ) = (900, 900)       b2 = 900          X
             (b2 , 200)            b2 = 900                          b2 = 900              b2 = 900          X
             [200, ∞)                b3 = 1                              X                     X             X


                                                   Table S25: b2 = 150

                            b1 \ b3               0           (0, 150)      [150, 200)       [200, ∞)
                                0                X               X           b2 = 900         b1 = 1
                            (0, 150)             X               X           b2 = 900           X
                          [150, 200)          b2 = 900       b2 = 900        b2 = 900           X
                           [200, ∞)            b3 = 1            X              X               X


                                              Table S26: b2 ∈ (150, 200]

                                    b1 \ b3               [0, b2 )               [b2 , ∞)
                                     [0, b2 )                X             (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                                    [b2 , ∞)       (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)


                                              Table S27: b2 ∈ (200, 900)

                       b1 \ b3             [0, 200]                  (200, b2 ]               (b2 , ∞)
                       [0, 200]                X                     b2 < 200           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                      (200, b2 ]          b2 < 200                   b2 < 200           (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)
                       (b2 , ∞)      (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)        (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)     (b1 , b3 ) = (0, 0)


                                               Table S28: b2 ∈ [900, ∞)

                                               b1 \ b3        [0, 200]      (200, ∞)
                                               [0, 200]          X          b2 < 200
                                              (200, ∞)       b2 < 200       b2 < 200


B     A model of the reverse auction under incomplete information
As described in Section 3.3, we recast Example 1 in Section 3.1 as a game of incomplete information.
Using the notation in Appendix B, the expected profit of firm 1 if it bids b1 ≥ 0 and b3 ≥ 0 is
                                     Z
    Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; v1 , v3 , σ) =            (P O1 (b1 , b2 (ṽ2 , σ), b3 ) − v1 ) 1 (1 ∈ F ∗ (b1 , b2 (ṽ2 , σ), b3 ))
                                       ṽ2
                                     + (P O3 (b1 , b2 (ṽ2 , σ), b3 ) − v3 ) 1 (3 ∈ F ∗ (b1 , b2 (ṽ2 , σ), b3 )) dΦ2 (ṽ2 ),



                                                                 xi
                                 Table S29: Possible bid configurations

                                     TV station 1                              TV station 2                       TV station 3
     Bid configuration          Pr(1 ∈ F ∗ (b)) P O1 (b)                  Pr(2 ∈ F ∗ (b)) P O2 (b)           Pr(3 ∈ F ∗ (b)) P O3 (b)
    min {b1 , b2 } = 900
   ∨ min {b1 , b3 } = 900
   ∨ min {b2 , b3 } = 900               0                        0                0                 0                 0          0
     b1 > max {b2 , b3 }                0                        0                1                b1                 1         b1
     b2 > max {b1 , b3 }                1                       b2                0                 0                 1         b2
     b3 > max {b1 , b2 }                1                       b3                1                b3                 0          0
                                        1                                          1
    900 > b1 = b2 > b3                  2                     b1 ∨ 0               2             b1 ∨ 0               1         b1
                                        1                                                                             1
    900 > b1 = b3 > b2                  2                     b1 ∨ 0              1                b1                 2       b1 ∨ 0
                                                                                   1                                  1
    900 > b2 = b3 > b1                  1                       b2                 2             b2 ∨ 0               2       b2 ∨ 0
                                        2                                          2                                  2
  900 > b1 = b2 = b3 > 0                3                     b1 ∨ 0               3             b1 ∨ 0               3       b1 ∨ 0
     b1 = b2 = b3 = 0                   1                        0                1                 0                 1          0


where 1(·) is the indicator function and ṽ2 is distributed according to the cumulative distribution
function Φ2 (ṽ2 ) = Φ ṽ2 −v
                               
                           σ
                             2
                                 with Φ(·) being the standard normal cumulative distribution func-
tion. As firm 1 bids optimally, the bidding functions are given by (b1 (v1 , v3 , σ), b3 (v1 , v3 , σ)) =
arg maxb1 ,b3 ≥0 Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; v1 , v3 , σ). The expected profit of firm 2 if it bids b2 ≥ 0 is
                                        Z Z
              Eπ2 (b2 ; v2 , σ) =                        (P O2 (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), b2 , b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ)) − v2 )
                                         ṽ1       ṽ3
                                        ·1 (2 ∈ F ∗ (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), b2 , b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ))) dΦ3 (ṽ3 )dΦ1 (ṽ1 ).

As firm 2 bids optimally, the bidding function is given by b2 (v2 , σ) = arg maxb2 ≥0 Eπ2 (b2 ; v2 , σ).
    In the interest of simplicity, we restrict bj ≤ 900 and consider the nine possible bid configu-
rations in Table S29.S2 We determine F ∗ (b) and P Oj (b) from the bid configuration along with
the specification of S(X, R) in equation (2), assuming a random tie-breaking rule for bids above 0
and below 900 in line with footnote 25. The expected profit of firm 1 if it bids b1 ∈ [0, 900] and
b3 ∈ [0, 900] is
                                            Z
        Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; v1 , v3 , σ) =              (b1 − v3 ) 1 (b1 > max {b2 (ṽ2 , σ), b3 })
                                             ṽ2
                                            + (2b2 (ṽ2 , σ) − v1 − v3 ) 1 (b2 (ṽ2 , σ) > max {b1 , b3 })
                                            + (b3 − v1 ) 1 (b3 > max {b1 , b2 (ṽ2 , σ)})
                                                                             
                                                1               1
                                            +     (b3 − v1 ) + (b1 − v3 ) 1 (900 > b1 = b3 > b2 (ṽ2 , σ))
                                                2               2
                                            − (v1 + v3 ) 1 (b1 = b2 (ṽ2 , σ) = b3 = 0) dΦ2 (ṽ2 ),

where we anticipate that in equilibrium firm 2’s bid does not have mass points above 0 and below
900 and therefore, from firm 1’s perspective, cannot tie with firm 1’s bids in this range.
   S2
     While restricting bj ≤ 900 restricts the set of equilibria, it does not restrict the payouts to TV stations associated
with these equilibria.


                                                                       xii
     The expected profit of firm 2 if it bids b2 ∈ [0, 900] is
                                Z Z
        Eπ2 (b2 ; v2 , σ) =                    (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) − v2 ) 1 (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) > max {b2 , b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ)})
                                  ṽ1    ṽ3
                                + (b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) − v2 ) 1 (b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) > max {b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), b2 })
                                  1
                                + (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) − v2 ) 1 (900 > b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) = b2 > b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ))
                                  2
                                + (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) − v2 ) 1 (900 > b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) = b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) > b2 )
                                  1
                                + (b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ, σ3 ) − v2 ) 1 (900 > b2 = b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) > b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ))
                                  2
                                  2
                                + (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) − v2 ) 1 (900 > b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) = b2 = b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) > 0)
                                  3
                                −v2 1 (b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) = b2 = b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) = 0) dΦ3 (ṽ3 )dΦ1 (ṽ1 ).

Inspection of the expected profit of firm 2 almost immediately yields

Proposition 5. Truthful bidding b2 (v2 , σ) = max {min {v2 , 900} , 0} is a dominant strategy for firm
2.

Proof. We show that for any given values of b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) and b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), firm 2 cannot do better
than bid b2 (v2 , σ) = max {min {v2 , 900} , 0}. We proceed by enumerating the different possible cases
for b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ), and v2 . We restrict attention to cases where b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) ≥ b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ)
because cases where b1 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) ≤ b3 (ṽ1 , ṽ3 , σ) are analogous. For each case, Table S30 lists the
best response of firm 2. A blank cell indicates that the case cannot arise. As can be seen from
Table S30, the best response contains max {min {v2 , 900} , 0} for each case, thereby establishing the
proposition.

                                        Table S30: Best response of firm 2

                               (1)                (2)             (3)                    (4)                     (5)              (6)
                            v2 > 900           v2 = 900      900 > v2 > b1        900 > v2 = b1 > 0          v2 = b1 = 0       v2 < b1
     900 = b1 > b3 > 0         900              [0, 900]                                                                        [0, b1 )
     900 > b1 > b3 > 0      (b1 , 900]         (b1 , 900]        (b1 , 900]              [0, 900]                               [0, b1 )
     900 = b1 > b3 = 0         900              [0, 900]                                                                        [0, b1 )
     900 > b1 > b3 = 0      (b1 , 900]         (b1 , 900]        (b1 , 900]              [0, 900]                               [0, b1 )
       900 = b1 = b3           900              [0, 900]                                                                        [0, b1 )
     900 > b1 = b3 > 0      (b1 , 900]         (b1 , 900]        (b1 , 900]              [0, 900]                               [0, b1 )
        b1 = b3 = 0          (0, 900]           (0, 900]         (0, 900]                                      [0, 900]


     In column (1) of Table S30, firm 2 prefers not to sell TV station 2 at the opening price of 900.
Firm 2 therefore either causes the reverse auction to fail at the outset if b1 = 900 or withdraws first
if b1 < 900. In column (2), firm 2 is indifferent between selling TV station 2 at the opening price
of 900 and not selling it. Firm 2 therefore bids anything if b1 = 900 or withdraws first if b1 < 900.
In column (3), firm 2 prefers not to sell TV station 2 at a price of b1 . Firm 2 therefore withdraws
first. In column (4) and (5), firm 2 is indifferent between selling TV station 2 at a price of b1 and


                                                                    xiii
not selling it. Firm 2 therefore bids anything. In column (6), firm 2 prefers to sell TV station 2 at
a price of b1 . Firm 2 therefore does not withdraw first.

   Using Proposition 5, the expected profit of firm 1 if it bids b1 ∈ [0, 900] and b3 ∈ [0, 900] can be
written as
                                      Z   ∞
      Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; v1 , v3 , σ) =           (2 · 900 − v1 − v3 ) 1 (900 > max {b1 , b3 }) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                       900
                                          Z   900
                                      +             (b1 − v3 ) 1 (b1 > max {ṽ2 , b3 })
                                          0
                                      + (2ṽ2 − v1 − v3 ) 1 (ṽ2 > max {b1 , b3 })
                                      + (b3 − v1 ) 1 (b3 > max {b1 , ṽ2 })
                                                                     
                                          1               1
                                      +     (b3 − v1 ) + (b1 − v3 ) 1 (900 > b1 = b3 > ṽ2 ) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                          2               2
                                        Z 0
                                      +      (b1 − v3 ) 1 (b1 > b3 )
                                          −∞
                                      + (b3 − v1 ) 1 (b3 > b1 )
                                                                   
                                          1               1
                                      +     (b3 − v1 ) + (b1 − v3 ) 1 (900 > b1 = b3 > 0)
                                          2               2
                                      − (v1 + v3 ) 1 (b1 = b3 = 0) dΦ2 (ṽ2 ).                            (S3)

   We assume v1 = 100 and v3 = 300 as in Table 1. Towards determining b1 (100, 300, σ) and
b3 (100, 300, σ), the following propositions show that firm 1 always bids b1 < b3 .

Proposition 6. Eπ1 (0, 0; 100, 300, σ) < Eπ1 (0, ; 100, 300, σ) and Eπ1 (b, b; 100, 300, σ) < Eπ1 (b −
, b; 100, 300, σ) for all b ∈ (0, 900] for any sufficiently small  > 0.

Hence, firm 1 never bids b1 = b3 .

Proof. First, consider b = 0. Then plugging into equation (S3) yields
                                                           Z   ∞
                      Eπ1 (0, 0; 100, 300, σ) =                     (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                             900
                                                               Z    900
                                                           +              (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                                0
                                                               Z    0
                                                        −       (100 + 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                           −∞
                                                        Z ∞
                                                      <      (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                         900
                                                          Z 900
                                                        +        (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                          Z 
                                                        +       ( − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                                −∞
                                                      = Eπ1 (0, ; 100, 300, σ)


                                                               xiv
for any sufficiently small  > 0. Consider next b ∈ (0, 900). Then plugging into equation (S3) yields
                                                Z   ∞
                    Eπ1 (b, b; 100, 300, σ) =            (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                  900
                                                    Z    900
                                                +      (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                     b
                                                Z b                       
                                                             1       1
                                              +         b − 100 − 300 dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                             2       2
                                              Z ∞−∞
                                            <      (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                               900
                                                Z 900
                                              +        (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                 b
                                                Z b
                                              +       (b − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                     −∞
                                            = Eπ1 (b − , b; 100, 300, σ).

Finally, consider b = 900. Then plugging into equation (S3) yields

                    Eπ1 (900, 900; 100, 300, σ) = 0
                                                  Z            900
                                                <                    (900 − 100)dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                           −∞
                                                    = Eπ1 (900 − , 900; 100, 300, σ).




Proposition 7. b1 > b3 implies Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ) > Eπ1 (b3 , b1 ; 100, 300, σ).

Hence, firm 1 never bids b1 > b3 . Taken together, Propositions 6 and 7 imply that firm 1 always
bids b1 < b3 .

Proof. Consider first 900 > b1 > b3 ≥ 0. Then plugging into equation (S3) yields




                                                     xv
                                                        Z   ∞
                  Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ) =                 (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                          900
                                                            Z   900
                                                        +             (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                             b1
                                                            Z b1
                                                  +       (b1 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                     −∞
                                                  Z ∞
                                                <      (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                   900
                                                    Z 900
                                                  +        (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                              b1
                                                            Z  b1
                                                        +           (b1 − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                              −∞
                                                = Eπ1 (b3 , b1 ; 100, 300, σ).

Next consider 900 = b1 > b3 ≥ 0. Then plugging into equation (S3) yields
                                                                Z     900
                      Eπ1 (900, b3 ; 100, 300, σ) =                         (900 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                                 −∞
                                                                Z 900
                                                          <                 (900 − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                                    −∞
                                                          = Eπ1 (b3 , 900; 100, 300, σ).




   Using Propositions 6 and 7, the expected profit of 1 firm if b3 < 900 becomes
                                           Z   ∞
           Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ) =            (2 · 900 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                           900
                                               Z    900
                                           +              (2ṽ2 − 100 − 300) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                b3
                                               Z b3
                                           +            (b3 − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                0
                                               Z    0
                                           +   (b3 − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                −∞
                                                               
                                                       900 − v2
                                      = 1400 1 − Φ
                                                           σ
                                                                                    
                                                             900 − v2           b3 − v2
                                        + (2v2 − 400) Φ                   −Φ
                                                                σ                  σ
                                                                          
                                                  b3 − v2            900 − v2
                                        +2σ φ                −φ
                                                     σ                  σ
                                                                
                                                         b3 − v2
                                        + (b3 − 100) Φ                                                (S4)
                                                            σ

                                                          xvi
and
                                                                   Z   900
                         Eπ1 (b1 , 900; 100, 300, σ) =             (900 − 100) dΦ2 (ṽ2 )
                                                                   −∞
                                                                             
                                                                     900 − v2
                                                            = 800Φ
                                                                        σ

if b3 = 900. Note that the expected profit of firm 1 depends solely on b3 ; hence, b1 ∈ [0, b3 ) is
indeterminate. Note also that limb3 →900− Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ) > Eπ1 (b1 , 900; 100, 300, σ); hence,
firm 1 never bids b3 = 900.
   To explore the relationship between the game of incomplete information as σ → 0+ so that
beliefs collapse at the true reservation values and the game of complete information, we first assume
v2 = 500 as in Table 1. The expected profit of firm 1 in the game of incomplete information becomes

                                            Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ)
       (                                                                                     
                         400
                                 + (b3 − 700) Φ b3 −500                 b3 −500             400
                             
           1400 − 800Φ    σ                          σ       + 2σ   φ      σ      −φ         σ         if b3 < 900,
   =
                                            800Φ 400
                                                         
                                                      σ                                                if b3 = 900.
                                                                                                                      (S5)

For comparison, in the game of complete information the profit of firm 1 in equation (S1) in Online
Appendix A.2 becomes
                                                        
                                                        
                                                             600            if b3 < 500,
                                 π1 (b1 , 500, b3 ) =       b3 − 100 if b3 > 500,                                     (S6)
                                                        
                                                              500            if b3 = 500,
                                                        


where we assume that firm 2 truthfully bids b2 = 500 and firm 1 bids b1 < b3 as in the game of
incomplete information. Note that in the game of complete information the profit of firm 1 again
depends solely on b3 and that firm 1 always bids such that b3 = 900.
   Figure S1 plots the expected profit of firm 1 in equation (S5) for various values of σ and the
profit of firm 1 in equation (S6). As σ → 0+ , the expected profit of firm 1 under incomplete
information closely resembles the profit of firm 1 under complete information. Moreover, for a wide
range of values of σ, b3 (100, 300, σ) in the game of incomplete information is arbitrarily close to
(but different from) b3 = 900 in the game of complete information. Close to extreme overbidding
thus arises in the game of incomplete information.
   To further explore the relationship between the games of complete and incomplete information,
we consider a variant of Example 1 in Section 3.3 in which we replace the reservation value of TV
station 2 by v2 = 700. The expected profit of firm 1 in the game of incomplete information becomes




                                                            xvii
Figure S1: Expected profit and profit of firm 1 in equations (S5) and (S6) with v2 = 500




                                           Eπ1 (b1 , b3 ; 100, 300, σ)
      (                                                                                
                        200
                                + (b3 − 1100) Φ b3 −700                b3 −700        200
                            
          1400 − 400Φ    σ                           σ       + 2σ   φ     σ      −φ    σ         if b3 < 900,
  =
                                            800Φ 200
                                                        
                                                     σ                                           if b3 = 900.
                                                                                                            (S7)

For comparison, in the game of complete information the profit of firm 1 in equation (S2) in Online
Appendix A.3 becomes
                                                       
                                                       
                                                            1000   if b3 < 700,
                                π1 (b1 , 700, b3 ) =       b3 − 100 if b3 > 700,                            (S8)
                                                       
                                                             800    if b3 = 700,
                                                       


where we assume that firm 2 truthfully bids b2 = 700 and firm 1 bids b1 < b3 as in the game of
incomplete information. Note that in the game of complete information the profit of firm 1 again
depends solely on b3 and that firm 1 always bids b3 ∈ [0, 700).
   Figure S2 is analogous to Figure S1. As σ → 0+ , the expected profit of firm 1 under incomplete
information again closely resembles the profit of firm 1 under complete information. Figure S2
further shows that b3 (100, 300, σ) in the game of incomplete information gets close to the reservation
value v3 = 300 of TV station 3 as σ → 0+. In this example, a small amount of incomplete
information thus appears to single out truthful bidding. Finally, Figure S2 shows that b3 (100, 300, σ)
gets close to 900 as σ → ∞. A large amount of incomplete information thus appears to support

                                                           xviii
Figure S2: Expected profit and profit of firm 1 in equations (S7) and (S8) with v2 = 700




close to extreme overbidding even though firm 1 never bids b3 = 900 in the game of complete
information as we show in Online Appendix A.3.


C      Private equity firms’ acquisitions and sales of TV stations
Figures S3-S5 document the timeline of acquisitions (black) and sales (red) of TV stations by
LocusPoint, NRJ, and OTA. As stated in the main text, from 2010 to 2015 these private equity
firms acquired 48 UHF stations. In addition, as stated in footnote 44, LocusPoint acquired W33BY-
D (facility ID 25722), WMJF-CD (facility ID 191262), and WBNF-CD (facility ID 14326) and sold
them to HME Equity Fund II LLC before the reverse auction; we exclude these UHF stations
from Figure S3. NRJ acquired KFWD (facility ID 29015); we include this VHF station in Figure
S4. Finally, LocusPoint acquired WPHA-CD (facility ID 72278) from D.T.V. LLC in a deal that
apparently has not been consummated due to a law suit between the two parties; we exclude this
UHF station from Figure S3.S3
    We obtain the holdings of LocusPoint, NRJ, and OTA as of 2015 from BIA. We rely on news
coverage to confirm these holdings and identify any changes to them.S4 We have been unable to
ascertain the purchase price for W24BB-D (facility ID 68137) and thus set it to zero. If multiple

  S3
     See https://publicfiles.fcc.gov/api/service/tv/application/1709537.html and Paragraph 81 of https:
//transition.fcc.gov/eb/Orders/2016/FCC-16-41A1.html, accessed on April 1, 2018.
  S4
     We primarily track TV station trading news through http://www.tvnewscheck.com/ and https://www.rbr.
com/.


                                                  xix
TV stations were acquired in a single transaction, then we allocate the total purchase price to each
acquired TV station in proportion to its interference free population.
   The FCC released the identity of the TV stations that relinquished their licenses in the reverse
auction along with their payouts. OTA voluntarily surrendered the license of WJPW-CD (facility
ID 68407) to the FCC.S5 We exclude from Table 5 and Figures S3-S5 any sales of non-spectrum
assets such as programming contracts, or equipment. For example, OTA and NRJ sold the non-
spectrum assets of KTLN-TV (facility ID 49153) and WGCB-TV (facility ID 55350), respectively,
after relinquishing their licenses in the reverse auction.S6




  S5
     See        https://enterpriseefiling.fcc.gov/dataentry/public/tv/draftCopy.html?displayType=html&
appKey=25076ff35f490dae015f4fa9968c0e0d&id=25076ff35f490dae015f4fa9968c0e0d&goBack=N,     accessed on
April 30, 2018.
  S6
     See http://www.tvnewscheck.com/article/108526/station-trading-roundup-5-deals-259m, accessed on
April 1, 2018.


                                                  xx
      Figure S3: Timeline of LocusPoint’s acquisitions (black) and sales (red) of TV stations




                                                                                              AUCTION: WLPH-CD,
                                    WDWO-CD, $4M
                                                                                              WQVC-CD, $15.2M

                                    WDVB-CD, $20M


                                     WLPD-CD, $6M                                                  WMGM-TV, $6M


                                          WBNF-CD, $1.4M         WQVC-CD, $1.3M                WLPD-CD, WDVB-CD,
                                                                                               $18.7M
                                          WMGM-TV, $6M




xxi
        2011      2012       2013          2014           2015          2016           2017           2018


                                                                                              WDWO, $2M


                               WRCF-CD, $1.25M        WMKE-CD, $2.5M                          WRCF-CD, $2.5M


                               WMJF-CD, $1.8M      W33BY-D, $1.6M                             WMKE-CD, $0.65M


                             KFTL-CD, $6.65M       WLPH-CD, $5.1M                             KFTL-CD, $2.85M

                                                                               W33BY-D, WMJF-CD,
                             WARP-CD, $3.05M
                                                                               WBNF-CD, $23.75M
        Figure S4: Timeline of NRJ’s acquisitions (black) and sales (red) of TV stations




                           KSCI, KIKU, $45M

                              WPHY-CD, $3.5M

                                      KSKJ-CD, $5.7M                                         AUCTION: WMFP,
                                                                                             WTVE, WZME, WGCB-
                                      KUBE-TV, $19M                                          TV, WOCH-CD, KTNC-
                                                                                             TV, KNET-CD, $640M
              WMFP, $5M               KTNC-TV, $13.5M

                                         KNLA-CD, KNET-CD,
              KCNS, $15M




xxii
                                         $59.2M


       2011        2012           2013           2014        2015     2016            2017        2018



                                 WOCH-CD, $7.4M                         KFWD, $9.9M              KSCI, $0.65M

                                WGCB-TV, $9M

                    WZME, $22.8M                                    KSKT-CD, $9.75M

                  WTVE, $30.4M
         Figure S5: Timeline of OTA’s acquisitions (black) and sales (red) of TV stations




                                                                                         AUCTION: KTLN-TV,
               KFFV, $5.05M                                                              WEBR-CD, WYCN-CD,
                                                                                         WLWC, WVTX-CD,
               KTLN-TV, $8M                                                              WEMW-CD, WEPA-
                                                                                         CD, WPCP-CD,
                         WEBR-CD, $6.6M                                                  WNNB-CD, WTBL-CD,
                                                                                         $441M
                                  WYCN-CD, $4.1M               W21CK-D, $1.1M

                                  WLWC, 13.8M                  W24BB-D, Unknown               KVOS-TV, KFFV, KAXT-
                                                                                              CD, $15.1M
                                      KAXT-CD, $10.1M           WTBL-CD, $0.55M


        2011      2012         2013          2014       2015         2016         2017       2018




xxiii
                                             KMIR-TV, $17M                                     KUGB-CD, $1.5M

                                           WKHU-CD, WJMB-CD,                                   W21CK-D, $0.5M
                                           WVTX-CD, WMVH-CD,
                                           WEMW-CD, WEPA-CD,
                                                                                               WKHU-CD, WMVH-CD,
                                           WWKH-CD, WPCP-CD,
                                                                                               WWKH-CD, WWLM-CD,
                                           WWLM-CD, WNNB-CD,
                                                                                               WJMB-CD, $0.275M
                                           WJPW-CD, $7.25M

                                KUGB-CD, $2.3M                                                WJPW-CD, Surrender

                     KVOS-TV, $2.9M                                                        KMIR-TV, $21M
D     Pseudo code for algorithm
There are N TV stations in the focal DMA and its neighbors. Throughout we fix the vector
b = (b1 , . . . , bN ) of their bids. Using the notation in Section 3, P Oj is the payout of TV station j
from the reverse auction and πj its profit. The base clock price is P , the set of active TV stations
is A, the set of inactive TV stations is I, and the set of frozen TV stations is F , where we omit the
dependence of these objects on the round τ of the reverse auction.

Full repacking. Algorithm 1 describes the algorithm that we use under full repacking as well as
under naive bidding with b = (s1 , . . . , sN ). On line 1, |Y | ≤ 1 by assumption, except possibly if
τ = 1, so that at most one active TV station opts to remain on the air.




                                                  xxiv
Algorithm 1 Full repacking
Initialization: Set τ = 1, P = 900, A = {1, . . . , N }, I = ∅, and F = ∅.
Repeat

   1. Let Y = {k ∈ A|bk ≥ P } be the set of active TV stations that opt to remain on the air at a
      base clock price of P . Set A ← A \ Y , I ← I ∪ Y , and P Oj = πj = 0 for all j ∈ Y .

   2. If τ = 1 and S(Y, R) 6= 1, then these TV stations cannot be repacked and the reverse auction
      has failed at the outset (see footnote 26). Set a flag, P Oj = πj = 0 for all j ∈ A, and
      terminate.

   3. For all k ∈ A do

       (a) If S(I ∪ {k}, R) 6= 1, then active TV station k cannot additionally be repacked. In this
           case, set A ← A \ {k}, F ← F ∪ {k}, P Ok = ϕk P , and πk = ϕk P − vk .

   4. End

   5. If A 6= ∅, then set P = maxj∈A bj , τ ← τ + 1, and continue with the decreased based clock
      price.

   6. If P = 0, then the reverse auction concludes with a base clock price of 0 (see footnote 27).
      Set a flag, F ← F ∪ A, P Oj = 0 and πj = −vj for all j ∈ A, and A = ∅ (in this order).

Until A = ∅.


Limited repacking. Algorithm 2 describes the algorithm that we use under limited repacking.
It takes the output of the algorithm under full repacking and naive bidding as an input.
    We relabel TV stations such that TV stations {1, . . . , K} are in the focal DMA and TV stations
{K + 1, . . . , N } are in the neighboring DMAs. We denote by F ∗,f ull,naive the (appropriately rela-
beled) set of frozen TV stations at the conclusion of the reverse auction from the algorithm under
full repacking and naive bidding. In the initialization, F ∗,f ull,naive ∩ {K + 1, . . . , N } is the set of TV
stations in neighboring DMAs that have been frozen under full repacking and naive bidding; these
TV stations cannot freeze another TV stations under limited repacking. On line 3, A ∩ {1, . . . , K}
is the set of active TV stations in the focal DMA; these are the only TV stations that can be frozen
under limited repacking.




                                                     xxv
Algorithm 2 Limited repacking
Initialization: Set τ = 1, P = 900, A = {1, . . . , N } \ F ∗,f ull,naive ∩ {K + 1, . . . , N } , I = ∅, and
                                                                                               

F = F ∗,f ull,naive ∩ {K + 1, . . . , N }.
Repeat

   1. Le Y = {k ∈ A|bk ≥ P } be the set of active TV stations that opt to remain on the air at a
      base clock price of P . Set A ← A \ Y , I ← I ∪ Y , and P Oj = πj = 0 for all j ∈ Y .

   2. If τ = 1 and S(Y, R) 6= 1, then these TV stations cannot be repacked and the reverse auction
      has failed at the outset (see footnote 26). Set a flag, P Oj = πj = 0 for all j ∈ A, and
      terminate.

   3. For all k ∈ A ∩ {1, . . . , K} do

       (a) If S(I ∪ {k}, R) 6= 1, then active TV station k cannot additionally be repacked. In this
           case, set A ← A \ {k}, F ← F ∪ {k}, P Ok = ϕk P , and πk = ϕk P − vk .

   4. End

   5. If A 6= ∅, then set P = maxj∈A bj , τ ← τ + 1, and continue with the lower based clock price.

   6. If P = 0, then the reverse auction concludes with a base clock price of 0 (see footnote 27).
      Set a flag, F ← F ∪ A, P Oj = 0 and πj = −vj for all j ∈ A, and A = ∅ (in this order).

Until A = ∅.




                                                   xxvi
E    Robustness to underbidding
We investigate the importance of underbidding for the computationally manageable Washington,
DC, DMA. Allowing the owner of a jointly owned TV station j located inside the focal DMA to
underbid bj = 0 in addition to bid truthfully bj = sj and overbid bj = 900 increases the number
strategy profiles from 189 to 343. Consequently, ruling out underbidding as a strategy, as we do in
the main text, greatly reduces the computational burden.
    On average across simulation draws, we find 23.89 (24.62) equilibria under the 126 MHz (84
MHz) clearing target that map into 1.11 (2.62) payout-unique equilibria. While 87.9% (83.0%)
of the underlying equilibria involve underbidding by at least one TV station, all payout-unique
equilibria can be sustained by an equilibrium that involves no underbidding. That is, for any
underlying equilibrium with underbidding, there is another equilibrium without underbidding that
results in identical payouts to all TV stations. Underbidding is therefore not essential for spanning
the set of equilibrium payouts.


F    Advertising revenue imputation
Table S31 reports parameter estimates for imputing missing advertising revenue, as described in
Appendix A.4.




                                               xxvii
                                                             Table S31: Advertising revenue imputation by year

                                                  2003        2004        2005        2006        2007        2008        2009        2010        2011        2012        2013        2015
                                       
         ln Interf erenceF reeP opjt             0.450***    0.439***    0.412***    0.384***    0.360***    0.334***    0.311***    0.319***    0.326***    0.285***    0.292***    0.213***

                                                 (0.053)     (0.052)     (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.045)     (0.043)     (0.043)     (0.042)     (0.042)     (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.041)

         Multicast                               0.204***    0.182***    0.182***    0.135***    0.141***    0.128**     0.130**      0.090*     0.123**     0.098**     0.107**     0.193***

                                                 (0.052)     (0.048)     (0.050)     (0.051)     (0.051)     (0.050)     (0.050)     (0.050)     (0.051)     (0.049)     (0.049)     (0.064)
                                             
         1 P owerOutputjt = F ullP ower          0.682***    0.582***    0.687***    0.817***    0.831***    0.822***    0.839***    0.893***    0.836***    0.926***    0.913***    1.021***

                                                 (0.119)     (0.117)     (0.110)     (0.110)     (0.101)     (0.099)     (0.099)     (0.094)     (0.094)     (0.091)     (0.090)     (0.092)

         Owns > 1 station in DMA                  0.071       0.014       0.049       0.112*     0.109**     0.127**     0.124**     0.150***    0.153***    0.162***    0.171***    0.208***

                                                 (0.058)     (0.056)     (0.056)     (0.057)     (0.056)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.055)     (0.053)     (0.053)     (0.056)

         Owns 2-10 stations across DMAs           0.002       0.023       -0.030      0.007       0.016       0.021       0.114       0.118      0.220***    0.172**     0.169**     0.212**

                                                 (0.091)     (0.089)     (0.089)     (0.090)     (0.088)     (0.086)     (0.086)     (0.084)     (0.084)     (0.082)     (0.083)     (0.094)

         Owns > 10 stations across DMAs          0.195**     0.204**      0.144*      0.148*      0.145*      0.156*     0.186**     0.180**     0.280***    0.225***    0.213***    0.202**

                                                 (0.087)     (0.085)     (0.086)     (0.087)     (0.085)     (0.083)     (0.082)     (0.080)     (0.081)     (0.079)     (0.080)     (0.088)

         # Stations in DMA                       0.029***    0.028***    0.023**      0.017*      0.018*      0.016       0.019*      0.011       0.006       -0.002      0.004       0.007

                                                 (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.010)




xxviii
         # Major network affiliates in DMA       -0.078***   -0.076***   -0.078***   -0.082***   -0.092***   -0.091***   -0.107***   -0.108***   -0.107***   -0.096***   -0.081***    -0.046

                                                 (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.031)     (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.031)

         W ealthIndexjt                          0.119***    0.103***    0.112***    0.081**     0.104***    0.092**     0.088**     0.082**     0.081**     0.079**     0.082**     0.141***

                                                 (0.039)     (0.038)     (0.039)     (0.040)     (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.039)     (0.037)

         CompIndexjt                              -0.039      -0.017      0.018       0.053       0.027       0.051       0.055       0.077       0.109*     0.118**      0.092       0.050

                                                 (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.060)     (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.058)     (0.057)     (0.057)     (0.059)
                         
         ln DM AP opjt                           0.451***    0.460***    0.453***    0.467***    0.524***    0.513***    0.526***    0.532***    0.502***    0.555***    0.553***    0.597***

                                                 (0.082)     (0.080)     (0.077)     (0.079)     (0.077)     (0.074)     (0.074)     (0.073)     (0.074)     (0.070)     (0.070)     (0.069)

         # Owned satellite stations              0.225***    0.190**     0.182**      0.129*      0.147*      0.133*     0.179**     0.166**     0.175**     0.164**     0.148**      0.030

                                                 (0.076)     (0.074)     (0.075)     (0.078)     (0.077)     (0.076)     (0.075)     (0.074)     (0.076)     (0.074)     (0.075)     (0.084)

         Network affiliation fixed effects          X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X

         Affiliation groups × U.S. states           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X           X

         Adjusted R2                              0.994       0.994       0.994       0.993       0.993       0.993       0.993       0.994       0.993       0.993       0.993       0.992

         N                                        1126        1137        1161        1205        1227        1243        1243        1250        1266        1272        1275        1301
