                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WINTER IS COMING:
      THE LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON CONFLICT, 1400-1900

                                         Murat Iyigun
                                         Nathan Nunn
                                         Nancy Qian

                                      Working Paper 23033
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23033


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We thank Isaiah Andrews, Tim Armstrong, Susan Athey, Steve Berry, Marshall Burke, Melissa
Dell, Michael Greenstone,Solomon Hsiang, Benjamin Jones, DanKeniston, Kyle Meng, Stelios
Michalopoulos, Ted Miguel, Nicholas Ryan, Joseph Shapiro, Chris Udry, and EricWeese for their
insights; the participants at the Zurich Applied Economics Seminar, University of Lausanne
Applied Seminar, University of Geneva Seminar, LSE/UCL Development Seminar, Stanford
Development Seminar, University of California at Berkeley Development Seminar, Duke
University     Development      Seminar,     NBER       Political    Economy,     the    Toulouse
DevelopmentWorkshop and the Yale Political Economy and Development Conference for useful
comments; Erin Fletcher, Nicola Fontana, Anna Hovde, Eva Ng, Joshua Schabla, Brittney
Stafford-Sullivan and Jaya Wen for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Murat Iyigun, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Winter is Coming: The Long-Run Effects of Climate Change on Conflict, 1400-1900
Murat Iyigun, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 23033
January 2017
JEL No. N43,N53,O13,P16,Q34

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the long-run effects of cooling on conflict. We construct a geo-referenced and
digitized database of conflicts in Europe, North Africa, and the Near East from 1400-1900, which
we merge with historical temperature data. We show that cooling is associated with increased
conflict. When we allow the effects of cooling over a fifty-year period to depend on the extent of
cooling during the preceding period, the effect of cooling on conflict is larger in locations that
experienced earlier cooling. We interpret this as evidence that the adverse effects of climate
change intensify with its duration.

Murat Iyigun                                    Nancy Qian
Department of Economics                         MEDS
University of Colorado                          Kellogg SOM
Campus Box 256                                  Northwestern University
Boulder, CO 80309                               2001 Sheridan Rd.
murat.iyigun@colorado.edu                       Evanston, Il 60208
                                                and NBER
Nathan Nunn                                     nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
1         Introduction

Climate change is one of the most pressing problems faced by countries today. Recent studies pro-
vide a large body of important evidence on the adverse effects of weather shocks on economic and
political outcomes in the short to medium runs (Burke and Emerick, 2015; Dell et al., 2012; Horn-
beck, 2012; Hsiang and Jina, 2014; Miguel et al., 2004). However, much less progress has been
made in understanding the effects of longer-run changes in the climate.1 This is important, because
climate change is inherently a long-run phenomenon, and it is unclear whether long-run effects will
be more or less detrimental than short-run effects. On the one hand, there may be what the literature
commonly refers to as “adaptation”. Populations may relocate, or they may adopt new technologies,
production processes, crops, or even social or institutional structures that better suit the new envi-
ronment. Thus, while individuals are unable to adapt to short-run fluctuations in weather, they may
be able to adapt to longer-run changes in climate. If this is the case, then long-term effects may be
weaker than the short-run effects. On the other hand, there may be “intensification”, a term coined
by Dell et al. (2014) to refer to the compounding effects of prolonged climate change that occurs
over an extended period of time. For example, one year of drought may have few adverse effects by
itself, but a year of drought that follows three successive years of drought may have larger adverse
effects if, for example, food stores have eroded. Prolonged periods of climate change, over decades
or centuries, may also begin to affect more fundamental factors, such as institutions, governance,
or even culture. Thus, it is possible that long-term effects may be greater than short-term effects.
        The goal of this paper is to provide a better understanding of the long-run effects of climate
change, and the potential channels through which these effects operate. To do this, one needs to
examine the effects of climate change over long periods of time. Since we do not yet have sufficient
time series to examine the effects of modern global warming, we attempt to make progress on this
important question by examining periods of dramatic cooling that occurred in Europe, North Africa
and the Near East between 1400 and 1900 CE.
        Our analysis examines the long-run effects of cooling on conflict and warfare – outcomes fea-
    1
        See Dell et al. (2014) for an overview of the climate change literature.


                                                               1
tured prominently in the literature on economic and political development, and for which reliable
measures are available to researchers. To measure historical conflict, we construct a new dataset of
all wars and each of their battles that were fought between 1400 and 1900 CE in Europe, the Near
East, and Northern Africa. The conflict data are constructed using two sources, Brecke (1999, forth-
coming) and Clodfelter (2008), which provide information on known wars, including the locations
and dates of all battles fought during a war. Over a period of six years, we manually digitized the
information and geo-referenced each battle (defined as a conflict event during a war) to construct
a dataset that records the date and location of over 2,700 conflicts in Europe, North Africa and the
Near East between 1400 and 1900 CE.
       We merge the conflict data with historical climate data that were constructed by geologists and
climatologists (Mann et al., 2009a). The original data set includes gridded annual average temper-
ature (0.5 degree by 0.5 degree grid-cells) from 500 to 2000, which covers the entire globe.2 Our
baseline sample is at the decade and grid-cell level, where each grid-cell is 400km by 400km. Our
grid-cells are large both to match the resolution of the climate data, and also to capture potential
spillovers in conflict caused by environmental fluctuations. For example, disruptions to agricultural
productivity can lead to migration, which will lead to conflict not just in the original location, but
in the destination of the migrants as well.
       The length of the 500-year panel allows us to estimate the impacts of climate change over the
long term, as well as test for the presence of adaptation and intensification effects. The period we
examine includes an era that is commonly referred to as the “Little Ice Age” by climatologists and
historians. This was a period of extreme cooling. During this time, glaciers expanded and seas
froze as far south as present-day Turkey. Temperature declines were accompanied by increased
variability in precipitation. Record levels of precipitation, which were preceded and/or followed by
droughts, significantly reduced agricultural productivity, which in turn led to famines and conflicts
that took various forms, including rebellions, uprisings, and foreign invasions. During the Little
Ice Age, there was temporal and spatial variation in the intensity of cooling.
   2
       See Section 4 for a detailed discussion.



                                                    2
       Although climate change in our context is one with temperature declines, the findings of our
study are relevant for the issue of modern climate change, e.g. global warming. To understand this,
it is important to keep several points in mind. First, in general, there is an optimal temperature
range for a given form of agricultural production. Thus, our study of historical cooling and studies
of modern warming share the common feature that both are examining deviations from the previous
level of temperature. Both cases are expected to reduce agricultural productivity, which can lead to
conflict. Second, both historical cooling and modern warming are correlated with higher environ-
mental volatility, which can disrupt agricultural production, as well as other economic activities.3
This fact underlies the climate change literature’s use of temperature as a sufficient statistic for
capturing environmental changes of the time (Nordhaus, 1993). For these reasons, we expect that
both long-run cooling and long-run warming may both be associated with greater conflict. Consis-
tent with this, a number of past studies have documented non-monotonic relationships (resembling
U-shaped curves) between conflict and temperature levels.4
       Our empirical analysis proceeds in several steps. We begin in Section 3 by motivating our
baseline specification, where the dependent variable is the change in conflict incidence over a fifty-
year period. The main independent variables are the change in average regional temperature over
the same period, the change in average regional temperature during the previous period, and the
interaction of these two terms. The latter interaction term is the key innovation of our estimation
and the focus of our analysis. We interpret it as the net of adaptation and intensification effects since
it shows how the effect of cooling in a fifty-year period on the change in conflict during that period
depends on cooling in the preceding fifty-year period. A negative interaction effect suggests that
adaptation dominates intensification. Cooling that immediately follows a period of previous cooling
has smaller marginal effects because society has had time to develop ways of adapting to further
change. A positive interaction effect suggests that intensification dominates adaptation. Cooling
that immediately follows an earlier period of cooling has larger marginal effects and the current
   3
     In Section 4, we document a correlation between cooler temperatures and higher rainfall volatility in the historical
data.
   4
     For example, Burke et al. (2015) report a U-shaped relationship between conflict incidence and temperature from
a panel of East African countries, observed at an annual frequency between 1981 and 2002.


                                                           3
effects of cooling are compounded by the effects of earlier cooling. For example, state capacity
might be eroded by long periods of cooling, which might make the region more politically sensitive
to further shocks. Alternatively, individuals and societies might constrain and limit belligerence
initially on the belief that the adverse climate shocks are transitory. But, with successive climate
shocks, they might ratchet up belligerence (or adaptation to the new environmental conditions) once
they start to view the new climate conditions as permanent.5
       The regressions control for time-period (i.e., decade) fixed effects and grid-cell fixed effects.
Time period fixed effects control for changes that affect conflict over time that are common across
space, e.g., changes in military technologies, changes in agricultural technologies, and broad politi-
cal changes like the rise of nation states. Grid-cell fixed effects control for time-invariant differences
across regions, e.g., geographic characteristics.
       The analysis produces several results. First, we find that for a location that experienced a stan-
dard deviation more of cooling, but experienced no cooling in the previous period, the change in
conflict incidence is approximately 0.03 standard deviations greater. Second, in a location that
experienced a standard-deviation of cooling in the previous period, a standard deviation more of
cooling in the current period leads to a 0.09 standard deviation increase in conflict change. The
first two results together imply that cooling has a three times greater effect on conflict change if the
same area experienced cooling during the previous period. While the forces of adaptation may be
present, our estimates indicate that they are dominated by the forces of intensification. Third, we
find that the coefficient for the direct effect of the previous fifty-years of cooling is close to zero
and insignificant. Thus, while cooling during the previous fifty-year period has no direct effect on
conflict change during the subsequent fifty-year period, it does have an important indirect effect be-
cause it increases the effect that cooling in the subsequent fifty-year period has on conflict change
during that same period.
       Our baseline specification is intentionally parsimonious, since the introduction of additional co-
variates can alter the interpretation of the estimates. Nevertheless, to address concerns of omitted
   5
       We provide a more detailed discussion and concrete historical examples in Section 2.



                                                           4
variables biases, we show that our results are very similar when we control for additional factors,
such as latitude, longitude, elevation, terrain slope, distance to the coast, agricultural suitability, the
urban population in 1400, and average temperature in 1401-1450. In our specifications, we interact
these time-invariant controls with a full set of time-period fixed effects to allow their influences to
vary flexibly over time. We also show that the findings are robust to alternative ways of clustering,
to the omission of earlier years when the historical climate data are of lower quality, and to the
omission of large wars which may spuriously drive our results. The last robustness check is impor-
tant for ruling out the concern that our estimates are spuriously driven by a few large wars (with
many battles) that happened to have coincided with cooling. In fact, when we divide the sample
according to the size of the war, we find that our results are driven by conflicts that are part of
medium scale wars. This is reassuring since it is less plausible that cooling was a key determinant
of the largest wars, such as the Napoleonic Wars or the wars related to the Reformation. Lastly, we
also demonstrate that it is unlikely that the results are due to measurement error in the temperature
data.
    To shed light on the mechanisms driving the results, we investigate heterogeneous effects. We
find that our estimates are strongest in regions that are suitable for the production of agricultural
staples, as well as for inland regions that are further from the coast. Both findings are consistent
with climate change affecting conflict by reducing agricultural productivity. It had a smaller effect
in regions that relied less on agriculture, either due to lower productivity in agriculture or greater
access to overseas trade. We also find that the negative effects of cooling were larger in regions that
were cooler in 1401-1450. This is consistent with cooling having more adverse effects in regions
that were already marginal for agricultural production due to their generally colder climate. In
addition, the results show that the effects of cooling were similar for conflicts that were part of
civil wars and for conflicts that were part of inter-state wars. However, we find that the effects are
concentrated in regions that were politically fractionalized during 1401-1450. This is consistent
with politically fractionalized regions being less stable and thus more sensitive to shocks.
    Our baseline estimates examine the direct and interaction effects of cooling during two fifty-


                                                    5
year periods – i.e., over one hundred years. We also examine longer-term effects of cooling by
estimating the contemporaneous and lagged effects of cooling (and their interactions) for five fifty-
year periods, i.e., over 250 years. The goal of this somewhat heroic exercise is to take advantage of
the long-historical panel data to investigate whether the effect of cooling on conflict change during
this fifty-year period is affected by coolingin the previous four 50-year periods. We find that the
further back that previous cooling occurred, the less it affects the impacts of recent cooling.
    Our paper contributes to two bodies of research. First, we make contributions to the climate
change literature. We are the first to provide direct estimates of long-run (i.e., beyond fifty or sixty
years) and very long-run effects (i.e., beyond 100 years) on any outcome. Past studies inferred long-
run effects indirectly from cross-sectional comparisons (Mendelsohn et al., 1994) or by plugging
in short-run estimates into “business-as-usual” models to project long-run effects (Deschenes and
Greenstone, 2011). In attempting to estimate causal effects beyond the short-run, we are most
closely related to studies of the medium-run effect of climate change in the United States (Burke
and Emerick, 2015; Dell et al., 2012), which we discuss in more detail later in the paper, and of the
medium-run effects of natural disasters (Hornbeck, 2012; Hsiang and Jina, 2014). Our results are
also consistent with the findings of a working paper by Ludlow and Hsiang (2016), which finds no
evidence of adaptation to climate change in the historical Irish context.6
    Our findings provide evidence of long-run intensification effects, and show that the effect of cli-
mate change is non-linear with respect to the duration of climate change. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the first to estimate long-run interaction effects of this nature and to show empirically
the importance of a flexible functional form for capturing such long-run effects. The specification
we estimate is discussed, though not estimated, in the review article by Dell et al. (2012).7 Our
    6
      Several recent studies in political science have examined the relationship between climate change and conflict in
the historical context. For example, Lee et al. (2013) recently linked historical conflict data provided by Brecke (1999,
forthcoming) and climate data from Mann et al. (2009a) to argue that climate change increases conflict. In contrast to
our analysis, these findings examine aggregate variation in the time series. By examining variation across both space
and time, we are able to provide complimentary evidence for the link between climate change and conflict that is not
identified from only time variation. These other studies do not examine interaction effects.
    7
      The review points out that the existing literature examines adaptation in the following ways. “First, different
geographic areas have different baseline climates. An unusual weather shock in one area is often well within normal
experience in another area, where adaptation has had the opportunity to occur. Comparing these areas by interacting
weather shocks with the existing distribution of weather events can help assess the magnitude of adaptation. Second,


                                                           6
focus on non-linearity is most closely related to Deschenes and Greenstone (2011) and Schlenker
and Roberts (2009), who provide evidence for the non-linear short-run relationship between tem-
perature levels and outcomes in the United States.
    Our findings also contribute to a very recent literature that examines the economic effects of
climate change during the Little Ice Age. For example, Waldinger (2015) examines the relation-
ship between mean temperatures over 50- and 100-year periods and urbanization from 1500-1750.
Dalgaard et al. (2016) examine the relationship between cooling and productivity growth within a
panel of 21 countries across centuries from 1000-1800. Our finding that cooling increases conflict
complements the findings from these studies, which show that cooling is associated with worse
economic outcomes.8
    Second, our findings also add to the empirical literature on the determinants of conflict. Our
investigation of the long-run effects of climate change complements studies of the short-run effects
of weather shocks and agricultural price shocks on conflict (e.g., Miguel et al., 2004; Dube and
Vargas, 2013). To establish causal identification, studies of the determinants of conflict tend to
estimate the impacts of shocks on contemporaneous conflict. For thorough reviews of this literature
see Hsiang et al. (2013) and Burke et al. (2015).9 In studying the long-run determinants of conflict,
we are most closely related to studies on the relationship between non-transitory agricultural shocks
and conflict in the historical context. For example, in a companion paper, Iyigun et al. (2016) use the
same conflict data as this paper to show that the adoption of potatoes in Europe, which increased
agricultural productivity, reduced conflict in the 18th and 19th centuries. Similarly, Jia (2014)
one can examine long differences; i.e., instead of looking at annual shocks, one can examine average impacts over
longer time horizons, such as decades. Third, one can focus on particular permanent shocks and trace out their impacts
over many years. Fourth, combining the previous two methods with short-run panel estimation, one can explicitly
compare the same event at different time scales to assess the degree of adaptation. Fifth, one can extend panel models
to explicitly examine spillovers of weather shocks”. We discuss our empirical specification relative to the existing
literature more in Section 3. Our examination of the interaction of climate change in different time periods differs from
and complements existing studies.
    8
      Our results are also in line with the findings from Anderson et al. (2016), who show that periods of cooling are
associated with greater religious violence and persecution against Jewish populations in Europe between 1100 and
1800, and with Oster’s (2004) finding of a relationship between cooling and witch killings in Renaissance Europe.
    9
      An example of such a study exploiting short-run variation with historical conflict data is Bai and Kung (2011a).
Using a long panel which include 2,000 years, they find that rainfall shocks in the previous decade increased nomadic
attacks, but shocks during one decade earlier had no effect. Kung and Ma (2014) examine annual data and document
a relationship between rainfall-shortages/crop failures and peasant rebellions during the Qing dynasty in China.


                                                           7
finds that the introduction of sweet potatoes acted as an insurance mechanism and reduced peasant
rebellions in China during adverse rainfall shocks.
         The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the historical background.
Section 3 motivates the empirical specification, Section 4 describes the data, and Sections 5 and 6
report the empirical results. Section 7 discusses the implications of our results for modern climate
change. Section 8 offers concluding thoughts.



2         Background

2.1         Climate Change and Agricultural Production

Prior to the fifteenth century, climate in the northern hemisphere was usually characterized by stable
long summers. However, between the early-fifteenth and the mid-nineteenth centuries, the climate
became more unpredictable, cooler, and subject to extremes (Lamb, 1995, p. 212). The period of
our study (1400-1900 CE) includes the entire era commonly referred to as the “Little Ice Age”.10
This period of cooling reached its peak in the 17th century, which experienced significant cooling.
Rivers and seas that previously did not freeze started to freeze over. During the winter of 1620-21,
the Bosphorus froze allowing people to walk between Europe and Asia (Parker, 2013, p. 3). During
the late 17th century, the ice laid thirty kilometers from shore along parts of the Dutch coast. Many
harbors were closed and shipping halted in the North Sea (Fagan, 2000, p. 113).
         The exact timing and extent of cooling experienced by different locations in Europe varied
and was severe in many locations. For example, data from Zurich from 1560-1599 indicate that
temperatures were 1.3 degrees Celsius colder than in 1880–1930 (Lamb, 1995, p. 212). England’s
average temperature in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries was 0.6-0.8 degrees Celsius
colder than in the early 20th century Lamb (1995, p. 212). From 1600-1650, the temperature cooled
by up to two degrees celsius in Scotland, leading to a severe reduction in agricultural production. It
    10
    There is a debate amongst climatologists about whether or not the Little Ice Age was a large deviation from very
long-run historical trends. This is inconsequential for our study.



                                                         8
is believed that 100,000 men, approximately one-fifth of the male population, left Scotland during
this period to live abroad (Parker, 2013, p. 100). In Northern Europe, nine out of the fourteen
summers between 1666-1679 were abnormally cold (Parker, 2013, p. xxv).
   The Eastern Mediterranean is a region that experienced particularly severe changes during the
Little Ice Age. Most places in this region suffered drought and plague during the 1640s and 1650s,
and again in the 1670s. The winter of 1684 was recorded as being the wettest winter on record
during the previous five centuries. The average temperature during the winters of the late 1680s
are estimated to have been a remarkable 3 degrees Celsius cooler than today (Parker, 2013, pp.
209–210).
   Like modern global warming, during the “Little Ice Age”, periods of climate change were char-
acterized by high variability in precipitation, particularly in the summer (Lamb, 1995, p. 213),
which in turn reduced agricultural output (Parker, 2013, ch. 3). Cycles of excessive cold and un-
usual rainfall often lasted for a decade or longer (Fagan, 2000, p. 48). Cold spells during germi-
nation, droughts during the early growing season, and major storms at harvest were particularly
disastrous for crops. As an example, in Baden of Southwest Germany, the frequency of good wine
years from 1550-1620 was less than half the frequency of 1480-1550 Lamb (1995, p. 213). Cli-
mate also affected crops indirectly. Excessive rain encouraged rodents, while droughts encouraged
locusts (Parker, 2013, p. 18). Severe cooling made previously productive lands located at higher
altitudes and latitudes unusable, and the expansion of glaciers made previously habitable lands un-
inhabitable. As well, successive years of flooding and excessive rain washed away the nutrients in
the soil that took decades to replenish. For example, it is estimated that between 1628 and 1630,
Chamonix lost a third of its land through avalanches, snow, glaciers, and flooding (Fagan, 2000, p.
124).
   The reduced availability of food caused population declines through increased mortality, re-
duced fertility, and out-migration. For example, during the mid-17th century, the population in
Ireland fell by at least one-fifth, the rural population in Germany declined by thirty to forty percent,
and in Poland and Russia populations fell by one-third (Parker, 2013, p. 25). Seventeenth-century


                                                   9
Finland saw eleven complete crop failures (Parker, 2013, p. 18). By the end of the century, Fin-
land had lost as much as a third of its population from famine and disease (Fagan, 2000, p. 132).
Possibly the hardest hit region during this time was the Balkans and Anatolia, which according to
estimates, lost about half of its population during the 17th century. By the mid-17th century, rural
populations in some regions in Anatolia fell by as much as 80 percent, while 30-40 percent of rural
villages were abandoned and left empty. Estimates from Boeotia, Greece indicate that by 1688,
the population was half of what it had been just a century earlier (White, 2011, pp. 204-211). The
lack of nutrition during these periods of cooling are also apparent in skeletal remains that show
the stunting of French soldiers born during these periods and in populations from Holland (Parker,
2013, p. 22).
   The drastic reduction in agricultural productivity typically caused surges in food prices. For
example, severe cooling in 17th century Scandinavia led to crop failures, which caused “bread
prices to climb far beyond the reach of families already weakened by two decades of [bad harvests
and] war” (Parker, 2013, p. 230). In France, consecutive years of bad weather during the same
period drove bread prices to the highest levels in over a century. Similar relationships between crop
failure and high food prices were also seen in other locations, such as Britain and Switzerland during
the 1730s (Fagan, 2000, p. 139). A recent study by Waldinger (2015) provides quantitative evidence
of the relationship between cold temperatures and higher wheat prices across ten European cities
during this period. According to her estimates, a one degree Celsius decline in temperature caused
an increase in the average wheat prices of 11 percent. These effects are important, especially given
that in Europe cereals provided approximately three-quarters of total caloric intake (Parker, 2013,
p. 19).
   This period of cooling not only affected agriculture, but for some locations, the fishing industry
as well. During the coldest period of the seventeenth century, sea temperatures along the Norwegian
coast fell by two degrees Celsius within a 30-year period. During this time, the Faroe cod fisheries
stopped producing as the sea surface temperature became five degrees colder than today. The lack
of cod was due to the fact that the fish cannot survive in water that is colder than 2 degrees Celsius


                                                 10
(Lamb, 1995, pp. 217–219). These effects were widespread, with production declining significantly
as far south as the Shetland Islands (Fagan, 2000, pp. 70, 116).
   An aspect of this period of cooling, which is crucial for our analysis which exploits variations
across both space and time, is that climate change was not uniform across regions or over time. As
Fagan explains: “Climate change varied not only from year to year but from place to place. The
coldest decades in northern [western] Europe did not necessarily coincide with those in say Russia”
(Fagan, 2000, p. 50). In fact, the Russian Empire absorbed a significant number of emigres from
devastated regions such as France and Germany. This variation was due, in part, to differences in
geography, with coastal and high altitude areas tending to be more affected due to the freezing of
coastlines and the movement of glaciers.


2.2   Climate and Conflict

Several historians and political scientists have noted that upticks in historical conflict were asso-
ciated with climate change (e.g., Lamb, 1995). A number of scholars have also documented links
between aggregate climatic fluctuations and conflict historically, including in China (Zhang et al.,
2006, 2007; Bai and Kung, 2011b; Jia, 2014), Africa (Fenske and Kala, 2015), and Europe (Zhang
et al., 2007; Tol and Wagner, 2010; Lee et al., 2013). Other studies have examined more specific
forms of violence and conflict. For example, Anderson et al. (2016) look across 936 European
cities between 1100 and 1800 and document that colder temperatures were associated with more
violence against Jewish populations. Oster (2004) shows that in the aggregate between 1520 and
1770, cooling is associated with more violence and accusations of witchcraft.
   There is ample historical evidence suggesting that the reduction in agricultural productivity that
resulted from cooling led to different types of conflict. There are examples of peasant rebellions
in times of famine (Parker, 2013, chpt. 3). Historians have also linked foreign invasions to climate
change – particularly to cooling. There are many potential reasons behind this relationship. This
could have been due to a reduction in the cost of invasion because natural barriers such as rivers or
seas froze over and allowed for easier troop movements. Or because reduced agricultural production


                                                 11
increased demand for other sources of revenue, which incentivized governments to invade relatively
fertile neighbors. At the same time, belligerent neighbors sometimes viewed the weakening of
state capacity caused by climate change as a good opportunity for invasion. For example, from
1686-1687, the Ottoman Empire experienced its second severe cold spell of the century – this was
the second time that the Golden Horn froze over – and for several years, it experienced winters
with little precipitation and summers with record-high levels of precipitation. The impoverished
government did not pay its army, which mutinied and forced Mehmet IV to abdicate, resulting in
the fifth forced removal of an Ottoman Sultan in sixty years. During this time, the Hapsburgs and
Venetians attacked. In 1699, after the Golden Horn froze again, the Ottomans signed the Treaty
of Karlowitz where it ceded most of modern Hungary and Greece (Parker, 2013, p. 209). During
periods of climate change, conflicts of different forms often occurred simultaneously. For example,
in the early 1600s in Russia, twenty years of famines, rebellions, and civil wars, as well as invasions
by both Sweden and Poland had reduced the size of the Russian population by approximately one-
quarter (Parker, 2013, p. 152).
       The impoverished agricultural sector made it easy for governments to recruit soldiers. After
the Great Winter of 1708-9, a French general said “we could only find so many recruits because
of the misery of the provinces. . . The misfortune of the masses was the salvation of the kingdom”
(Parker, 2013, p. 101). Thus, another reason why climate change may have increased conflict was
by reducing the cost of arming.11


2.3       Adaptation and Intensification

In many of the examples that we have provided, the effects of climate change on conflict intensified
as periods of climate change prolonged. More generally, historical accounts suggest that continued
climate change weakened state capacity, which in turn reduced internal political stability and made
states vulnerable to external invasion as well as internal strife. A striking example of this is the
  11
     This is consistent with the the contemporary evidence of the relationship between the reduced opportunity costs
of conflict in the face of adverse agricultural shocks. See fore example Miguel et al. (2004).




                                                        12
Ottoman Empire. Parts of the Ottoman Empire experienced severe cooling and suffered repeated
agricultural productivity shocks during the late 16th and the early 17th centuries (White, 2011). In
several regions of Anatolia, the number of rural taxpayers fell by three-quarters between 1576 and
1642, and almost half of all villages disappeared (Parker, 2013, p. 188).
         At the same time, historical accounts also give examples to suggest that afflicted populations
were able to adapt with time. There are numerous accounts of migration and the relocation of
economic activity. Production of certain types of crops permanently ceased in some regions. In
Britain, wine production was significantly reduced by exceptionally harsh winters during the 1430s,
and in 1469 wine production stopped altogether. Historians also argue that farmers sometimes
adapted to their new environments by experimenting with new agricultural technologies, which
improved productivity. For example, Flemish and Dutch farmers used windmills to drain the land
of excess precipitation and began to experiment with lay farming and crop rotation. During the
1600s, Dutch engineers developed better methods for reclaiming land and protecting against floods
(Fagan, 2000, p. 107). To cope with colder winters, farmers from Northern Europe introduced
turnips and potatoes as field crops in the late-1600s and early-1700s (Fagan, 2000, pp. 108–109).12
Another example is the experience of Norway, where the traditional industry of fishing suffered
severely from the cold temperatures of the 17th century. By the beginning of the 18th century,
many coastal villages had been abandoned – and instead – the population engaged in logging, the
export of timber, and ship building. Norway developed a large merchant fleet based on the timber
trade, which transformed the economy of its southern regions (Fagan, 2000, p. 116).



3         Empirical Framework

The aim of our analysis is to understand the effects of prolonged climate change on conflict. Our
empirical specification is guided by the recent review article by Dell et al. (2014). Studies of cli-
    12
     The effects of new crops are ambiguous ex ante since sometimes, the lack of knowledge caused cultivation to
interact poorly with environmental change. For example, the production decline in Ireland in the 18th century was
partly caused by the potato’s vulnerability to precipitation (long droughts followed by excessive rains) (Fagan, 2000,
Chpt. 11).


                                                         13
mate change typically have in mind an underlying model that assumes that the relationship between
temperature and the outcome of interest is locally linear and that there is an optimal temperature.
Deviations from the optimal level in either direction has detrimental impacts, reducing productivity,
increasing conflict, etc. The setting we study is one in which already-cold environments became
colder. This differs from studies of modern climate change that tend to focus on already-warm
environments becoming warmer.
     Studies of climate change tend to focus on the short-run effects of temperature (or rainfall) levels
on outcomes such as conflict, agricultural productivity, or income (e.g., Dell et al., 2012; Deschenes
and Greenstone, 2011; Miguel et al., 2004). Using panel data, such studies estimate equations that
take the following form:


                                     yi,t = −αTi,t + ρi + ςt + εi,t ,                                (1)

where an outcome (measured in levels) in region i and time period t, yi,t , is a function of the
level of the climate variable, typically temperature or rainfall, Ti,t , as well as region fixed effects,
ρi , and time fixed effects, ςt . For the purpose of simplifying the discussion, we will simply refer
to T as a measure of temperature. Variations in temperature, Ti,t , is assumed to be exogenously
given. Region fixed effects control for time-invariant differences across regions that would affect
conflict levels, such as terrain ruggedness or agricultural suitability. Time fixed effects control for
any changes in the determinants of conflict that are common across space, such as innovations in
military technology.
     In our setting, the cross-sectional unit i is a grid-cell, and the time period is a decade, denoted
d. The outcome of interest, yi,d , is the incidence of violent conflicts in grid cell i during the decade
d.
     To estimate effects of continued climate change beyond the short run using year-to-year varia-
tion, existing studies have adopted two different strategies. The first is to plug the short-run esti-
mates into a model that assumes that the long-run “production function” is the same (or similar) to
the short-run one. A well-known recent example of this is Deschenes and Greenstone (2011), which

                                                   14
finds that in the short-run, very high and very low temperatures are associated with higher mortality
rates. Applying these estimates to a “business-as-usual” model predicts that climate change will
increase mortality by three percent in the next century. Interestingly, they document a similarly
non-linear relationship between temperature and energy consumption, which they interpret as ev-
idence that heating and cooling are used to mitigate the negative effects of extreme temperatures,
i.e., technology can adapt to mitigate the effects of climate change.
   A second approach examines changes in temperature over longer time intervals (i.e., long-
differences) to estimate the medium- or longer-run effects of climate change (e.g., Dell et al., 2012;
Burke and Emerick, 2015). In our setting, we follow a similar logic. We use a decade as the unit
of observation, which we index by d. For each decade, we then take a fifty-year difference, i.e.,
the average temperature value for a decade minus the value five decades earlier. We denote this
five-decade difference by ∆. Thus, our regression equation is:




 ∆yi,d−5 = yi,d −yi,d−5 = −α(Ti,d −Ti,d−5 )+(ςd −ςd−5 )+(εd −εd−5 ) = α∆Ci,d−5 +δd +i,d , (2)


where ∆Ci,d−5 = −(Ti,d − Ti,d−5 ) is the decrease in average temperature (i.e., extent of cooling)
from decade d − 5 to d. Thus, ∆Ci,d−5 is the negative of an increase in temperature. Therefore, it
is positive in sign if there is cooling. Lastly, d ≡ εd − εd−5 and δd ≡ ςd − ςd−5 . In our analysis, we
measure conflict, yi,d , using an indicator variable that equals one if there was conflict in grid-cell i
during any year of decade d. By taking first-differences, we net out any time-invariant differences in
a location’s propensity to engage in conflict. This addresses, for instance, the possibility that there
may be time-invariant differences, such as income or agricultural production, that may themselves
be correlated with conflict. The specification also includes time-period fixed effects, δd . These
capture differences over time that are common to all grid cells.
   An important point about equation (2) is that it does not include grid-cell fixed effects, since
they are differenced away when we move from equation (1) to (2). A concern with not controlling



                                                   15
for location fixed effects is that cooling may have occurred in regions that experienced changes in
other factors that could have influenced conflict change. One possibility is to add location fixed
effects, which will capture differences in the average changes in conflict over the fifty-year intervals
across different locations. To be as conservative as possible, our final specification also includes
location (i.e., grid-cell) fixed effects, ρi :


                                       ∆yi,d−5 = α∆Ci,d−5 + δd + ρi + i,d .                        (3)

       Equation (3) effectively examines the relationship between cooling and conflict change during
overlapping windows that are five decades in length.13 This strategy has many benefits. First,
because the unit of observation is a decade (and the measures used are averages during that decade),
we can make use of fine-scale variations in conflict and temperature. We are unable to examine
the data at a finer level – e.g., annually – since the reconstructed climate data are not reliable at
frequencies finer than a decade (Mann et al., 2009b,a). Second, by differencing over fifty-year
periods, we can examine how longer-run changes in cooling affect conflict. Since our analysis
examines all decades (and not, for example, every fifth decade) we maximize the information that
our estimates exploit. Because our differences do contain overlapping decades, observations will
not be independent. To address this, we cluster all standard errors at the grid-cell level. Third, since
equation (3) includes time-period fixed effects, our estimates of interest are determined by the effects
of climate change that deviate from changes that are common to all locations in our sample. Thus,
our estimates are not influenced by aggregate trends that are common to all locations. Similarly,
equation (3) also includes grid-cell fixed effects, which capture differences in the average change
in conflict incidence across locations.
       Given our interest in estimating the presence of intensification and adaptation effects, we aug-
ment equation (3) and allow for the possibility that cooling in the previous fifty-year period may
affect the change in conflict during the current fifty-year period. In addition, we allow cooling in
the previous fifty-year period to affect how cooling in the current fifty-year period affects conflict
  13
       We discuss alternative interval lengths in more detail in Section 4.


                                                             16
change during the same period. Thus, our regression equation takes the following form:


         ∆yi,d−5 = α1 ∆Ci,d−5 + α2 ∆Ci,d−10 + β(∆Ci,d−5 × ∆Ci,d−10 ) + δd + ρi + εi,d ,             (4)


where everything is defined as in equation (3), including ∆, which continues to denote a difference
over fifty years. The new expression, ∆Ci,d−10 , denotes the difference in cooling between five
decades prior and ten decades prior to the current decade: ∆Ci,d−10 = −(Ti,d−5 − Ti,d−10 ). The
change in conflict over a fifty-year period in grid-cell i, ∆yi,d−5 , is now a function of: cooling over
the same fifty-year time period in grid-cell i, ∆Ci,d−5 ; cooling during the previous fifty-year period
in grid-cell i, ∆Ci,d−10 ; and the interaction of these two periods of cooling, ∆Ci,d−5 × ∆Ci,d−10 .
   It is easy to see that equation (3) is a special case of equation (4), where α2 = 0 and β = 0. The
more-flexible equation (4) allows the effect of cooling in the previous fifty-year period to directly
affect the change in conflict in the subsequent fifty-year period, i.e., α2 6= 0 . In addition, equation
(4) allows the extent of cooling in the previous period to alter the contemporaneous effect of cooling
on conflict change. The marginal effect of cooling during a fifty-year period on conflict change in
that same fifty-year period, where each period cools by 1 degree Celsius, is given by α1 + β. The
estimate of β provides evidence for the presence of adaptation and intensification effects.
   It is important to recognize that we are not able to separately identify the magnitude of adapta-
tion effects and intensification effects, but only the net effect of both. If β < 0, then this provides
evidence for the presence of adaptation effects, and to the extent that intensification effects also
exist, suggests that adaptation effects dominate the intensification effects. Analogously, if β > 0,
then this implies that intensification effects exist, and to the extent that adaptation effects are also
present, they are dominated by intensification effects.
   There are many potential omitted variables that can confound the interpretation of the estimates.
For example, the historical evidence discussed earlier suggests that cooling was more pronounced
in coastal areas, which may have experienced changes in other factors that could have influenced
conflict. Thus, after we present our baseline results, we check the robustness of our estimates to also



                                                  17
account for these other factors. As we will show, the baseline estimates are, if anything, conservative
relative to the estimates that we obtain when we include additional controls.



4        Data

4.1      Conflict

The primary source used to construct our conflict dataset is Michael Clodfelter’s (2008) Warfare and
Armed Conflicts, which is a statistical encyclopedia of global conflicts between 1494 and 2007 CE.
This is the most comprehensive source of data available on conflicts over a long time horizon. We
extend the Clodfelter data back to 1400 using a second source, Peter Brecke’s Conflict Catalogue,
which contains an annual record of all violent conflicts with 32 or more combat deaths, starting
in 1400 CE.14 Although both sources have widely drawn upon various scholars in different ways
(Wimmer and Min, 2006; Zhang et al., 2007; Iyigun, 2008; Dencecco, 2009; Dencecco and Prado,
2012; Lee et al., 2013; Besley and Reynal-Querol, 2014; Iyigun et al., 2016), the data had not
yet been digitized for the full time period available and for all of greater Europe. In addition, the
locations of battles had not been geocoded. Although the locations of the battles were reported in
Clodfelter, they were not reported explicitly in Brecke. For the conflicts that were in Brecke but
not Clodfelter, we obtained the locations from other sources such as Shaw (1976), Levy (1983) and
Findlay and O’Rourke (2007).15 We chose to use two sources, rather than one, to maximize coverage
and to allow each to cross-check the other.16 While we used the two most widely consulted sources,
we do recognize that a number of other sources also exist. Ultimately, due to resource constraints,
    14
      For each conflict recorded in the catalog, the primary information covers (i) the number and identities of the parties
involved in the conflict; (ii) the common name for the confrontation, if it exists; and (iii) the date(s) of the conflict. On
the basis of these data, there also exists derivative information on the duration of conflicts and the number of fatalities,
although these are only available for less than a third of the sample.
   15
      For the Brecke data, where we had to consult additional sources, we collected up to four different locations for the
primary battles fought in each war.
   16
      According to our procedure, prior to 1494, we rely solely on Brecke. Of the two sources, Clodfelter, though its
coverage does not extend as far back in time, is more comprehensive since it reports information on battles and not just
wars. Thus, we use this as our primary source and use Brecke to extend the dataset back to 1400 and to cross-check
Clodfelter. Our results are robust to using only the Clodfelter data. These are available upon request.



                                                            18
and the time necessary to cross-check multiple data sources against one another, we chose to rely
on only two sources.
   Our constructed conflict dataset is a panel of all conflicts fought on land by location and year. In
total, there are 2,787 battles, defined as a conflict location in a calendar year. While our underlying
data are at the conflict level, it is interesting to note that conflicts belong to larger wars. The 2,787
battles in our sample belong to 912 wars. We are able to code several characteristics at the war
level. For example, we can compute the size of the war in terms of the number of conflicts (battles
within a location and calendar year). On average, there are two conflicts per war. But this masks
significant variation, from one conflict (which is common) to 74 conflicts (during the peninsular
Napoleonic War, 1807-1814). Around 20% of battles belong to single-conflict wars. We also know
whether a war was an inter-state conflict (involving actors from multiple states) or an intra-state one
(involving actors from within a state). Later, we will use this information to divide the conflict data.
   Using this information, we construct a balanced panel of the number of conflicts in a 400km
by 400km grid-cell and in a decade from 1401–1900. The size of our grid-cells is determined by
the variation in the historical climate data, which we discuss in the next section. The grid-cells
are fairly large. For example, modern day France is the same size as approximately four grid-cells.
This is important since it means that grid-cells likely capture localized spillover effects; for example,
disruptions to local agricultural productivity can lead to migration, which can lead to conflict not
just in the original location, but also neighboring destinations of the migrants. Smaller grid-cells
are less likely to capture these spillover effects than our 400km by 400km grid-cell.
   Figure 1 shows a map of the locations of the conflicts in our database for each century of our
sample. It shows that, over time, conflicts moved from being mostly in the Northwest of our sample
to the Southeast. Motivated by this, in our robustness analysis, we are careful to check that our
results are robust to controlling for latitude interacted with time effects.
   Following existing empirical studies on conflict, such as Miguel et al. (2004), our main outcome
variable is the incidence of conflict, measured with an indicator variable that equals one if at least
one conflict occurred in a grid-cell at any time during the decade. A benefit of this measure is


                                                   19
.                                                                                             .



Legend                                                                                        Legend
   Battles, 1400s                                                                                Battles, 1500s
                                          Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ                                                                        Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ




                    (a) 1401-1500                                                                                                       (b) 1501-1600



.                                                                                             .



Legend                                                                                        Legend
   Battles, 1600s                                                                                Battles, 1700s
                                          Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ                                                                        Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ




                    (c) 1601-1700                                                                                                       (d) 1701-1800



                                    .



                                    Legend
                                       Battles, 1800s
                                                                                                    Copyright: ©2013 Esri, DeLorme, NAVTEQ




                                                                              (e) 1801-1900

                    Figure 1: Locations of conflicts during each century of our sample.




                                                                                   20
that our estimates are easily comparable to pre-existing studies that examine the short-run effects
of weather on conflict. Another benefit is that it helps to mitigate concerns of measurement error
relative to, for example, a measure of the number of battles, which is more likely to be measured
imprecisely.


4.2       Climate

To measure cooling, we use temperature data constructed by Mann et al. (2009a). The authors use
a climate field reconstruction approach to reconstruct global patterns of surface temperature for a
long historical period. The construction uses proxy data with global coverage that comprise 1,036
tree ring series, 32 ice core series, 15 marine coral series, 19 documentary series, 14 speleothem
series, 19 lacustrine sediment series, and 3 marine sediment series. The data have global coverage
and report the average annual temperature for five degree latitude by five degree longitude grids,
and are available for each year from 500 to 1959 CE.17 The data are most accurate for the post-
medieval period in the Northern Hemisphere, where our study takes place, because of the larger
number of climate proxies from this context.
       The data accurately estimate decadal temperature averages but not for finer time periods. Simi-
larly, they are accurate as averages over space, but not for finer geographic locations. The resolution
and quality of the data are the key determinants of our analysis being at the decade and 400km by
400km grid-cell level.
       Historical temperature data are reported as deviations, measured in degrees Celsius, from the
1961–1990 mean temperature. To be succinct, we will refer to these temperature deviations as
temperature in the paper. Figure 2a plots the average temperature for each decade. On average,
the decade-average means are below zero, which means that the period we study is on average
cooler than 1961–1990. Consistent with historical accounts, the data show three periods of dramatic
cooling. The first begins during the middle of the 15th century and lasts until the end of the same
  17
    One degree latitude is approximately 111km, and one degree longitude ranges from approximately 111km (at the
equator) to 85 kilometers at 40 degrees North to 20 kilometers at 80 degrees North.




                                                      21
century. The second begins at approximately the beginning of the 17th century and lasts for one
hundred years. The third is of shorter duration and occurs towards the beginning of the 19th century
and lasts for three decades.
    Figure 2b shows the decade-level average temperatures along with the standard deviations of
temperatures within a decade. It shows that there is significant spatial variation in temperature for
any given decade. To better illustrate the longer-run trends, Figure 2c plots the fifty-year moving
averages of temperature. The pattern corresponds to historical accounts that show severe cooling
during the late 15th century, the mid-17th century and the early 19th century. The figure shows that
the long-run trend is flat and that mean temperatures tend to cycle between cooling and warming.
The average change in temperature over the time period of analysis is around zero, which means
that over the 500-year sample period, the extent of cooling roughly equals the extent of warming
on average.18
    To get a better understanding of the variation across space and time of the extent and duration of
cooling, for each grid-cell we calculate the number of decades when there was cooling (i.e., when
the average temperature in this decade is lower than the average temperature in the previous decade).
The data show both that cooling often persisted over long periods of time and that the duration
(persistence) varied across grid cells. For example, over a course of 250 years (i.e., 25 decades),
the average grid cell experienced almost ten decades of cooling. However, the cell that experienced
the least cooling only experienced it for two decades, whereas the grid cell that experienced the
most cooling had cooling in 18 out of 25 decades.
    As an alternative strategy to analyze the spatial variation in cooling, we map the magnitude of
cooling, measured in degrees Celsius, during three fifty-year intervals, 1451-1500, 1651-1700 and
1851-1900. This is shown in Figure 3. For each period, we divide the grids into ten equal-sized
groups according to the extent of cooling. Dark orange marks the grids that experienced the least
cooling this period. Dark blue marks the grids that experienced the most cooling. Several facts
emerge from the maps. First, there is significant spatial variation in each period. Second, cooling
 18
    Specifically, ∆Ci,d−5 = −.0084 (std.dev. 0.033). In our sample, mean conflict incidence change is also zero:
∆yi,d−5 = −.0004 (std.dev. 0.014).


                                                      22
                                          -.2
                          Mean Decadal Temp and Std. Dev.
                           -.5       -.4  -.6   -.3



                                                            1400       1500     1600          1700        1800   1900
                                                                                       Year


                                                                   (a) Decadal Means – Main Measure
                                          .5
                          Mean Decadal Temp and Std. Dev.
                              -1        -.5
                                          -1.5    0




                                                            1400       1500     1600          1700        1800   1900
                                                                                       Year

                                                                              Temp            Std. Dev.



                                                            (b) Decadal Means and Standard Deviations
                                          -.25 -.3
                          Temperature 50-Yr MA
                             -.4      -.35-.45
                                          -.5




                                                            1400       1500     1600          1700        1800   1900
                                                                                       Time


                                                                     (c) fifty-Year Moving Average
                                                               Figure 2: Temperature over Time
Notes: The historical temperature data are constructed by Mann et al. (2009a). They are reported
as deviations from the 1961-1990 mean temperature in degreesCelsius.



                                                                                     23
is not concentrated along latitude or longitude, or in a given region. Third, there is significant
variation across our 400km by 400km grid-cells, suggesting that the use of larger grid-cells may
result in the loss of important variation.
   Finally, there is significant variation across time in the spatial distribution of cooling. For exam-
ple, Figure 3a shows that, during the second half of the 15th century, there was significant cooling
along the Atlantic coast and in the eastern Mediterranean. Figure 3b shows that during the late 17th
century, the most severe cooling was felt in eastern Europe, in present-day Ukraine, and western
Russia. Figure 3c shows that, during the late 19th century, cooling lessened in eastern Europe, but
was greater in northern Europe.
   Within our sample period, the main concern is that the earlier centuries in our sample have lower
quality data, and that the estimates from some grid-cells are based purely on extrapolation. After
we present the baseline results, we will check that our main findings are robust to the exclusion
of data from earlier periods, and to the exclusion of grid-cells for which underlying climate proxy
measures do not exist.
   There exists an alternative source of historical temperatures that has been constructed by Luter-
bacher et al. (2004). These have been used in studies such as Durante (2010) and Waldinger (2015).
They are reported every three months (i.e., at the season-year level) and at a 0.5 degree resolution.
Thus, both spatially and temporally, these data are more disaggregated than the data from Mann
et al. (2009a). However, the Luterbacher data only extend back to 1500 and have much more lim-
ited geographic coverage (they do not include North Africa, Eastern Europe, or the Near East). We
choose to use Mann et al. (2009a) as our baseline climate measures since, for the purpose of estimat-
ing the macro-level long-run effects of climate change, the benefits of more expansive geographical
and temporal coverage outweigh the disadvantages of less fine-grained data.


4.2.1   Temperature as a Sufficient Statistic for Climate Change

Our measures of climate change are based on temperature, and we interpret temperature as a suf-
ficient statistic for climatic events that reduce agricultural productivity. This is consistent with


                                                  24
                                                                                                      Temperature Change (in Celsius)
                                                                                                          0-10th: [-0.44, -0.14]

                                                                                                          10-20th: [-0.13, -0.098]

                                                                                                          20-30th: [-0.097, -0.067]

                                                                                                          30-40th: [-0.066, -0.049]

                                                                                                          40-50th: [-0.048, -0.040]

                                                                                                          50-60th: [-0.039, -0.014]

                                                                                                          60-70th: [-0.013, 0.0]

                                                                                                          70-80th: [0.010, 0.047]

                                                                                                          80-90th: [0.048, 0.11]

                                                                                                          90-100th: [0.1, 0.23]




                                                    (a) 1450-1500
                                     Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap contributors,
                                     and the GIS user community




                                                                                                      Temperature Change (in Celsius)
                                                                                                          0-10th: [-0.15, -0.077]

                                                                                                          10-20th: [-0.076, -0.026]

                                                                                                          20-30th: [-0.025, 0.0053]

                                                                                                          30-40th: [0.0054, 0.028]

                                                                                                          40-50th: [0.029, 0.050]

                                                                                                          50-60th: [0.051, 0.074]

                                                                                                          60-70th: [0.075 , 0.10]

                                                                                                          70-80th: [0.11, 0.14]

                                                                                                          80-90th: [0.15, 0.19]

                                                                                                          90-100th: [0.20, 0.32]




                                                    (b) 1650-1700
                                     Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap contributors,
                                     and the GIS user community




                                                                                                      Temperature Change (in Celsius)
                                                                                                          0-10th: [-0.85, -0.69]

                                                                                                          10-20th: [-0.68, -0.50]

                                                                                                          20-30th: [-0.49, -0.39]

                                                                                                          30-40th: [-0.38, -0.33]

                                                                                                          40-50th: [-0.32, -0.27]

                                                                                                          50-60th: [-0.26, -0.21]

                                                                                                          60-70th: [-0.20, -0.13]

                                                                                                          70-80th: [-0.12, -0.054]

                                                                                                          80-90th: [-0.053, 0.075]

                                                                                                          90-100th: [0.076, 0.28]




                                                    (c) 1850-1900
                                     Esri, HERE, DeLorme, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap contributors,
                                     and the GIS user community




Figure 3: Relative cooling across grid-cells for select fifty-year periods. Lighter shades indicate
more cooling (more negative changes in temperature).




                                                                 25
historical accounts which suggest that the Little Ice Age was associated with “a greater frequency
of severe weather events – such as flash floods, freak storms, prolonged droughts and abnormal
(as well as abnormally long) cold spells.” (Parker, 2013, p. 27). It is also consistent with mod-
ern research on climate change. As Nordhaus explains: “In thinking about the impact of climate
change, one must recognize that the variable focused on in most analyses – global averaged surface
temperature – has little salience for impacts. Rather, variables that accompany or are the result of
temperature changes – precipitation, water levels, extremes of droughts or freezes, and thresholds
like the freezing point. . . will drive the socioeconomic impacts. Mean temperature is chosen be-
cause it is a useful index of climate change that is highly correlated with or determines the more
important variables” (Nordhaus, 1993, pp. 14–15).
   To verify the historical relationship between temperature and rainfall, we combined the temper-
ature data from Mann et al. (2009a) with precipitation data from Pauling et al. (2006), which is avail-
able for the entire time period of our study, but has more limited geographic coverage (essentially
Western and Central Europe only). Examining variation in temperature and precipitation across
decades and grid-cells, we find that the bivariate relationship between the two is strong and posi-
tive. According to the magnitude of the relationship, a one-standard-deviation increase in cooling
is associated with an increase in average precipitation of 0.47 standard deviations. The relationship
also remains if we add grid-cell or time-period fixed effects. We find that a one-standard-deviation
increase in cooling is associated with a 0.67 standard-deviation increase in precipitation if we con-
dition on grid-cell fixed effects; a 0.47 standard-deviation increase in precipitation if we condition
on decade fixed effects; and a 0.53 standard-deviation increase in precipitation if we condition on
both. Examining relationships with rainfall volatility (the standard deviation of rainfall across years
within a decade), we find that a one-standard-deviation increase in cooling is associated with the
following increases in volatility, measured in standard deviations: 0.34 (raw data), 0.17 (grid-cell
fixed effects), 0.36 (decade fixed effects) and 0.05 (both fixed effects). Thus, consistent with his-
torical accounts (e.g., Fagan, 2000), the data indicate that cooling is associated with higher average
precipitation and greater volatility.


                                                  26
5     The Long-Run Effects of Cooling on Conflict

5.1    The “Short-Run” Effects of Temperature on Conflict

Before turning to the primary focus of our paper, which is testing for the presence of adaptation
and intensification effects, we first examine the effect of cooling on changes in the incidence of
conflict. We begin by first estimating equation (1), which reports the relationship between the
levels of temperature and conflict. Given the large body of evidence that colder weather during
our context caused instability and conflict, these estimates serve as a check on the validity of the
data and their construction. In estimating equation (1), we take a decade as the unit of observation,
with temperature measured as the average during the decade, and conflict incidence equals one if
there was at least one conflict in that location at any point during that decade. The estimates are
reported in column (1) of Table 1. The estimated coefficient for temperature is negative and highly
significant, showing that during this period, more cooling was associated with a higher likelihood
of conflict. According to the magnitude of the estimates, decreasing temperature by one-standard-
deviation (0.404 degrees Celsius) increases the probability of conflict by 0.404 × 0.0299 = 0.012
or 1.2 percentage-points. This is a non-trivial effect, since the average incidence of conflict is
8.8 percentage-points (and the standard deviation is 28 percentage-points). These estimates are
consistent with the historical accounts discussed in Section 2, as well as previous findings based on
aggregate time series data (e.g., Zhang et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2013).


5.2    Baseline Results

The primary interest of our study is in better understanding how the impact of cooling on conflict
change depends on a location’s earlier cooling. We begin by first estimating equation (3), which
follows studies such as Dell et al. (2012) and Burke and Emerick (2015) that estimate the medium-
run effects of climate change. The estimates, which we report in column (2) of Table 1, show a
strong positive relationship between the extent of cooling during a fifty-year period and the change
in conflict incidence during the same period. According to the magnitude of the estimates, a one-

                                                  27
        Table 1: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Baseline Estimates and Checks of Sensitivity to Functional Form

                                                                                      Dependent Variable:
                               Conflict
                            Incidence, y i,t                                      Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δy i ,d-5
                                 (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)       (9)       (10)
                                                                                                                                            Avg Temp, 1401-1450
                                                                                                      Baseline                              <= Median > Median
     Cooling:
      ΔCi,d-5                                  0.0477*** 0.0468***     0.0650***       0.0426***      0.0436***     0.0269*      0.0430**    0.0437       0.0461
                                               (0.0155) (0.0157)       (0.0241)        (0.0141)        (0.0146)     (0.0142)     (0.0178)   (0.0267)     (0.0296)

      ΔCi,d-52                                             -0.0186      -0.0237
                                                           (0.0203)     (0.0206)

      ΔCi,d-53                                                          -0.0521
                                                                        (0.0328)
      ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10                                                               0.0859**       0.0874**      0.0878**     0.0892**    0.181**      0.0455
                                                                                       (0.0372)       (0.0386)      (0.0384)     (0.0380)   (0.0719)     (0.0494)
      ΔCi,d-10                                                                          0.00101       0.00344       0.00126       0.0140    0.00296      -0.0101




28
                                                                                        (0.0125)      (0.0130)      (0.0132)     (0.0165)   (0.0315)     (0.0219)
     Temperature:
      T i,d                   -0.0299***                                                                           -0.0372**      -0.0307
                               (0.0087)                                                                             (0.0173)     (0.0224)

      T i,d-10                                                                                                                   -0.0312*
                                                                                                                                 (0.0161)

     Grid-Cell FE                  Y              Y            Y            Y              N              Y             Y            Y          Y            Y
     Time Period FE                Y              Y            Y            Y              Y              Y             Y            Y          Y            Y

     Observations              14,000           12,880      12,880       12,880          11,480        11,480        11,480       11,200      5,740        5,740
     Number of Clusters          280             280         280          280             280           280           280          280         140          140
     R-squared                  0.291           0.016       0.016        0.016           0.014         0.017         0.017        0.018       0.022        0.021

     Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):
     Coeff                                                                             0.129          0.131        0.115       0.132        0.224        0.092
     S.E.                                                                             (0.040)        (0.041)      (0.041)     (0.040)      (0.088)      (0.049)
     Notes : The unit of observation is a decade and a 400 km by 400km grid-cell. Coefficients are reported with standard errors clustered at the grid-cell level in
     parentheses.
standard-deviation increase in cooling (a change of 0.23 degrees Celsius) increases the change in
conflict incidence by 0.23 × 0.0477 = 0.011 or 1.1 percentage-points. This effect is significant
given that the mean of the change in conflict incidence is -0.00047 and the standard deviation is
0.34.
       Given that the relationships between temperature and outcomes such as agricultural production
and mortality can be highly non-linear (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Deschenes and Green-
stone, 2011), we check for non-linearities by adding higher-order terms for cooling to equation (3).
The results, reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 1, show that the higher-order terms add little
to the explanatory power. Their coefficients are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant,
and the R-squared of the equation remains virtually unchanged.
       We now turn to our primary question of interest, which is whether the effect of cooling on the
change in conflict incidence depends on a location’s earlier cooling. We do this by estimating equa-
tion (4), which includes a measure of cooling in the preceding fifty-year period, as well as its inter-
action with cooling during the current fifty-year period. The estimates are reported in columns (5)
and (6) of Table 1. Column (5) reports a specification without grid-cell fixed effects, while column
(6) reports a specification that also includes grid-cell fixed effects. The two specifications produce
nearly identical estimates.19 According to the baseline estimates in column (6), a one-degree de-
cline in temperature during the current fifty-year period (that was not preceded by earlier cooling)
increases the change in conflict incidence over the same period by 4.36 percentage-points. This
finding is consistent with the estimate from column (1), showing that lower temperatures increase
conflict incidence. By contrast, a one-degree decline in temperature during the previous fifty-year
period (50 to 100 years prior) has no direct effect on conflict change over the subsequent fifty-year
period. The estimated coefficient is statistically insignificant and very small in magnitude. Thus,
although cooling during a fifty-year period has a contemporaneous effect on conflict in that period,
it has no lagged effect on conflict during the next fifty-year period.
       The estimates also show that the coefficient on the interaction term is large, positive, and statis-
  19
    This is because average changes in temperature and conflict incidence over time are around zero across cells (i.e.,
temperature and conflict cycles over our very long time horizon of 500 years). Recall the discussion in the data section.


                                                          29
tically significant. It shows that the effect of cooling on conflict change during the current period
is significantly greater if the location also experienced cooling in the previous fifty-year period.
According to the estimates, if the location experienced a degree more of cooling in the previous
fifty-year period, then the effect of a degree of cooling in the current period on the increase in con-
flict will be 8.74 percentage-points greater. These estimates provide evidence for the presence of
intensification effects, and their dominance over any adaptation effects, if they exist. The significant
(and large) interaction effect also suggests that standard models that only allow for contemporaneous
effects of cooling (or climate change more generally) on conflict incidence are potentially misspec-
ified. Even if the models allow for lagged effects, where past periods of cooling to have an effect,
they still may be misspecified. This is because the primary effect of past periods of cooling ap-
pears not to be through a direct persistent effect, but through an indirect effect on the impact that
subsequent shocks have on the outcome of interest.
   At the bottom of Table 1, we report the estimated effect (and standard error) of cooling during
the current fifty-year period on conflict change during the same period if there was one-degree
of cooling in the previous fifty-year period, i.e., α1 + β · 1. According to our baseline estimate
from column (6), if a location experienced one-degree Celsius of cooling in the previous fifty-year
period, then a degree of cooling this period increases conflict incidence by 13.1 percentage-points.
If the same location did not experience any cooling in the previous fifty-year period, then the same
effect would only be 4.36 percentage-point increase (i.e., α1 ).
   To further assess the magnitude of the estimate, consider a one-standard-deviation increase in
cooling, which is equal to 0.227 degrees Celsius. Also, recall that a standard deviation of a change
in conflict incidence is 0.34, or 34 percentage-points. According to our estimates, a one-standard-
deviation increase in cooling, but with no cooling in the previous period, is associated with an
increase in conflict incidence of just under one percentage-point (0.0436 × 0.227 = .0099), which
is equal to 0.03 standard deviations (0.0099/0.339 = 0.29). By contrast, a one-standard-deviation
increase of cooling, with a standard deviation of cooling in the previous period, is associated with
an increase in conflict incidence of 2.97 percentage-points ((0.0436 × 0.227) + (0.0874 × 0.227) =


                                                  30
0.0297), which is equal to 0.09 standard deviations (0.0297/0.339 = 0.087). Thus, these magni-
tudes are sizable, but at the same time plausibly moderate since we believe that many other factors
determined the overall variation in conflict in our sample.
       In column (7), we introduce a control for the average temperature during the last decade of
the observation, decade d. This addresses the concern that the extent of cooling is mechanically
associated with the level of temperature at the end of the fifty-year period. If the level of temperature
itself affects changes in conflict incidence, then this could confound our estimated impact of cooling
on conflict. The estimates show that the interaction coefficient of interest remains robust to the
inclusion of a control for the average temperature measured at the end of the fifty-year time-period.
In column (8), we add a control for the average temperature at the beginning of the one-hundred-
year period. This addresses the concern that the degree of cooling may have been correlated with
initially cooler temperature levels, and conflict may have evolved differently depending on initial
conditions. The estimates show that the main results remain robust to the inclusion of this control.
       Finally, we examine heterogeneity by a location’s average temperature, measured during our
base time-period, 1401-1450. This specification is motivated by studies, such as Dell et al. (2012),
Waldinger (2015), and Burke and Emerick (2015), that investigate whether the relationship between
temperature and outcomes differ according to temperature in a base-period.20 This also tests our
conjecture that the adverse effects of cooling may be driven by places that were initially cold (rel-
ative to optimal growing conditions) getting colder. We divide the sample into two equally sized
groups depending on whether the baseline temperature is above or below the median. The estimates
for the two samples are reported in columns (9) and (10) of Table 1. While the baseline effect of
cooling on the change in conflict incidence α1 is similar in both samples, the coefficient of the
interaction term, β, which captures the net of adaptation-intensification effects, is much larger in
magnitude and only significant for the locations that were initially colder. In addition, as shown
at the bottom of the table, the estimated effect of cooling, conditional on cooling in the previous
decade is much larger in the initially colder locations. Thus, the effects of cooling on increased
  20
    Our exercise differs slightly from theirs since we are examining whether the effect of temperature change, rather
than temperature levels, varies by baseline temperature.


                                                         31
                                           Table 2: The Correlates of Cooling

                                                                                             (1)                  (2)
                                                                                               Dependent Variable
              Independent Variable                                                         ΔCi,d-5        ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10
          A.     Incidence of Conflict (1401--1450)                                     -0.00196                 0.00949*
          B.     Interstate Conflict Incidence (1401--1450)                             -0.00148                 0.00642
          C.     Civil Conflict Incidence (1401--1450)                                  -0.00394                 0.00684*
          D.     Average Number of Conflicts (1401--1450)                               -0.00305                 0.00444
          E.     Average Temperature (1401--1450)                                       0.125***                 -0.00263
          F.     Number of Cities (1400)                                                -0.00380                 0.00424
          G.     Suitability for Wheat, Dry Rice, Wet Rice, Barley, and Rye (1st P.C.)  -0.0458***               0.00575
          H.     Suitability for Potatoes                                               -0.0464***               0.00320
          I.     Latitude                                                               0.0261***                -0.0576***
          J.     Longitude                                                              -0.0886***               0.0190
          K.     Distance to the Coast                                                  -0.101***                -0.0226***
          L.     Slope                                                                  -0.0162**                0.00569
          M.     Elevation                                                              -0.0173                  -0.0141
        Notes : The unit of observation is a 400km by 400km grid cell and decade. Each cell reports the correlation
        coefficient between the variable listed in the column heading and the variable listed in the row heading. The
        bivariate correlations reported in column (1) each have 12,880 observations, while the correlations reported in
        column (2)each regression has 11,480 observations.The standarderrors are clustered atthe cell level. *, ** and ***
        indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels.



conflict are primarily driven by places that were cold to begin with.


5.3      Robustness

5.3.1     Correlates of Conflict and Cooling

Since most of the climate change in our context is not believed to be a result of human actions
(Mann, 2002, p. 508), our main empirical concern is that cooling happened to occur in places
that had other features that caused them to experience different patterns of conflict over time –
i.e., the presence of spurious correlations. To address this concern, we control for variables that
are potentially correlated with either climate change or conflict and allow their effects to differ
flexibly over time. As a first step, we first examine the relationships between a number of potentially
important time-invariant covariates and our two independent variables of interest, the extent of
cooling during a fifty-year period ∆Ci,d−5 , and the interaction of this with the extent of cooling in
the prior fifty-year period, ∆Ci,d−5 × ∆Ci,d−10 . Table 2 reports the bivariate relationship between
the two variables and a range of time-invariant covariates.


                                                                 32
       The correlation coefficient reported in row A of column (1) shows that cooling is unrelated to
the incidence of conflict in the first period of our panel, 1401-1450. We can also classify conflicts
according to the type of war that they were a part of, either inter-state or intra-state. As shown
in column (1) of rows B and C, the incidence of either type of conflicts during the base period is
unrelated to cooling. Alternatively, we can examine the number of conflicts instead of incidence
during the base period. We find that this too is uncorrelated with cooling (row D). Looking at
average temperature in 1401-1450, we find that subsequent cooling is positively correlated with
initial temperature. Places that experienced more cooling were initially warmer (row E). We also
consider economic development in our initial period, as measured by the number of cities present.
Using georeferenced data from Nunn and Qian (2011) on city location and size, we compute the
number of cities per grid-cell in 1400. We find that this is uncorrelated with cooling (row F).
       We examine the relationship between agricultural suitability and cooling by using measures of
crop suitability from the FAO GAEZ dataset. We use Old World staple crops that existed prior to
the Columbian Exchange (wheat, dry rice, wet rice, barley and rye). We also measure potatoes sep-
arately, which were an important staple introduced as a field crop first adopted in Europe in the late
17th and early 18th centuries (Nunn and Qian, 2010, 2011). Because of the high correlation across
suitability for the five staple crops, we use the first principal component of the suitability mea-
sures.21 We find that places that experienced more cooling were also those that were less suitable
for the cultivation of Old World staple crops and potatoes (rows G and H).
       Finally, we examine geographic characteristics that could be correlated with cooling: latitude,
longitude, distance to the nearest coastline, slope and elevation (rows I to M). The correlates show
that northern and western regions in our sample experienced more cooling. Given the geographic
shift in conflict from north to south that we observed earlier in Section 4, this raises the important
concern that not accounting for latitude may cause our baseline estimates to be confounded. The
correlations also show that regions closer to the coast and regions that are flatter experienced more
cooling. This pattern of cooling could confound our estimates if coastal areas or regions with flatter
  21
    See the Data Appendix for a description of the FAO data. The first principal component is the only component to
have an eigenvalue of more than one. Iyigun et al. (2016) use a similar measure.


                                                        33
terrain experienced other changes during cooling periods that could have influenced conflict. Over
the long time horizon that we study, we are most concerned about the many changes in military
technologies that may have changed the costs and benefits of fighting over certain types of terrain.
    Column (2) reports the bivariate relationships between the same set of variables and the interac-
tion of cooling in two consecutive fifty-year periods. The variables that are significantly correlated
are the incidence of conflict during 1401-1450, the incidence of civil conflict during 1401-1450,
latitude, and distance to the coast.
    To address the concern that the estimated effect of cooling on conflict change may be confounded
by these other factors, Table 3 reports estimates of equation (4) controlling for the set of covariates
reported in Table 2, each interacted with decade fixed effects, which allows the influence of the
additional control variables to vary flexibly over time. To be cautious, we control for all covariates,
not just the ones that are significant in Table 2.22 In column (1), we reproduce the baseline estimates
for comparison, and in columns (2)-(7), we report the estimates with the additional covariates. We
find that the estimates of interest remain robust. Thus, it is unlikely that our main results are driven
by spurious correlations.
    In column (8), we control for a lag of the dependent variable to address the possibility that con-
flict change may persist over time for reasons other than cooling.23 Our equation includes measures
of cooling during the current and previous fifty-year period (t − 49 to t and t − 99 to t − 50).
Since the change in conflict during the previous fifty-year period (t − 99 to t − 50) is endogenous
to cooling that period, we do not control for conflict change during this time. Instead, we control
for the lagged change conflict incidence from two periods ago (t − 149 to t − 100). As reported,
the estimates remain robust to the inclusion of this covariate.
    Finally, in columns (9) and (10), we show the robustness of our standard errors to alternative
   22
      In column (5), we control for the suitability for the cultivation of Old World staples interacted with time period
fixed effects and the suitability for potato cultivation interacted with a post-1700 dummy variable. The latter control is
motivated by the fact that potatoes were not cultivated as an important field crop until the end of the 1600s (Nunn and
Qian, 2011).
   23
      The conflict literature at large typically worries that the mechanical persistence in conflict levels can confound
causal estimates, and the typical way to deal with this is to control for lagged conflict levels. Ex ante, this is less obvious
of a concern for our examination of changes. Note that a common problem in controlling for a lagged dependent variable
in a short panel is the Nickel Bias. The length of our panel mitigates this concern.


                                                             34
methods for calculating standard errors. In column (9), we report standard errors clustered at the
larger 800km×800km grid-cell level. As we show, the use of larger clusters, which are approxi-
mately the size of modern France, has little effect on the standard errors. For some variables, the
standard errors increase slightly, while for others they decrease slightly. In column (10), we report
Conley (1999) standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation, using a window of 10 degrees
latitude and 10 degrees longitude. Again, the standard errors are similar to our baseline clustered
standard errors.


5.3.2   Alternative Measures of Conflict

Following studies such as Miguel et al. (2004) and Dube and Vargas (2013), the analysis thus far
examines conflict incidence as the outcome of interest. An alternative strategy is to measure conflict
as the total number of conflicts (where a conflict is defined as a battle in location in a calendar year).
Estimates where conflict is measured using the number of conflicts or the log number of conflicts
are reported in Table 4.24 Column (1) reproduces our baseline estimates for comparison, while
columns (2) and (3) report the new estimates that use the number of conflict measures. As shown,
the estimates are qualitatively similar across measures.


5.3.3   Measurement Error in Temperature

The historical temperature data are interpolated from underlying climate proxies. This raises the
concern of measurement error. If the measurement error is classical, then the coefficients for the
uninteracted variables will be biased towards zero. However, with classical measurement error, the
sign of the bias for the coefficients of the interaction terms is ambiguous Griliches (1986); Klepper
and Leamer (1984). Therefore, one concern is that the large positive interaction effect is a result of
measurement error rather than intensification effects. We know of no obvious econometric method
for dealing with this issue. Thus, we undertake a number of alternative strategies to address it.
The first is to estimate equation (4) using three different 300-year sub-samples: 1401-1700, 1501-
  24
    When we take the natural log of the total number of conflicts, we add 0.1 to the measure so that we do not lose
observations with values of zero.


                                                        35
                                          Table 3: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Robustness to Additional Control Variables

                                                                                  Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δy i,d-5
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)              (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                                             Suitability for                                                             Cluster
                                                                                              Old World                                               Accounting       Standard
                                                           Conflict   Number of                Staples x                                              for Lagged        Errors at   Spatially-
                                                          Incidence    Conflicts Temperature   Time FE,      Number of                 Geographic     Measure of       800km by     Adjusted
                                                         1401-1450 x 1401-1450 x 1401-1450 x  Potatoes x Cities in 1400                Controls x     Dependent       800km Grid-   Standard
                                             Baseline      Time FE     Time FE     Time FE    post-1700      x Time FE                  Time FE        Variable        Cell Level    Errors
     Cooling:
      ΔCi,d-5                                0.0436***    0.0445***     0.0425***        0.0667***       0.0331*        0.0416***      0.1090***          0.0524***    0.0436**     0.0436**
                                             (0.0146)     (0.0145)      (0.0145)         (0.0244)        (0.0173)       (0.0146)       (0.0283)           (0.0178)     (0.0169)     (0.0174)

      ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10                     0.0874**     0.0756**       0.0836**        0.1080**        0.0633*        0.0810**        0.1070*           0.0844**     0.0874**     0.0874**
                                             (0.0386)     (0.0355)       (0.0354)        (0.0422)        (0.0380)       (0.0376)        (0.0564)          (0.0401)     (0.0431)     (0.0428)

      ΔCi,d-10                                0.0034       0.0045         0.0040          0.0214         -0.0141         0.0035          0.0115            0.0042       0.0034       0.0034
                                             (0.0130)     (0.0126)       (0.0128)        (0.0247)        (0.0136)       (0.0130)        (0.0267)          (0.0131)     (0.0119)      (0.014)




36
     Prior change in conflict, Δyi,d-15                                                                                                                   -0.0169
                                                                                                                                                          (0.0221)

     Grid-Cell FE                               Y            Y              Y                Y               Y              Y               Y                Y             Y            Y
     Time-Period FE                             Y            Y              Y                Y               Y              Y               Y                Y             Y            Y

     Observations                             11,480       11,480         11,480          11,480          11,029         11,480          11,480            10,080       11,480       11,480
     Number of Clusters                         280         280            280             280             269            280             280               280           85          n/a
     R-squared                                 0.017       0.043          0.043           0.019           0.031          0.032           0.041             0.019        0.017        0.017

     Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):

     Coeff                                     0.131        0.120         0.126            0.175          0.096           0.123           0.216            0.137         0.131
     S.E.                                   (0.041)       (0.038)         (0.038)         (0.048)         (0.042)         (0.040)        (0.061)        (0.043)       (0.048)
     Notes: The unit of observation is a decade and a 400km by 400km grid cell. "Geographic Controls" (in column 7) include: latitude, longitude, elevation, slope and the distance to the
     nearest coast. Coefficient are reported with standard errors clustered at the grid-cell level in parentheses, except for column (9), where the standard errors are clustered at the 800km
     by 800km grid-cell level, and column (10) where we report Conley standard errors adjusted for spatial autocorrelation with a window of 10 degrees latitude and 10 degrees
     longitude.
    Table 4: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Robustness to Alternative Measure of Conflict

                                                 Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Measure
                                                   (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                                            Conflict Incidence         Total Number of        Natural Log of Total
                                               (Baseline)                  Conflicts          Number of Conflicts
         Cooling:
          ΔCi,d-5                                0.0436***                  0.0128                  0.1140***
                                                 (0.0146)                  (0.0502)                 (0.0405)

          ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10                     0.0874**                  0.218*                    0.244**
                                                 (0.0386)                  (0.131)                   (0.109)

          ΔCi,d-10                                0.0034                    0.0408                   0.0177
                                                 (0.0130)                  (0.0290)                 (0.0349)

         Grid-Cell FE                                Y                        Y                        Y
         Time Period FE                              Y                        Y                        Y
         Observations                             11,480                    11,480                   11,480
         Number of Clusters                         280                      280                      280
         R-squared                                 0.017                    0.020                    0.020

         Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):
         Coeff                                     0.131                    0.231                     0.357
         S.E.                                     (0.041)                  (0.111)                   (0.116)

         Notes: The unit of observation is adecade and a 400km by 400km grid-cell. Coefficientsare reported with
         standard errors clustered at the grid-cell level in parentheses.



1800, and 1601-1900. The estimates from this exercise are informative since more recent periods
have higher quality temperature data due to the fact that the number of underlying weather proxies
increases steadily over time (Mann et al., 2009a). Thus, we check the sensitivity of our results to
the use of data from the different time periods. The estimates are reported in columns (2)-(4) of
Table 5. In column (1), the baseline estimates are reproduced for comparison. The results show
that the estimates are similar across the three subsamples, which indicates that differences in the
quality of the temperature data over time do not have a strong effect on our estimates of interest.
   The second strategy that we undertake restricts our sample to observations that are less likely to
contain significant measurement error due to the presence of a climate proxy (i.e., the raw data) in
that grid-cell. Specifically, we omit grid-cells for which there are no underlying climate proxies in
the Mann et al. dataset. The estimates are reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table 5. Column (5)
presents estimates after restricting the sample to only include grid-cells that have at least one climate
proxy in any time period. Column (6) further restricts the sample to observations (i.e., grid-cells and


                                                             37
                Table 5: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Robustness to Alternative Samples

                                                            Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δy i,d-5
                             (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                                                                                              Grid-Cells and
                                                       300-Year Subsamples                                    Time-Periods     Omit Cells with
                                                                                              Grid-Cells with with Climate      Documentary
                         Full Sample      1401-1700        1501-1800         1601-1900        Climate Proxies    Proxies          Proxies
Cooling:
 ΔCi,d-5                  0.0436***          0.0203          0.0376**          0.0482***          0.0927*         0.0946         0.0446***
                          (0.0146)          (0.0175)         (0.0160)          (0.0179)           (0.0526)       (0.0591)        (0.0148)

  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10      0.0874**           0.110**         0.0809**           0.101**           0.202*          0.149           0.0903**
                          (0.0386)          (0.0436)         (0.0393)          (0.0438)           (0.115)        (0.122)          (0.0366)

  ΔCi,d-10                 0.00344          -0.0191          0.00828            0.0143           -0.00516        0.000299         0.00796
                           (0.0130)         (0.0201)         (0.0141)          (0.0179)          (0.0329)        (0.0375)         (0.0131)

Observations               11,480            5,880             8,400             8,400             2,255          1,984            11,349
Number Clusters              280              280               280               280                55             55              279
R-squared                   0.017            0.018             0.014             0.023             0.049          0.060            0.016

Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):
Coeff                      0.131            0.130           0.119           0.149               0.295             0.244            0.135
S.E.                      (0.041)          (0.043)         (0.042)         (0.047)             (0.115)           (0.123)          (0.039)
Notes: The unit of observation is a decade and a 400km by 400km grid-cell. Coefficients are reported with standard errors clustered at the
grid-cell level in parentheses.



time-periods) that have at least one climate proxy in that grid-cell and time period. Both restrictions
result in a significantly smaller sample size and reduction in power, and thus the standard errors for
all coefficients increase noticeably. This said, the point estimates remain robust. In particular, the
coefficient on our interaction term (our primary variable of interest) remains positive and large in
magnitude. Since we expect there to be less measurement error in the restricted samples used in
columns (5) and (6), the results suggest that it is unlikely that the estimate for the interaction effect
from the baseline specification reported in column (1) is biased upwards due to measurement error.
     As a final strategy, we address the concern that extent and nature of documentary evidence for
temperature may be endogenous to the conflict. Relative to other datasets, such as Luterbacher et
al. (2004), the data from Mann et al. (2009a) uses very little documentary evidence. However, to be
as conservative as possible, we omit cells with documentary proxies. Column (7) shows that this
has little effect on the estimates.




                                                                       38
5.3.4    Spurious Correlation with Large Wars

Given that our analysis examines the incidence of conflicts (i.e., battles) and not wars (which com-
prise many battles), one may be concerned that our results are spuriously driven by a small number
of large wars that included many conflicts. To address this, we alternately omit the 25 largest wars
from our sample when constructing our conflict incidence indicator variable. The largest war con-
tains 74 battles and the 25th largest war contains 18 battles. Appendix Table A.1 shows that our
estimates remain robust to the exclusion of any of the 25 largest wars. Thus, it does not appear that
any particular large war is driving our results.


5.4     Heterogeneous Effects

Geography        Although there are many potential explanations underlying our estimated relationship
between cooling and conflict, the most natural one is that cooling resulted in reduced agricultural
productivity and living standards, which in turn increased conflict.25 To test for this mechanism,
we check whether the effects we estimate vary by the extent to which locations were dependent
on agriculture, which we measure in a variety of ways. The first is using agricultural productivity,
measured using a grid-cell’s average suitability for the cultivation of Old World staple crops (wheat,
dry rice, wet rice, rye and barley).26 We measure suitability as the first principal component of the
suitability for these five crops. We divide the grid-cells into two groups according to whether it is
above or below the sample median, and estimate equation (4) separately for the two samples. The
estimates are reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6. As reported, the estimates reported in
column (1) are smaller in magnitude and less precise than those in column (2). Although neither
  25
      Indirect evidence of such a channel is provided by Iyigun et al. (2016), who show that the increase in agricultural
productivity, that arose from introduction of the potato from the Americas during the Columbian exchange, resulted in
decreased warfare and conflict.
   26
      We measure suitability for the cultivation of potatoes using the suitability index (ranging from 0 to 100) from
the most recent version of the Food and Agricultural Organization’s (FAO’s) Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ)
database (accessed October 31, 2014). The FAO predicts the suitability of locations for the cultivation of a number of
important crops based on time-invariant natural conditions (i.e., conditions that are unlikely to change over time such
as the average days of sunshine), and which allow us to specify inputs to simulate historical technologies (e.g. rain-fed
irrigation). The original database is at an (approximately) 10km resolution. We construct averages within our grid-cells
and use this measure.



                                                          39
     Table 6: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Heterogenous Effects According to Geography

                                                    Dep Var: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δy i,d-5
                         Suitability for Old World Staples
                                     (First P.C.)                     Distance to Coast                      Number of Cities in 1400
                              (1)                  (2)              (3)               (4)                     (5)                (6)
                          <= Median             > Median         <= Median         > Median                  None           One or more
Cooling:
 ΔCi,d-5                     0.0212           0.0771**            0.0354*             0.1130**             0.0414***          0.208
                            (0.0141)          (0.0374)            (0.0179)            (0.0516)              (0.0158)         (0.202)
  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10         0.0127             0.206              0.0691              0.0853              0.0728**           0.595
                            (0.0210)           (0.126)            (0.0514)            (0.0785)             (0.0361)          (0.473)
  ΔCi,d-10                  -0.00290          -0.00269            -0.0179              0.0372              0.00263            0.0617
                           (0.00960)          (0.0280)            (0.0158)            (0.0383)             (0.0129)          (0.1050)

Observations                 4,860              5,220               4,860              5,220                 9,108             972
Number Clusters               135                145                 135                145                   253               27
R-squared                    0.023              0.031               0.020              0.033                 0.015            0.091

Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):
Coeff                           0.034           0.283             0.105               0.199                  0.114          0.803
S.E.                           (0.023)         (0.143)           (0.060)             (0.068)                (0.038)        (0.530)
Notes: The unit of observation is adecade and a 400km by 400km grid-cell. Coefficientsare reported with standarderrors clustered at
the grid-cell level in parentheses.




of the coefficients for the interaction terms are statistically significant at conventional levels, the
magnitude of the estimates show that the effects of cooling (with or without prior cooling) appear
to be driven by locations that are more suitable for agriculture.27
       The second characteristic that we consider is distance to the coast. Since areas closer to the coast
are, on average, more integrated and involved in long-distance trade and commerce, we expect them
to be less dependent on regional agriculture. We calculate the distance from the center of each grid-
cell to the nearest coastline and divide the sample into grid-cells that are above or below the median
value. Columns (3) and (4) in Table 6 show that the effects are qualitatively similar between coastal
and inland regions, but the magnitude of the effect of cooling on conflict (with or without prior
cooling) is larger for inland regions. This is consistent with the coastal areas being less sensitive to
negative shocks to agricultural productivity because of their specialization in trade and commerce.
  27
     Note that in principle, we can also test for differences in effects depending on whether a location was suitable
for the cultivation of staples that are better able to survive in cold climates, namely rye, barley, and potatoes (which
were introduced during the Columbian Exchange). These results are available upon request and very similar to those in
columns (1) and (2). We believe that the similarity is partly due to the high correlation between agricultural productivity
across different crops, and thus we learn little from comparing the two sets of estimates and do not present them in the
paper.


                                                                  40
   We next examine the differential effects for grid-cells that were more or less urbanized at the
beginning of our period of interest. Cities, like coastal locations, are less dependent on agriculture
since they are more specialized in commerce and manufacturing. We divide the sample according
to whether or not a grid-cell contained any cities in 1400, where a city is defined as a location with
more than 40,000 inhabitants. In our sample, only 8.7% of grid-cells contained a city in 1400.
Thus, the sample size for grid-cells with cities is much larger than that the sample size for grid-
cells without cities. The estimates are reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table 6. Although both
estimates are positive, the magnitude of the estimated impact of cooling on conflict (with or without
prior conflict) is much larger for grid-cells with cities in our base time-period. The estimates for
the urban cells are statistically insignificant, which is not surprising given the small sample size.
The estimates for the non-city sample are statistically significant, but much smaller in magnitude.
The relative magnitudes of the coefficient estimates could be due to the fact that conflict tends to
occur where populations are located and therefore the marginal effect of climate change on conflict
is greater in cells with urban locations. However, the point estimates should be interpreted with
caution given the large standard errors around the point estimates for the urban sample.


Type of Wars We next examine whether the effects differ across different forms of war, either
wars between two different nation states (an inter-state war) or a war that involves a state and a
domestic non-state actor (an intra-state war). We divide conflicts into those that are part of an
intra-state war and those that are part of an inter-state war, and construct separate conflict incidence
measures for both types of conflicts. The estimates with both types of conflict incidence as the
dependent variable are reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 7. We find that the estimates are
qualitatively similar for both types of conflicts. The coefficients for cooling in the contemporaneous
period are positive and statistically significant. The interaction coefficient is always positive and
large in magnitude, but less precisely estimated for inter-state conflicts. The effect of cooling in
the previous fifty-year period is small in magnitude and statistically insignificant for both types of
conflict. The marginal effect shown on the bottom of the table is positive and significant for both



                                                  41
Table 7: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Heterogenous Effects Depending on Characteristics of
the War

                                                Dep Var: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δy i,d-5
                                (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)                (6)       (7)
                                   War Type                  War Size (Number of Battles)              Border in Cell in 1450
                            Intra-State Inter-State         Small      Medium        Large              None          Border
Cooling:
 ΔCi,d-5                     0.0132        0.0248**        0.00422      0.0202*        0.0119           0.0117      0.101***
                            (0.00835)      (0.0114)       (0.00915)     (0.0104)      (0.00783)       (0.00893)     (0.0357)

  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10         0.0369*        0.0534        -0.00465      0.0961***      0.00341          0.0341       0.0930
                             (0.0222)      (0.0370)       (0.0210)      (0.0330)       (0.0194)        (0.0217)     (0.0965)

  ΔCi,d-10                  -0.00772        0.0121         -0.0132       -0.0152*     0.0365***        0.00109       0.0126
                            (0.00954)      (0.0136)       (0.0102)      (0.00905)     (0.00865)       (0.00875)     (0.0314)

Observations                  11,480        11,480         11,480        11,480         11,480          5,330         6,150
Number Clusters                 280          280            280           280            280             130           150
R-squared                      0.020        0.018          0.010         0.018          0.037           0.014         0.025

Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in the previous 50-year period (ΔCi,d-5 +ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10):
Coeff                      0.050        0.078          0.000       0.116        0.015             0.046               0.194
S.E.                      (0.022)      (0.040)        (0.022)     (0.035)      (0.018)           (0.022)             (0.100)

Notes: The unit of observation is a decade and a 400km by 400km grid-cell. Coefficients are reported with standard
errors clustered at the grid-cell level in parentheses.



types of conflicts. The magnitude is larger for interstate conflicts, but the difference in magnitude
between the two types of conflict is not statistically significant. The similarity of the estimates is
consistent with historical accounts that report that cooling was associated with increased conflicts
of all types.
       We also check for differential effects depending on the size of the war a conflict belongs to. We
do this by dividing conflicts into three equally-sized groups (i.e., the same number of conflicts in
each group) according to whether a conflict belonged to a small, medium, or large sized war, where
the size of the war is measured by counting the number of battles that are associated with the war.28
We then construct our three conflict incidence measures, one for each size of war. The estimates
with these three measures as the outcome of interest are reported in columns (3)-(5) of Table 7.
Interestingly, the estimates show that the main results are primarily due to the impacts on medium
  28
       The raw conflict data report fatalities, but only for some battles. This statistic is not systematically reported.




                                                              42
sized wars (and to some extent large wars).


Political Fractionalization          We next examine whether regions that were politically more frac-
tionalized ex ante were more sensitive to the impacts of cooling on conflict. To examine this, we
divide observations into two groups based on whether a grid-cell contained a border at any point
from 1401-1450. On average, almost half of the observations contain a border in the base time
period.29 The estimates, which are reported in columns (6) and (7) of Table 7, show that the effects
are qualitatively similar for the two samples. However, the magnitude is larger in grid-cells that
were split by a borders in the initial period. These results are consistent with regions with higher
fractionalization being more sensitive to climate change.



6        The Very Long-Run Effects of Cooling on Conflict

In this section, we take advantage of the length of our panel data to estimate the potential for longer-
run adaptation or intensification effects. In doing this, we allow the impact of cooling during the
current fifty-year period on conflict change during the same fifty-year period to depend on cooling
over the previous four fifty-year time periods, rather than just the one previous fifty-year period. It
is possible that periods of cooling prior to the previous fifty-years also matter. Thus, our estimating
equation is:

                        X                         X
           ∆yi,d−5 =            αk (4Ci,d−k ) +           β5,k (4Ci,d−5 × 4Ci,d−k )                           (5)
                        k∈K5                      k∈K10
                        X                                          X
                    +           β10,k (4Ci,d−10 × 4Ci,d−k ) +             β15,k (4Ci,d−15 × 4Ci,d−k )
                        k∈K15                                     k∈K20

                    + β20,25 (4Ci,d−20 × 4Ci,d−25 ) + Xi,d Γ + ρi + δd + εi,d ,


where K5 , K10 , K15 , and K20 denote the following sets of numbers: K5 = {5, 10, 15, 20, 25},
K10 = {10, 15, 20, 25}, K15 = {15, 20, 25}, and K20 = {20, 25}. k indexes the numbers within
    29
    We digitized data on borders for every fifty years. These are reported by Reed, Frank E. Centennial Historical
Atlas. Clockwork Software Incorporated, 2014. http://www.historicalatlas.com.

                                                           43
the set.
    By including interactions that involve ∆Ci,d−5 , e.g., ∆Ci,d−5 × ∆Ci,d−10 , ∆Ci,d−5 × ∆Ci,d−15 ,
etc, equation (5) allows intensification and adaptation effects to occur over longer periods of time.
The estimates of the coefficients β5,k capture how the impact of cooling in the current period on
conflict change in the same period is shaped by the history of cooling during the prior 200 years.
The specification also includes the full set of lagged interaction terms, e.g., ∆Ci,d−10 × ∆Ci,d−15 ,
∆Ci,d−15 × ∆Ci,d−20 , etc, which capture net adaptation and intensification effects that may have
lagged impacts.


6.1    Flexible Estimate

The estimates of equation (5) are summarized in Figure 4, where we report the marginal effects of
cooling on conflict change in the current period for different histories of cooling. The underlying
estimates are reported in appendix Table A.2. The x-axis reports the number of previous years of
cooling (at 1 degree Celsius per fifty-year period). At zero on the x-axis, we report the marginal
effect of cooling without any cooling in previous periods. At 50 on the x-axis, we report the marginal
effect of cooling when there was 1 degree of cooling during the previous fifty years. At 100, we
report the marginal effect of cooling when there was 1 degree of cooling (per fifty-year period)
during the previous 100 years. Analogously, at 150 and 200 on the x-axis, we report the marginal
effects of cooling when there was one degree of cooling per fifty-year period during the previous
150 and 200 years, respectively. Also reported are the 90% confidence intervals of the estimated
marginal effects.
    We find evidence that intensification effects continue to dominate adaptation effects as cool-
ing continues beyond 50 years prior. However, the magnitude of the intensification effects diminish
with the duration of cooling. As with the main results, cooling during the most recent past fifty-year
period (i.e., the previous fifty-year period) has a large influence on the marginal effect of contempo-
raneous cooling on increasing conflict change. However, cooling during earlier fifty-year periods
(i.e., two or more fifty-year periods ago) has smaller influences. For example, having 200 years of


                                                  44
Figure 4: How the Marginal Effect of Contemporaneous Cooling on Conflict Change Varies De-
pending on Previous Periods of Cooling
                        .6
          Marginal Effect on Conflict
              .2        0    .4




                                        0    50               100                150    200
                                            Years of Previous Cooling (1C per 50 yrs)

                                                   Marginal Effect             90% CI
                                                   90% CI


Notes: The y-axis reports the marginal effects of cooling on conflict change in the current time
period. The x-axis reports the number of previous years of cooling at one degree Celsius per fifty-
year period. The calculated marginal effects are based on the estimated coefficients from equation
(5), which are reported in table A.2 column (4).




                                                           45
prior cooling (at one degree per fifty years) has nearly the same impact on the marginal effect of
contemporaneous cooling as 150 years of prior cooling, and only a slightly greater effect than 100
years of prior cooling. Thus, we find diminishing effects for the influence of past cooling on the
marginal effect of contemporaneous cooling on conflict change.


Robustness       To check that the very long-run estimates are not driven by spurious correlations, we
include in equation (5) a similar set of geographic controls as reported in Table 3. We also control
for temperature in the contemporaneous time period as in column (7) of Table 1. The estimates are
reported in appendix Table A.3. The marginal effects – and how they vary with previous periods
of cooling – are summarized in Figure 5. The estimates are very similar to the baseline estimates,
which are shown by the thick solid black line. The estimated effects of cooling are always positive
and tend to exhibit the same pattern as the baseline estimates. For all specification but two, the
estimates are within the 90% confidence intervals of the baseline specification.
       We also check that the very long-run estimates are not biased by our choice of the dependent
variable. When we use alternative measures of conflict namely – the total number of battles and
the natural log of the total number of battles – the predicted marginal effects are similar. These
are shown in Figure 6.30 Likewise, the precision of our estimates is similar if we conduct our
analysis using larger grid-cells that are 800km by 800km in size. The estimates, which are reported
in Appendix Figure A.1, are qualitatively identical to our baseline estimates which use 400km by
400km grid-cells.31
       As a final exercise, we examine the best fit model by using LASSO. We undertake this exer-
cise, with the caveat that LASSO is not designed for choosing the correct economic model, but
the most parsimonious model that gives the best predictive power. Thus, the estimates should be
interpreted with caution and we do not use LASSO to determine our main specification. We force
the model to condition on time and grid-cell fixed effects. The LASSO-chosen model includes four
lagged temperature changes and two interactions, including the most recent two lagged periods and
  30
     The coefficients and standard errors are shown in Appendix Table A.4.
  31
     Note that we do not check the robustness of our results to smaller grid-cell sizes since the climate data are not
available at resolution finer than 5 arc minutes.

                                                         46
Figure 5: How the Marginal Effect of Contemporaneous Cooling on the Change in Conflict Inci-
dence Depends on Previous Periods of Cooling: Robustness to Alternative Specifications
                                      .6
          Marginal Effect on Conflict
                .2    0     .4




                                           0                 50                100                150                                              200
                                                             Years of Previous Cooling (1C per 50 yrs)
                                               Baseline                                                          Baseline 90% CI

                                               Baseline 90% CI                                                   Conflict Incidence 1401-1450 x Time FE

                                               Conflict # 1401-1450 x Time FE                                    Temp 1401-1450 x Time FE

                                               Suit for Old World Staples x Time FE, Suit Potatoes x Post-1700   # Cities in 1401-1450 x Time FE

                                               Geographic Controls x Time FE                                     Current Temperature




Notes: The y-axis reports the marginal effect of cooling on the change in conflict incidence. The x-
axis reports the number of previous years of cooling at one degree celsius per fifty-year period. The
reported effects are based on coefficient estimates from equation (5). The estimates are reported in
Table A.3.




                                                                                        47
Figure 6: How the Marginal Effect of Contemporaneous Cooling on the Change in Conflict Inci-
dence Depends on Previous Periods of Cooling: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Conflict
                            1.5
              Marginal Effect on Conflict
                  .5        0     1




                                            0    50               100                150      200
                                                Years of Previous Cooling (1C per 50 yrs)

                                                       Conflict #             Ln Conflict #


Notes: The y-axis reports the marginal effect of cooling on the change in conflict incidence. The x-
axis reports the number of previous years of cooling at one degree celsius per fifty-year period. The
reported effects are based on coefficient estimates from equation (5). The estimates are reported in
appendix Table A.4.




                                                               48
their interactions (in addition to the imposed time-period and grid-cell fixed effects). The resulting
pattern is similar to the baseline specification and is reported in Appendix Figure A.2.32



7         Policy Implications

Our empirical strategy offers several important advantages for understanding the effects of future
climate change. In particular, by allowing past periods of cooling to affect the impacts of subsequent
episodes of cooling, we are able to identify the presence of net adaptation or intensification effects.
This is possible, in part, because we examine climate change over a very long period. An advantage
of our strategy is that we do not rely on extrapolations from short-run estimates to obtain estimates
of long-run effects. Our strategy provides alternative evidence for the long-run impacts of climate
change, which is importance since, as Hsiang and Burke (2014) point out, historical data with
“long time scales are able to examine ’low frequency’ changes in climate that perhaps more closely
resemble future anthropogenic climate changes”.
         At the same time, there are also several important caveats to bear in mind. First, the histori-
cal context, which is necessitated by the examination of changes over a long time horizon, differs
from the modern context in ways that affect the speed of adaptation or the extent of intensification.
In particular, better infrastructure and more trade can mitigate the effects of climate change (e.g.,
Burgess and Donaldson, 2010); that technological innovations, such as new seed varieties, may
greatly reduce the medium-run impact of climate change (e.g., Emerick et al., 2015), and factors
may be able to reallocate more quickly because modern economies have a greater share of workers
in non-agriculture sectors (Waldinger, 2015). Second, within the historical setting that we examine,
the adverse environmental disruption was due to cooling, whereas the environmental disruption in
modern climate change is due to warming. Cooling and warming share similarities. For exam-
ple, both are environmental changes that disrupt traditional economic activities. However, there is
evidence from U.S. agriculture in the 20th century that cooling is less damaging to agricultural pro-
    32
    Note that since the only interaction of current cooling chosen by the LASSO model is the interaction of current
cooling with cooling during the previous period, the marginal effect is similar for cooling that lasts 100 years or longer.


                                                           49
ductivity than warming by the same magnitude (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). If this is true
more generally, then the effects of global warming on conflict may be larger than what is implied
by our estimates.
    Notwithstanding these caveats, our results provide new evidence and insights for policy makers
who are interested in understanding and mitigating the adverse effects of future climate change.
First, our results provide strong evidence for intensification effects and their dominance over any
adaptation effects that may exist. We find that periods of climate change, in addition to having
direct impacts in the contemporaneous period, also have important indirect impacts by magnifying
the negative impacts of future climate change.



8    Conclusion

The long-run impact of climate change is one of the most important questions for policymakers
and economists today. A large part of the debate revolves around how much society can adapt
to climate change and how much time is required to adapt. At the same time, one worries that the
effects of prolonged environmental disruption could cause institutions and state capacity to weaken,
which could intensify the effects of environmental change. We make progress on these issues by
examining the long-run historical impacts of climate change on conflict. To do this, we construct
a large geo-referenced dataset on conflicts from 1400–1900 CE for Europe, North Africa and the
Near East, and combine it with recently-constructed historical climate data.
    Our decade-level panel enables us to estimate a flexible model that allows the impact of cooling
to vary depending on a location’s previous history of cooling. We find that climate change, which
took the form of cooling during our period of analysis, significantly increased conflict. In addition,
the estimated effect of cooling on the change in conflict differed depending on the history of cooling.
The impacts of cooling during the current fifty-year period were greater if a location experienced
more cooling during the previous fifty-year period. This finding provides new evidence for the
presence of intensification effects.



                                                  50
   To understand the policy implications for our results, it is important to point out some impor-
tant similarities and differences between the historical context and the context of modern climate
change. As we discussed in the introduction, cooling reduced agricultural production in our context
while warming reduces production in the modern context. This is merely an artifact of the fact that
historical climate change manifested as cooling in regions that were already cold, while modern cli-
mate change manifests as warming in equatorial regions that are already warm. Historical cooling
in Europe and modern warming in equatorial regions share the fact that both disrupt traditional eco-
nomic activities. Another important similarity is that the locations in our historical context and the
equatorial countries in the modern context that suffer from climate change are both pre-industrial or
early-industrial economies that rely heavily on agriculture, and have poor transportation and com-
munication infrastructures that could facilitate the flow of the factors of production. Although the
effects we estimate should be carefully interpreted as specific to our context, policymakers should
take note of the insight that the effects of climate change can intensify with its duration.
   Our study has several important implications for future studies of climate change. First, for
studies of the long-run effects of climate change, it demonstrates the necessity of using flexible
specifications that allow the effects of climate change to depend on the recent experience of a lo-
cation. Second, our findings show that an important avenue for future research is to understand
the mechanisms underlying intensification (and adaptation). Finally, our study demonstrates the
benefits of using historical data to better understand long-run processes that are directly relevant
for future economic development. We hope that the data that we have constructed, which will be
made publicly available, will be useful to future researchers.




                                                  51
References
Anderson, Robert Warren, Noel D. Johnson, and Mark Koyama, “Jewish Persecutions and
 Weather Shocks: 1100–1800,” Economic Journal, 2016, p. forthcoming.

Bai, Ying and James Kai-sing Kung, “Climate Shocks and Sino-nomadic Conflict,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, August 2011, 93 (3), 970–981.

   and , “Climate Shocks and Sino-Nomadic Conflict,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2011, 93 (3), 970–981.

Besley, Timothy and Marta Reynal-Querol, “The Legacy of Historical Conflict: Evidence from
  Africa,” American Political Science Review, 2014, 108 (2), 319–336.

Brecke, Peter, “Violent Conflicts 1400 A.D. to the Present in Different Regions of the World,”
  1999. Paper presented at the 1999 meeting of the Peace Science Society.

  , “The Conflict Dataset: 1400 A.D.Present,” forthcoming. Mimeo, Georgia Institute of Technol-
  ogy.

Burgess, Robin and Dave Donaldson, “Can Openness Mitigate the Effects of Weather Shocks?
  Evidence from India’s Famine Era,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (2), 449–53.

Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick, “Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US agricul-
  ture,” Stanford University Working Paper, Stanford University 2015.

  , Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel, “Climate and Conflict,” Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, 2015, 7 (1), 577–617.

Clodfelter, Micheal, Warfare and Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Encyclopedia of Casualty and
  Other Figures, 1494-2007, 3rd Edition, Jefferson, N.C.: McFarlane & Company Inc., 2008.

Conley, T. G., “GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence,” Journal of Econometrics,
  September 1999, 92 (1), 1–45.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Casper Worm Hansen, and Nicolai Kaarsen, “Climate Shocks and
  (Very) Long-Run Productivity,” 2016. Mimeo, University of Copenhagen.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken, “Temperature Shocks and Economic
  Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  July 2012, 4 (3), 66–95.

  , , and , “What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Literature,”
  Journal of Economic Literature, 2014, 52 (3), 740–98.

Dencecco, Mark, “Fiscal Centralization, Limited Government, and Public Revenues in Europe,”
  Journal of Economic History, 2009, 69 (1), 48–103.

   and Mauricio Prado, “Warfare, Fiscal Capacity, and Performance,” Journal of Economic
  Growth, 2012, 17 (3), 171–203.

                                              52
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Ev-
  idence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2011, 3 (4), 152–85.

Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F. Vargas, “Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict: Evidence
 from Colombia,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2013.

Durante, Ruben, “Risk Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: An Empirical
 Investigation,” 2010. Working Paper, Sciences Po.

Emerick, Kyle, Manzoor H. Dar, Alain deJanvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Technological In-
 novations, Downside Risk, and the Modernization of Agriculture,” Working Paper, University of
 California, Berkeley 2015.

Fagan, Brian, The Little Ice Age: How Climate Made History, 1300-1850, New York: Basic Books,
  2000.

Fenske, James and Namrata Kala, “Climate and the Slave Trade,” Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics, 2015, 112, 19–32.

Findlay, Ronald and Kevin H. O’Rourke, Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World Economy
  in the Second Millennium, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007.

Griliches, Zvi, “Economic Data Issues,” in Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligator, eds., Hand-
  book of Econometrics, Volume 3, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986, pp. 1465–1514.

Hornbeck, Richard, “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run
 Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1477–
 1507.

Hsiang, Solomon M. and Amir S. Jina, “The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on
  Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence From 6,700 Cyclones,” Working Paper 20352, National
  Bureau of Economic Research July 2014.

  and Marshall Burke, “Climate, Conflict, and Social Stability: What Does the Evidence Say?,”
  Climatic Change, 2014, 123 (1), 39–55.

  , , and Edward Miguel, “Quantifying the Influence of Climate on Human Conflict,” Science,
  2013, 341 (151), 1212–1228.

Iyigun, Murat, “Luther and Suleyman,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2008, 123
  (4), 1465–1494.

  , Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian, “The Long-run Effects of Agricultural Productivity and Con-
  flict: Evidence from Potatoes, 1400–1900,” Yale University Working Papers, Yale University
  2016.

Jia, Ruixue, “Weather Shocks, Sweet Potatoes and Peasant Revolts in Historical China,” Economic
  Journal, 2014, 124, 92–118.

                                               53
Klepper, Steven and Edward E. Leamer, “Consistent Sets of Estimates for Regressions with
  Errors in all Variables,” Econometrica, 1984, 52 (1), 163–184.
Kung, James Kai-sing and Chicheng Ma, “Can Cultural Norms Reduce Conflicts? Confucianism
 and Peasant Rebellions in Qing China,” Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 111, 132–149.
Lamb, H.H., Climate, History and the Modern World Climate, History and the Modern World,
  New York: Routledge, 1995.
Lee, Harry F., David D. Zhang, Peter Brecke, and Jie Fei, “Positive correlation between the
  North Atlantic Oscillation and violent conflicts in Europe,” Climate Research, 2013, 56 (1), 1–
  10.
Levy, Jack S., War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495–1975, Lexington, KY: University of
  Kentucky Press, 1983.
Ludlow, Francis and Solomon Hsiang, “No adaptation to climate during one millennium of Irish
  history,” University of Berkeley at California Working Paper April 2016.
Luterbacher, Jurg, Daniel Dietrich, Elena Xoplaki, Martin Grosjean, and Heinz Wanner,
  “European Seasonal and Annual Temperature Variability, Trends, and Extremes Since 1500,”
  Science, 2004, 303 (5663), 1499–1503.
Mann, Michael E., “Little Ice Age,” in Micahel C. MacCraken and John S. Perry, eds., Ency-
 clopedia of Global Environmental Change. Volume 1. The Earth System: Physical and Chem-
 ical Dimensions of Global Environmental Change, Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2002,
 pp. 504–509.
  , Zhihua Zhang, Scott Rutherford, Raymond S. Bradley, Malcolm K. Hughes, Drew Shin-
  dell, Caspar Ammann, Greg Faluvegi, and Fenbiao Ni, “Global Signatures and Dynamical
  Origins of the Little Ice Age and Medieval Climate Anomaly,” Science, 2009, 326, 1256–1260.
  , , , , , , , , and , “Supporting Online Material for: Global Signatures and Dy-
  namical Origins of the Little Ice Age and Medieval Climate Anomaly,” 2009. Online Appendix.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, “The Impact of Global Warming
 on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis,” The American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (4), 753–771.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti, “Economic Shocks and Civil Con-
 flict: An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2004, 112
 (4), 725–753.
Nordhaus, William D., “Reflections on the Economics of Climate Change,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 1993, 7 (4), 11–25.
Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian, “The Columbian Exchange: A History of Disease, Food and
  Ideas,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 163–188.
  and , “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence from a Historical
  Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 593–650.

                                               54
Oster, Emily, “Witchcraft, Weather and Economic Growth in Renaissance Europe,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 2004, 18 (1), 215–228.

Parker, Geoffrey, Global Crisis: War, Climate Change and Catastrophe in the Seventeenth Cen-
  tury, Yale University Press, 2013.

Pauling, Andreas, Jurg Luterbacher, Carlo Casty, and Heinz Wanner, “Five Hundred Years
  of Gridded High-Resolution Precipitation Reconstructions over Europe and the Connection to
  Large-Scale Circulation,” Climate Dynamics, 2006, 26, 387–405.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J. Roberts, “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe dam-
  ages to U.S. crop yields under climate change,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2009, 106 (37), 15594–15598.

Shaw, Stanford J., History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey. Volume 1. Empire of the
  Gazis: The Rise and Decline of the Ottoman Empire, 1280–1808, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 1976.

Tol, Richard S.J. and Sebastian Wagner, “Climate Change and Violent Conflict in Europe over
  the Last Millennium,” Climate Change, 2010, 99, 65–79.

Waldinger, Maria, “The Economic Effects of Long-Term Climate Change: Evidence from the
 Little Ice Age,” 2015. Working Paper, London School of Economics.

White, Sam, The Climate of Rebellion in the Early Modern Ottoman Empire, New York: Cam-
 bridge University Press, 2011.

Wimmer, Andreas and Brian Min, “From Empire to Nation-State: Explaining Wars in the Mod-
 ern World, 1816–2001,” American Sociological Review, 2006, 71 (6), 867–897.

Zhang, David D., C.Y. Jim, George C-S Lin, Yuan-Qing He, James J. Wang, and Harry F.
  Lee, “Climate Change, Wars and Dynastic Cycles in China over the Last Millennium,” Climate
  Change, 2006, 76 (3), 459–477.

  , Peter Brecke, Harry F. Lee, , Yuan-Qing, and Jane Zhang, “Global Climate Change, War,
  and Population Decline in Recent Human History,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 2007, 104 (49), 19214–19219.




                                               55
A     Appendix (Not for Publication)

We use two sources of data to construct our baseline conflict database: Brecke’s Conflict Catalogue
and Clodfelter’s (2008) Warfare and Armed Conflicts. Using the information on the names of the
locations of battles from our sources, we then manually geo-referenced and digitized the location.
In our analysis the unit of observation is a grid-cell and a time period. In the underlying raw data
we identify a battle, defined as a conflict recorded in our sources, occurring in a location and in a
calendar year. We code conflicts that are part of the same war, but occurring in different locations
or different years as separate battles. For our analysis, we thus aggregate all battles occurring in a
grid-cell and over a time period to obtain a measure of the total number of battles in that grid-cell
and time period.
    To measure cooling we use temperature data estimates constructed by Mann et al. (2009a).
The original data set includes gridded average temperature (0.5 degree by 0.5 degree grid-cells)
annually from 500 to 1900 and covering the entire globe. Mann et al. (2009a) use a climate field
reconstruction approach to reconstruct global patterns of surface temperature for a long historical
period. The construction uses proxy data with global coverage that comprises 1,036 tree ring series,
32 ice core series, 15 marine coral series, 19 documentary series, 14 speleothem series, 19 lacustrine
sediment series, and 3 marine sediment series (Mann et al., 2009b).
    Following Nunn and Qian (2011), we construct measures of suitability using the FAO’s Global
Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) data base. We differ in using a more recent version than was un-
available to Nunn and Qian (2011). The data include information on 154 different crops and the
physical environment of 2.2 million cells spanning the whole world, with each cell covering an
area of 5 arc minutes by 5 arc minutes, or roughly 10km by 10km cells. Using nine climate char-
acteristics of each cell, such as frequency of wet days, precipitation, mean temperature, etc., FAO
calculated an estimate of the potential yield of each crop in each cell, given an assumed level of
crop management and input use. With some additional data processing, the FAO then calculated
the constraint-free crop yields and referenced the potential yield of each cell as a percent of this
benchmark. The index ranges from 0 to 100. The GAEZ cells are 10km by 10km and finer than the

                                                 56
cells used in our analysis. Thus, we measure suitability at the cell level as the average suitability
measure of land within the cell.
   It is important to note that in calculating suitability, the FAO’s agro-climatic model explicitly
avoids taking into account factors that are easily manipulated by human intervention. For example,
the fact that Europe has been significantly de-forested over time does not affect the suitability mea-
sure because the amount of forests does not factor into suitability. Instead, the model focuses on
agricultural inputs that are difficult to manipulate such as climate and the average hours of sunshine
in each season. Similarly, the GAEZ model allows us to choose inputs for factors such as mecha-
nization and irrigation. To the best of our ability, we choose inputs to approximate for the level of
technology available during our historical period of study (e.g., rain-fed and low input intensity).




                                                 57
Figure A.1: How the Marginal Effect of Cooling on Conflict Change Varies Depending on Previous
Periods of Cooling: Robustness to the use of 800km by 800km grid-cells.
                        .6
          Marginal Effect on Conflict
              .2        0    .4




                                        0    50               100                150    200
                                            Years of Previous Cooling (1C per 50 yrs)

                                                   Marginal Effect             90% CI
                                                   90% CI


Notes: The y-axis reports the marginal effects of cooling on conflict change in the current time
period. The x-axis reports the number of previous years of cooling at one degree celsius per fifty-
year period. The predicted effects are based on coefficients from equation (5). The coefficients and
standard errors are available upon request.




                                                           58
Figure A.2: How the Marginal Effect of Cooling on Conflict Change Varies Depending on Previous
Periods of Cooling: LASSO Estimates
                        .4
          Marginal Effect on Conflict
           .1         .20       .3




                                        0    50               100                150    200
                                            Years of Previous Cooling (1C per 50 yrs)

                                                    Marginal Eff              90% CI
                                                    90% CI


Notes: The y-axis reports the marginal effects of cooling on conflict change in the current time pe-
riod. The x-axis reports the number of previous years of cooling at one degree celsius per fifty-year
period. The predicted effects are based on coefficients from the LASSO model. The coefficients
and standard errors are available upon request.




                                                           59
            Table A.1: The Effect of Cooling on Conflict: Robustness to the Exclusion of the Twenty Five Largest Wars

                                                                            Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δyi,d-5

                Size of Omitted War                 ΔCi,d-5                       ΔCi,d-10               ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10                             Marginal Effect of Cooling
               (Number of Conflicts)        Coef.         Std. Err.       Coef.          Std. Err.      Coef.       Std. Err.       Obs.     R-sq.       100 years      Std. Err.
      (1)          No Omission            0.00344         (0.0130)      0.0874**         (0.0386)    0.0436***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.131         (0.041)
      (2)               74                0.00382         (0.0131)      0.0894**         (0.0388)    0.0463***      (0.0148)      11,480     0.016         0.136         (0.042)
      (3)               70               0.000485         (0.0131)      0.0907**         (0.0389)    0.0438***      (0.0145)      11,480     0.021         0.135         (0.042)
      (4)               66                0.00279         (0.0132)       0.0741*         (0.0381)    0.0435***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.016         0.118         (0.041)
      (5)               63                0.00315         (0.0130)      0.0890**         (0.0387)    0.0432***      (0.0147)      11,480     0.016         0.132         (0.041)
      (6)               55                0.00285         (0.0130)      0.0845**         (0.0384)    0.0448***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.016         0.129         (0.041)
      (7)               48                0.00107         (0.0131)      0.0909**         (0.0390)    0.0414***      (0.0147)      11,480     0.017         0.132         (0.041)
      (8)               43                -0.00800        (0.0120)       0.0721*         (0.0370)    0.0413***      (0.0145)      11,480     0.016         0.113         (0.040)
      (9)               42                0.00250         (0.0131)      0.0901**         (0.0388)    0.0417***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.016         0.132         (0.041)
     (10)               35                0.00119         (0.0132)      0.0891**         (0.0387)    0.0431***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.019         0.132         (0.041)
     (11)               32                0.00143         (0.0130)      0.0955**         (0.0389)    0.0403***      (0.0145)      11,480     0.016         0.136         (0.042)
     (12)               31               0.000596         (0.0130)      0.0810**         (0.0371)    0.0446***      (0.0148)      11,480     0.018         0.126         (0.040)




60
     (13)               31                0.00344         (0.0130)      0.0874**         (0.0386)    0.0436***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.131         (0.041)
     (14)               28                0.00339         (0.0130)      0.0930**         (0.0391)    0.0445***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.138         (0.042)
     (15)               27                0.00576         (0.0130)      0.0937**         (0.0386)    0.0411***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.016         0.135         (0.041)
     (16)               24                0.00264         (0.0131)      0.0860**         (0.0386)    0.0435***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.129         (0.041)
     (17)               23                0.00252         (0.0131)      0.0871**         (0.0386)    0.0431***      (0.0147)      11,480     0.017         0.130         (0.041)
     (18)               23                0.00227         (0.0131)      0.0837**         (0.0384)    0.0423***      (0.0147)      11,480     0.017         0.126         (0.041)
     (19)               23                0.00323         (0.0130)      0.0892**         (0.0388)    0.0434***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.133         (0.041)
     (20)               22                0.00395         (0.0130)      0.0884**         (0.0386)    0.0435***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.132         (0.041)
     (21)               20                0.00197         (0.0129)      0.0933**         (0.0385)    0.0407***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.016         0.134         (0.041)
     (22)               19                0.00187         (0.0128)      0.0856**         (0.0384)    0.0440***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.130         (0.041)
     (23)               19                0.00474         (0.0130)      0.0817**         (0.0368)    0.0433***      (0.0144)      11,480     0.017         0.125         (0.039)
     (24)               19                0.00370         (0.0130)      0.0840**         (0.0384)    0.0428***      (0.0146)      11,480     0.017         0.127         (0.041)
     (25)               18                0.00352         (0.0130)      0.0860**         (0.0385)    0.0429***      (0.0145)      11,480     0.017         0.129         (0.041)
      (26)               18                0.00339       (0.0130)         0.0874**        (0.0386)     0.0435*** (0.0147)         11,480 0.017              0.131         (0.041)
     Notes: The regression controls for cell and time fixed effects. Observations are at the decade and 400km by 400km grid-cell level. Standard errors are clustered at the cell
     level. Each row is estimated with a sample where all battles from a given war are omitted. This does not affect the number of observations since the sample includes
     observations with zero conflicts.
Table A.2: The Very Long-Run Effect of Cooling on Conflict using the Fully Flexible Specification

                                             Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δyi,d-5
                                           (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)

      Cooling:
       ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10               0.0874**               0.0858**                0.114**               0.159***
                                        (0.0386)               (0.0407)               (0.0487)               (0.0603)
        ΔCi,d-5                         0.0436***             0.0516***                0.0330*              0.0721**
                                         (0.0146)              (0.0180)               (0.0194)               (0.0279)
        ΔCi,d-10                         0.00344               0.00391                  0.0138              0.0645***
                                         (0.0130)              (0.0137)               (0.0198)               (0.0240)
        ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-15                                      -0.0106                -0.0357                0.0451
                                                               (0.0500)               (0.0570)               (0.0784)
        ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-15                                    0.00925                 -0.0150                0.0103
                                                               (0.0408)               (0.0455)               (0.0511)
        ΔCi,d-15                                              -0.000634               -0.00354                0.0325
                                                               (0.0180)               (0.0180)               (0.0209)
        ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-20                                                              0.0634                0.0825
                                                                                      (0.0494)               (0.0702)
        ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-20                                                            0.106**               0.160***
                                                                                      (0.0473)               (0.0543)
        ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-20                                                           -0.00878                0.0385
                                                                                      (0.0461)               (0.0581)
        ΔCi,d-20                                                                     -0.0465**               -0.0238
                                                                                      (0.0188)               (0.0190)
        ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-25                                                                                    0.0223
                                                                                                             (0.0403)
        ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-25                                                                                  0.00836
                                                                                                            (0.0805)
        ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-25                                                                                  -0.0189
                                                                                                             (0.0666)
        ΔCi,d-20 x ΔCi,d-25                                                                                   0.0243
                                                                                                            (0.0685)
        ΔCi,d-25                                                                                            0.0566**
                                                                                                            (0.0220)

      Observations                       11,480                 10,080                 8,680                  7,280
      R-squared                          0.017                  0.019                  0.022                  0.030

      Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in each previous 50-year period:
      50 Years of Prev. Cooling           0.131                  0.137                 0.147                    0.231
                                         (0.041)                (0.043)               (0.050)                  (0.066)
      100 Years of Prev. Cooling                                 0.131                 0.125                    0.341
                                                                (0.065)               (0.085)                  (0.124)
      150 Years of Prev. Cooling                                                       0.174                    0.359
                                                                                      (0.072)                  (0.109)
      200 Years of Prev. Cooling                                                                                0.381
                                                                                                               (0.129)
      Notes : All regressions control for cell and time fixed effects. Observations are at the decade and 400km by 400km
      grid-cell level. Standard errors, clustered at the grid-cell level, are reported in parentheses.




                                                               61
Table A.3: The Very Long-Run Effect of Cooling on Conflict using the Fully Flexible Specification:
Robustness to Controls

                                                                 Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Incidence, Δyi,d-5
                                   (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)             (7)                  (8)
                                                                                                    Suitability for
                                                                                                      Old World
                                                  Conflict      Number of           Temperature     Staples x Time   Number of        Geographic           Level of
                                              Incidence 1401- Conflicts 1401-       1401-1450 x     FE, Potatoes x Cities in 1400 x Controls x Time      Temperature,
                                Baseline       1450 x Time FE 1450 x Time FE          Time FE         post-1700        Time FE            FE                 Ti,d
Cooling:
 ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10            0.159***            0.143**           0.147**         0.173***           0.109*          0.155***           0.223***         0.159***
                               (0.0603)           (0.0599)          (0.0594)         (0.0640)         (0.0590)          (0.0591)           (0.0823)         (0.0599)
  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-15             0.0451             0.0303            0.0408           0.0661         -0.00570            0.0557             0.106            0.0415
                               (0.0784)           (0.0774)          (0.0775)         (0.0890)         (0.0821)          (0.0770)            (0.118)         (0.0788)
  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-20             0.0825             0.104             0.0892           0.0454           0.138*            0.0764             0.0610           0.0931
                               (0.0702)           (0.0690)          (0.0682)         (0.0784)         (0.0722)          (0.0689)            (0.101)         (0.0711)
  ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-25             0.0223             0.0428           0.0425            0.0131           0.0463            0.0335           -0.0293            0.0150
                               (0.0403)           (0.0390)          (0.0399)         (0.0449)         (0.0406)          (0.0396)           (0.0554)         (0.0403)
  ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-15            0.0103             0.0120            0.0264           0.0104           0.0297            0.0208            0.0501          0.00359
                               (0.0511)           (0.0490)          (0.0500)         (0.0540)         (0.0492)          (0.0513)           (0.0801)         (0.0512)
  ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-20          0.160***            0.126**          0.139***          0.142**           0.107*          0.155***            0.180**         0.166***
                               (0.0543)           (0.0535)          (0.0529)         (0.0643)         (0.0565)          (0.0529)           (0.0808)         (0.0539)
  ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-25           0.00836            0.0120          -0.000408         -0.00482           0.0398            0.0180            -0.0224         0.00460
                               (0.0805)           (0.0793)          (0.0791)         (0.0897)         (0.0837)          (0.0795)            (0.120)         (0.0808)
  ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-20            0.0385            0.0285             0.0376          0.0191            0.0370            0.0391             0.119            0.0388
                               (0.0581)           (0.0553)          (0.0562)         (0.0589)         (0.0548)          (0.0569)           (0.0896)         (0.0583)
  ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-25           -0.0189           -0.0112           -0.00936          -0.0363          -0.0232          -0.00755             0.0715          -0.0237
                               (0.0666)           (0.0641)          (0.0643)         (0.0731)         (0.0719)          (0.0667)            (0.100)         (0.0670)
  ΔCi,d-20 x ΔCi,d-25            0.0243           -0.0308            -0.0202           0.0813          -0.0192          -0.00739            -0.0211          0.0265
                               (0.0685)           (0.0640)          (0.0652)         (0.0749)         (0.0660)          (0.0673)           (0.0916)         (0.0687)
  ΔCi,d-5                      0.0721**           0.0674**          0.0664**         0.0830**          0.0571*          0.0670**           0.150***         0.0509*
                               (0.0279)           (0.0279)          (0.0280)         (0.0368)         (0.0324)          (0.0281)           (0.0430)         (0.0282)
  ΔCi,d-10                     0.0645***          0.0604**         0.0650***           0.0508           0.0388          0.0634***            0.0395         0.0602**
                               (0.0240)           (0.0243)          (0.0239)         (0.0354)         (0.0245)          (0.0237)           (0.0453)         (0.0247)
  ΔCi,d-15                       0.0325            0.0291             0.0339           0.0491          0.0490*            0.0306             0.0223           0.0283
                               (0.0209)           (0.0209)          (0.0207)         (0.0322)         (0.0250)          (0.0210)           (0.0391)         (0.0212)
  ΔCi,d-20                      -0.0238            -0.0224           -0.0239          -0.0601          -0.0387           -0.0240            -0.0109          -0.0208
                               (0.0190)           (0.0186)          (0.0188)         (0.0386)         (0.0237)          (0.0190)           (0.0388)         (0.0195)
  ΔCi,d-25                     0.0566**           0.0511**          0.0512**         0.101***         0.0679***         0.0523**           -0.0210          0.0570**
                               (0.0220)           (0.0214)          (0.0214)         (0.0381)         (0.0256)          (0.0216)           (0.0428)         (0.0220)

Observations                      7,280            7,280             7,280             7,280             6,994            7,280             7,280             7,280
R-squared                         0.030            0.061             0.060             0.032             0.048            0.047             0.058             0.030

Marginal effect of cooling with 1C of cooling in each previous 50-year period:
50 Years of Prev. Cooling         0.231             0.211            0.214             0.256            0.166              0.222              0.374            0.210
                                 (0.066)          (0.065)           (0.064)           (0.074)          (0.067)            (0.064)            (0.088)          (0.066)
100 Years of Prev. Cooling        0.276             0.241            0.255             0.322            0.160              0.278              0.480            0.251
                                 (0.110)          (0.109)           (0.109)           (0.123)          (0.112)            (0.110)            (0.168)          (0.111)
150 Years of Prev. Cooling        0.359             0.345            0.344             0.368            0.299              0.355              0.541            0.345
                                 (0.109)          (0.105)           (0.105)           (0.119)          (0.109)            (0.108)            (0.170)          (0.108)
200 Years of Prev. Cooling        0.381             0.388            0.387             0.381            0.345              0.388              0.511            0.359
                                 (0.129)          (0.128)           (0.127)           (0.143)          (0.129)            (0.129)            (0.193)          (0.129)
Notes: The regression controls for cell and time fixed effects. Geographic controls (column 7) include latitude, longitude, elevation, slope and the distance to the
nearest coast. Observations are at the decade and 400km by 400km grid-cell level. Standard errors, clustered at the grid-cell level, are reported in parentheses. The
robustness specifications in columns 2-7 are the same as columns 2-7 of Table 3. Column 8 is the same as column 7 of Table 1.




                                                                               62
Table A.4: The Very Long-Run Effect of Cooling on Conflict using the Fully Flexible Specification:
Alternative Measures of Conflict

                                                  Dependent Variable: Fifty-Year Change in Conflict Measure
                                                    (1)                      (2)                      (3)
                                             Conflict Incidence        Total Number of        Natural Log of Total
                                                (Baseline)                 Conflicts          Number of Conflicts
          Cooling:
           ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-10                    0.159***                   0.586**                 0.503***
                                                 (0.0603)                   (0.237)                  (0.175)
            ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-15                     0.0451                     0.149                   0.127
                                                 (0.0784)                   (0.232)                  (0.218)
            ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-20                     0.0825                  0.578***                   0.358*
                                                 (0.0702)                   (0.219)                  (0.186)
            ΔCi,d-5 x ΔCi,d-25                     0.0223                     0.106                   0.0916
                                                 (0.0403)                   (0.127)                  (0.110)
            ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-15                    0.0103                     0.197                   0.0749
                                                 (0.0511)                   (0.162)                  (0.143)
            ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-20                  0.160***                  0.681***                 0.564***
                                                 (0.0543)                   (0.173)                  (0.163)
            ΔCi,d-10 x ΔCi,d-25                   0.00836                     0.129                  0.0572
                                                 (0.0805)                   (0.195)                  (0.225)
            ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-20                    0.0385                   0.503**                   0.185
                                                 (0.0581)                   (0.254)                  (0.177)
            ΔCi,d-15 x ΔCi,d-25                   -0.0189                   -0.0240                  -0.0478
                                                 (0.0666)                   (0.245)                  (0.187)
            ΔCi,d-20 x ΔCi,d-25                    0.0243                   0.593**                   0.199
                                                 (0.0685)                   (0.257)                  (0.189)
            ΔCi,d-5                              0.0721**                    0.0587                  0.200**
                                                 (0.0279)                  (0.0958)                 (0.0805)
            ΔCi,d-10                             0.0645***                  0.166**                 0.192***
                                                 (0.0240)                  (0.0805)                 (0.0678)
            ΔCi,d-15                               0.0325                   0.198**                  0.125**
                                                 (0.0209)                  (0.0775)                 (0.0568)
            ΔCi,d-20                              -0.0238                  -0.00904                  -0.0609
                                                 (0.0190)                  (0.0568)                 (0.0537)
            ΔCi,d-25                             0.0566**                    0.0676                  0.146**
                                                 (0.0220)                  (0.0740)                 (0.0627)
          Observations                             7,280                    7,280                    7,280
          R-squared                                0.030                    0.027                    0.034

          Predicted marginal effects of (1C of cooling per 50 years) for:
          50 Years of Prev. Cooling                  0.231                      0.644                     0.703
                                                    (0.066)                    (0.219)                   (0.193)
          100 Years of Prev. Cooling                 0.276                      0.794                     0.830
                                                    (0.110)                    (0.326)                   (0.317)
          150 Years of Prev. Cooling                 0.359                      1.372                     1.188
                                                    (0.109)                    (0.383)                   (0.321)
          200 Years of Prev. Cooling                 0.381                      1.478                     1.280
                                                    (0.129)                    (0.425)                   (0.376)
          Notes: The regression controls forcell and time fixed effects.Observationsare atthe decade and 400km by
          400km grid-cell level. Standard errors, clustered at the grid-cell level, are reported in parentheses.




                                                             63
