                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SUPPLY-SIDE DRUG POLICY IN THE PRESENCE OF SUBSTITUTES:
       EVIDENCE FROM THE INTRODUCTION OF ABUSE-DETERRENT OPIOIDS

                                         Abby Alpert
                                        David Powell
                                    Rosalie Liccardo Pacula

                                      Working Paper 23031
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23031


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2017




We would like to thank seminar participants at the Conference of the American Society of Health
Economists and the APPAM Fall Research Conference for helpful comments, especially from our
discussants Dean Lillard and Melinda Buntin. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Abby Alpert, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of
Abuse-Deterrent Opioids
Abby Alpert, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
NBER Working Paper No. 23031
January 2017
JEL No. I12,I18,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

Overdose deaths from prescription opioid pain relievers nearly quadrupled between 1999 and
2010, making this the worst drug overdose epidemic in U.S. history. In response, numerous
supply-side interventions have aimed to limit access to opioids. However, these supply
disruptions may have the unintended consequence of increasing the use of substitute drugs,
including heroin. We study the consequences of one of the largest supply disruptions to date to
abusable opioids – the introduction of an abuse-deterrent version of OxyContin in 2010. Our
analysis exploits across state variation in exposure to the OxyContin reformulation. Using data
from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), we show that states with higher
pre-2010 rates of OxyContin misuse experienced larger reductions in OxyContin misuse,
permitting us to isolate consumer substitution responses. We estimate large differential increases
in heroin deaths immediately after reformulation in states with the highest initial rates of
OxyContin misuse. We find less evidence of differential reductions in overall opioid-related
deaths, potentially due to substitution towards other opioids, including more harmful synthetic
opioids such as fentanyl. Our results imply that a substantial share of the dramatic increase in
heroin deaths since 2010 can be attributed to the reformulation of OxyContin.

Abby Alpert                                     Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
The Wharton School                              RAND Corporation
University of Pennsylvania                      1776 Main Street
3641 Locust Walk                                P.O. Box 2138
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
alpertab@wharton.upenn.edu                      and NBER
                                                pacula@rand.org
David Powell
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
powelld@nber.org
1. Introduction

        Drug overdose deaths have increased dramatically over the past 15 years, increasing by
137% between 2000 and 2014 (Rudd et al., 2016). By 2009, they were the leading cause of
death from injuries in the United States, exceeding deaths from motor vehicle accidents and
firearms (Paulozzi, 2012). Overdose deaths from prescription opioid pain relievers have been the
primary driver behind this upward trend, nearly quadrupling since 1999 and killing nearly 19,000
individuals in 2014 (CDC, 2016). This unprecedented rise in opioid overdose deaths has
prompted the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to call this the worst drug
overdose epidemic in U.S. history (Kolodny, et al., 2015). While prescription opioids serve a
legitimate medical purpose in the treatment of pain (see American Pain Society (2009) for a
review), they are also highly addictive and present a serious risk for abuse, dependence, and
overdose. The harmful effects of prescription opioids are particularly acute in the U.S.—the
largest consumer of these drugs. 1 In 2014, nearly 2 million Americans abused or were
dependent on prescription opioids, and 10.3 million had used prescription opioids for non-
medical purposes in the past year (SAMHSA, 2015). The economic costs of opioid abuse—
including health care and criminal justice costs as well as productivity loss— are also large,
estimated at $78.5 billion in 2013 (Florence et al., 2016).
        Given the severity of the opioid epidemic, the federal government and states have
implemented a vast array of policies aimed at curbing prescription opioid abuse. These policies
have disproportionately targeted the supply-side of the market by limiting access to opioids,
including Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs), Medicaid Lock-In Programs, pain
clinic laws, enhanced diversion control, black box warnings, and abuse-deterrent drug
formulations. This emphasis on supply-side interventions is consistent with the National Drug
Control Strategy of the United States more broadly, which allocates the majority of its budget to
enforcement and market disruption efforts. 2 In contrast, less attention and funding have been
directed to demand-side interventions, such as prevention and substance abuse treatment, 3 which



1
  The U.S. consumes more than 80% of the world supply of oxycodone and 99% of hydrocodone—the main
ingredients in the majority of prescription opioids (International Narcotics Control Board, 2008).
2
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/about-content/fy2015_summary.pdf (accessed May 29,
2016)
3
  Prevention reduces the rate of new abuse while treatment attempts to reduce abuse among current users.

                                                                                                            2
aim to reduce the prevalence of addiction. Although, the recently signed 21st Century Cures Act
will provide $1 billion in funding for these types of programs. 4
        While supply-side interventions often dominate the discussion surrounding drug policy,
evidence of their effectiveness is mixed with many studies finding limited effects across a wide
range of drugs (see for example, Dobkin and Nicosia, 2009; Dobkin et al., 2014; Pollack and
Reuter, 2014). The failure of supply-side interventions can often be attributed to the presence of
substitutes, which limits the scope for these policies to reduce overall drug abuse, even when
successfully targeting one drug or one component of the supply chain. There are two types of
potential substitution responses to supply-side policies which may lessen their efficacy. First,
disruption of part of the supply chain for a given drug may lead to substitution across suppliers,
which enables the continued production or distribution of the drug. Second, consumers may
substitute across similar drugs. Previous evidence has shown fluid substitution across drugs in
response to supply changes, with an emphasis on alcohol, smoking, and marijuana (e.g., DiNardo
and Lemieux, 2001; Crost and Guerrero, 2012). While this evidence shows that there is
substitution across some drugs, the policy implications of this type of substitution are not well-
understood.
        In this paper, we study the consequences of a massive nationwide supply disruption for
opioid abuse: the introduction of abuse-deterrent OxyContin. In 2010, the FDA approved a
reformulated, abuse-deterrent version of OxyContin which was designed to make the pill
difficult to crush or dissolve. The most dangerous and addictive methods of abuse occur when
OxyContin is crushed for ingestion, inhalation or injection to release the drug more quickly. The
original formulation was then discontinued, marking a substantial reduction in the supply of
abusable prescription pain relievers. At the time of the reformulation, OxyContin was one of the
highest selling prescription drugs in the U.S. (ranking 15th in terms of retail sales in 2010
(Bartholow, 2011)) and it was also one of the leading drugs of abuse due to the efficiency
through which the pill could deliver highly concentrated amounts of oxycodone (Cicero et al.,
2005). In fact, many experts have implicated OxyContin as one of the key causes of the opioid
epidemic, as its introduction in 1996 coincided with the origin of the epidemic in the mid-1990s
(e.g., Kolodny et al., 2015). The reformulation of OxyContin— the first prescription drug to


4
 In addition, the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (signed into law on July 22, 2016) budgeted $181
million annually to address the opioid epidemic, including resources to expand prevention and addiction services.

                                                                                                                    3
ever receive an abuse-deterrent designation by the FDA— represents a highly innovative
approach to addressing the trade-off between preserving the medical benefits of opioids for
legitimate pain patients (who take the pill orally) and limiting spillovers to non-medical use.
Indeed, time series evidence suggests that the OxyContin reformulation significantly reduced
non-medical OxyContin use by as much as 40% (Cicero, et al. 2012; Butler, et al. 2013; Cicero,
et al. 2015).
        However, by raising the cost of OxyContin abuse, this intervention may have also had the
unintended effect of increasing the abuse of substitute drugs, including even more harmful
opiates such as heroin and fentanyl. To the extent that this occurred, it would reduce the
effectiveness of the intervention in reducing overall drug abuse. While prescription opioids and
heroin are pharmacologically similar, this relationship does not inherently imply that individuals
will switch to the more dangerous illegal substance given the additional costs associated with
acquiring and abusing illegal drugs. 5 The existence and magnitude of actual substitution patterns
across different types of drugs are determined by individual characteristics as well as access to
substitutes, and therefore is an empirical question.
        We examine this question in this paper by quantifying how the OxyContin reformulation
impacted both OxyContin misuse and substitution from OxyContin to other drugs. By studying
a unique supply disruption in which the entire production of an abusable drug was discontinued,
we can isolate consumer-side substitution responses across drugs. We leverage data from
multiple sources including the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) and
administrative data from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to measure OxyContin
and pain reliever use and data from the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) to measure
overdose deaths related to natural and synthetic (e.g., fentanyl) opioids and heroin. We study
mortality both as an important outcome on its own and as a proxy for opioid and heroin
substitution. We ultimately assess the net effects of the reformulation on overall overdose
deaths. The impacts of this policy are particularly relevant given that the FDA intends to
encourage the development of more abuse-deterrent opioids. 6
        Following the OxyContin reformulation in 2010, abuse of prescription opioid
medications and overdose deaths decreased for the first time since 1990 (Warner et al., 2014;

5
  Other factors may also differentially influence the decisions behind misusing opioids versus heroin. For example,
people may consider opioids “safe” since they are legal drugs, prescribed by physicians.
6
  http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm492237.htm (accessed May 21, 2016)

                                                                                                                      4
Dart et al., 2015). However, this drop coincided with an unprecedented rise in heroin overdoses
(see Figure 1). Heroin-related overdoses more than tripled between 2010 and 2014 (from 1.0 to
3.4 deaths per 100,000), after remaining relatively constant between 1999 and 2010. In 2014
alone, heroin was responsible for over 10,000 deaths. This time series evidence is consistent
with the hypothesis that the reformulation led individuals to substitute away from OxyContin to
heroin. Indeed, prior studies in the medical literature— which have been limited to before and
after evaluations of the reformulation (e.g., Coplan et al., 2013; Larochelle et al., 2015)— have
suggested there is a relationship between these recent trends. 7 However, it is difficult to isolate
the effects of OxyContin reformulation from other concurrent changes in state and federal
policies that have sought to address the rise in opioid abuse during the same time period.
         We address the challenge of identifying the effects of a national intervention separately
from other policy and secular trends, by exploiting across state variation in pre-reformulation
rates of OxyContin misuse. The reformulation should have more “bite” in states with higher
initial rates of OxyContin misuse. Consistent with our hypothesis, we show that states with high
initial OxyContin misuse experience larger declines in OxyContin misuse immediately following
the reformulation. We exploit this differential exposure to the reformulation across states to
quantify its effects on opioid deaths and substitution to other drugs.
         We find that the OxyContin reformulation significantly reduced OxyContin misuse, but
also led to a large increase in heroin deaths. Specifically, states with the highest initial rates of
OxyContin misuse experienced the largest increases in heroin deaths. Event study results show
that this differential increase in heroin deaths began precisely in the year following
reformulation. Moreover, heroin deaths were uncorrelated with OxyContin misuse prior to the
reformulation: both the levels and trends in heroin deaths were nearly identical across states with
high or low initial rates of OxyContin misuse before 2010. Our estimates show that each
additional percentage point of pre-reformulation OxyContin misuse is associated with a relative
decrease in OxyContin misuse of 0.8 percentage points and an additional 2.5 heroin deaths per
100,000 through 2013. These estimates imply that each percentage point reduction in the rate of
OxyContin misuse due to reformulation leads to 3.1 more heroin-related deaths per 100,000.


7
 Prior medical studies surveying patients in substance abuse treatment programs (e.g., Cicero et al., 2015; Butler et
al., 2013) found evidence of a reduction in abuse of OxyContin following reformulation, as well as substitution to
other opioids and heroin.


                                                                                                                        5
Extrapolating our estimates to the national trend implies that as much as 80% of the three-fold
increase in heroin mortality since 2010 may be due to the OxyContin reformulation.
           On the other hand, we find less evidence of differential reductions in overall opioid
mortality following the reformulation in states with high initial OxyContin misuse. While we
estimate a reduction of 0.8 opioid deaths per 100,000 for each additional percentage point of pre-
reformulation OxyContin misuse, this estimate is not statistically significant. When focusing on
natural opioids (e.g., oxycodone and hydrocodone) alone, we find stronger evidence of mortality
reductions after the reformulation (2.4 deaths per 100,000) but these estimates are only
marginally statistically significant. The lack of significant effects suggests that there has been an
increase in substitution from OxyContin to other types of opioids, counteracting the potential
mortality gains from the reduction in OxyContin misuse. One particularly concerning
substitution pattern is towards more harmful synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl, which have
recently gained attention due to a sharp rise in fentanyl-related deaths. 8 Studying synthetic
opioids independently, we find suggestive evidence of a relative increase in deaths in high initial
OxyContin misuse states. Finally, we show that the impact of the reformulation on heroin and
opioid deaths largely offset each other, leading to no net reduction in overall overdose deaths.
           Given the considerable policy efforts to reduce opioid abuse during this time period as
well as concurrent supply and demand shocks for opioids and heroin, we conduct several tests to
verify that our results represent a causal effect of the reformulation. Focusing on other major
policies introduced around 2010, we show that our results are not sensitive to controlling for the
differential adoption of PDMPs or excluding Florida— which experienced a significant
crackdown on “pill mills” operating in the state in 2010 and 2011. 9 Furthermore, we exploit the
independent variation across states in initial nonmedical OxyContin use from initial nonmedical
pain reliever use more generally. We find that nonmedical use of OxyContin, specifically, is
predictive of growth in heroin mortality while initial nonmedical use of pain relievers more
generally is not. We also show that reductions in heroin prices, as well as changes in economic
conditions, are uncorrelated with initial OxyContin misuse. These tests are consistent with
reformulation driving the rise in heroin overdoses and not secular trends or other policies which
would likely affect misuse of a broader set of pain relievers.


8
    http://emergency.cdc.gov/han/han00384.asp (accessed May 29, 2016)
9
    We also exclude other states that were impacted by Florida pill mills.

                                                                                                     6
        This study quantifies the high degree of substitutability between heroin and medically-
intended opiates in response to a large supply reduction in abusable OxyContin. While opioid
policies have generally focused on disrupting the supply of opioids for nonmedical use, our
findings demonstrate how the availability of unregulated substitute drugs can severely undermine
the effectiveness of such policies. In principle, it is plausible that heroin is a substitute in the
short-term but a complement in the longer-term, suggesting scope for the reformulation to have
future benefits. Reducing the supply of abusable opioids may diminish the probability of
initiation into opiate abuse and gradually shrink the population that potentially transitions from
medically-intended opioids to heroin over time. Although we can only study the first three years
after the policy, we find no evidence that the reformulation effect is shrinking over time; in fact,
we estimate that the effect on heroin use gets larger in each subsequent year. While the
introduction of OxyContin is often blamed for initiating the opioid epidemic, the removal of the
original formulation of OxyContin coincided with a dramatic rise in heroin deaths. This study
illustrates the challenges of addressing a deep-rooted addiction epidemic using supply side
strategies in the presence of substitute drugs.


2. Background

        In this section, we provide background on the historical importance of OxyContin as an
innovation in pain management and how it became one of the most widely abused prescription
drugs. We then discuss the abuse-deterrent reformulation of OxyContin and the current state of
the literature on understanding its consequences on individual behavior.


Background on OxyContin
        OxyContin was introduced by Purdue Pharma in 1996 and is the brand-name drug for the
extended-release formulation of oxycodone. Oxycodone is a semi-synthetic opioid which is
classified in the United States as a Schedule II controlled substance, similar to morphine.
OxyContin is primarily used for the management of acute or chronic pain, including pain due to
injuries, cancer, and other conditions. The key innovation of OxyContin was its long-acting
formula which provided 12 hours of continuous pain relief, significantly improving the quality
and ease of pain management over previous drugs. However, the timed-release aspect of
OxyContin is contingent on taking the pill whole. Crushing or dissolving the pill causes the high

                                                                                                       7
dose of oxycodone, which is intended to be released slowly over 12 hours, to be delivered all at
once. This property made OxyContin especially easy to abuse. Individuals who intended to
abuse OxyContin could chew, snort or inject the crushed pill for maximum euphoric effects.
This method of abuse is arguably the most dangerous, as this high level of potency comes with a
heightened risk for addiction and overdose death. Ironically, it was the time-released aspect of
OxyContin that led FDA officials to initially believe that OxyContin would be less attractive to
abusers since absorption of the drug would be delayed. As a result, the original product label
included the false statement that OxyContin had a lower potential for abuse than other
oxycodone products. This claim became a cornerstone of the marketing campaign for the drug
(GAO, 2003).
       OxyContin sales increased rapidly from $45 million in 1996 to more than $3 billion in
2010 (GAO, 2003; Bartholow, 2011). It ranked as the 15th highest selling prescription drug in
the U.S. in terms of retail sales and the top selling drug in the class of prescription opioid pain
relievers (Bartholow, 2011). This growth was partially fueled by an aggressive marketing
campaign which promoted the drug for a wide range of conditions, including non-cancer chronic
pain, and as a first line therapy (GAO, 2003). This departed from previous clinical
recommendations to prescribe opioid pain relievers only after other drugs had failed (WHO
Expert Committee, 1986) and primarily for acute and cancer pain (Max et al., 1995). OxyContin
prescriptions for non-cancer pain increased nearly tenfold from 1997 to 2002 (fourfold for cancer
pain). Non-cancer pain was a relatively untapped market in which the risk of addiction was less
well-known (GAO, 2003). Consequently, there was a massive expansion of opioids prescribed
by primary care physicians (as opposed to specialty physicians such as oncologists), who had
more limited training in pain management. The marketing campaign also inflated claims of the
drug’s safety. In 2007, Purdue Pharma pleaded guilty to misleading users about the risk of
addiction with OxyContin, leading to an over $600 million settlement for criminal and civil
charges.
       The culture surrounding the use of opioids was also changing in the mid-1990s. In 1995,
the American Pain Society recommended that pain should be assessed as the “fifth vital sign”
(along with blood pressure, temperature, pulse and respiratory rate) and the increasing
importance of treating pain led national pain organizations to revise treatment guidelines to
recommend the use of opioids in treating both cancer and non-cancer pain (Phillips, 2000).

                                                                                                      8
        The increased market presence of OxyContin during this time period led to high levels of
diversion to non-medical use. OxyContin became one of the leading drugs of abuse in the U.S.
(Cicero et al., 2005) and it was the first drug targeted for monitoring by the DEA by its brand
name, specifically, because of its high frequency of abuse (GAO, 2003). Given that the
introduction of OxyContin coincided with the beginning of the opioid epidemic in the mid-
1990s, it is often cited as a key factor in driving the increasing trend in opioid abuse and deaths
(e.g., Kolodny et al., 2015).


The OxyContin Reformulation
        In April 2010, Purdue Pharma introduced a reformulated version of OxyContin which
was designed to make the drug more difficult to abuse. It was the first drug product to ever
receive an “abuse-deterrent” designation from the FDA. 10 The abuse-deterrent version uses
physicochemical barriers to make the pill hard to break, crush or dissolve, thus deterring the
most harmful methods of abuse while still maintaining the pain-relieving benefits for legitimate
medical users who take the drug orally. In August 2010, Purdue Pharma stopped distributing the
original formulation of OxyContin to pharmacies. It should be noted that the reformulation is
not entirely “abuse-proof,” since it cannot deter oral misuse (i.e., taking more pills or higher
doses than prescribed), and some users have even found ways to counteract the abuse-deterrent
properties of the new version. 11 When the original formulation of OxyContin lost patent
protection in April 2013, the FDA announced that they would not approve any generic versions
of the original OxyContin formulation, since they determined that the benefits no longer
outweighed its risks. Consequently, only the reformulated version has been distributed to
pharmacies since August 2010.
        There was an immediate reduction in OxyContin misuse and oxycodone distribution at
the national level after the reformulation, as shown in Figure 2. We find that self-reported
misuse of OxyContin declined by more than 20 percent between the 2010 and 2012 waves of the
NSDUH data. Total legal distribution of oxycodone—as recorded by the DEA— also declined
for the first time after the reformulation, following a steady increase since 2000. Although it is

10
  This reformulated version received an official “abuse-deterrent” designation from the FDA in April 2013.
11
  Highly sophisticated methods were shared on websites for how to counteract the abuse-deterrent properties of the
drug. However, given the significant effort required, these methods may prove too costly for most users (Cicero and
Ellis, 2015).

                                                                                                                 9
possible for patients to switch from OxyContin to other oxycodone drugs after the reformulation,
such a pattern does not appear to dominate because the trend in oxycodone use after 2010 is still
downwards. Our findings are consistent with several medical studies showing that the
reformulation was effective at reducing OxyContin abuse among recreational users by about 40
percent, with an even larger percentage reduction in non-oral abuse (Cicero et al., 2012; Butler et
al., 2013; Cicero et al., 2015).
          We use the introduction of abuse-deterrent OxyContin (and the discontinuation of the
original formulation) as a large national shock to the supply of abusable opioids. Prior studies in
the medical literature have examined survey and surveillance data before and after 2010,
showing that the reformulation was associated with a time series reduction in calls to poison
control centers for abuse or accidental exposure (Coplan et al., 2013), adverse event reports of
death (Sessler et al., 2014), drug diversion reports (Severtson et al., 2013) and abuse among
recreational users (Butler et al., 2013; Cassidy et al., 2014; Cicero and Ellis 2015). Most of these
studies also find evidence of a rise in heroin use and the use of other opioids. In one widely
cited study, Cicero and Ellis (2015) surveyed a small sample (N=153) of recreational users of
OxyContin, finding that 33% had indicated that they replaced OxyContin with other drugs in
response to the abuse-deterrent formulation. 70% of this group reported that they had switched to
heroin.
          While these studies support the plausibility of a causal connection between the
OxyContin reformulation and the dramatic increase in heroin and other opioid use, the time-
series research designs limit the ability to separate the role of the OxyContin reformulation from
other opioid-related policies; and analysis on small, non-random samples may not generalize to
explain national trends. Understanding the empirical substitution patterns between opioids and
heroin due to market disruptions is critical for the evaluation of these types of policies. The
reformulation represents one of the largest disruptions to the nonmedical market for opioids,
presenting a rare opportunity to estimate the relationship between opioid-specific supply-side
policies and consumer-level responses. We exploit variation in exposure to the reformulation
across states based on initial rates of OxyContin misuse and estimate reformulation impacts for
the census of deaths in the U.S. Our approach permits us to account for fixed differences across
geographic areas with different exposure rates, control for common national shocks, and test for
pre-existing differences across areas.

                                                                                                   10
        The FDA recently announced its intent to encourage the development of more opioid
formulations with abuse-deterrent properties. 12 To date, the FDA has approved abuse-deterrent
versions for several brand name extended-release opioids (Targiniq, Embeda, Hysingla,
MorphaBond, Xtampza, and Troxyca), though OxyContin remains the most important given its
large market size. To the extent that recent heroin overdose trends are due to the introduction of
reformulated OxyContin, we might expect that these trends could be exacerbated in the near
future as the introduction of other abuse-deterrent opioids cause more users to switch from
opioids to heroin. Consequently, it is especially important to understand substitution patterns in
response to supply-side opioid policies to predict future trends in drug abuse.

Related Literature
        Supply-side interventions, which reduce access to the targeted drug, have largely
dominated the set of policies aimed at reducing drug abuse (Pollack and Reuter, 2014).
Economic theory predicts that policies which reduce the supply of drugs— through mechanisms
such as enforcement (e.g., seizures and arrests), monitoring, interdiction, and regulation of
substances and drug precursors— should increase drug prices, lowering demand for the drug
(Caulkins and Reuter, 2010; Reuter and Kleiman, 1996). However, substitution effects driven by
cross-price elastic supply or demand for drugs may partially undo the benefits of these policies
or reduce their long term impact. In general, there are two possible substitution responses by
producers and consumers.
        First, the increase in price may attract new suppliers to the market (or increased
production by existing suppliers), thereby reducing or even eliminating the supply shortfall. 13
As just one example, in the market for methamphetamine, interventions that targeted the supply
of specific drug precursors were found to have only short term effects on prices because
producers could substitute away from using the regulated inputs towards unregulated ones
(Cunningham and Finlay, 2016; Dobkin et al., 2014). More generally, supply side interventions
have rarely succeeded in eliminating an entire supply chain for a drug, leaving behind alternative
sources for production and distribution of the drug. Thus, substitution across producers can
mute the price effects (and, hence, the responsiveness of utilization) from these types of


12
  http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm492237.htm (accessed May 21, 2016)
13
  The reduction in observed use in response to a supply shock should depend on the slope of the demand curve for
that specific drug. If demand is inelastic, then total use (and supply) will remain the same.

                                                                                                               11
interventions. The OxyContin reformulation is a unique intervention in this respect since Purdue
Pharma is the sole legal producer of this compound and altogether reduced the supply of its
abusable drug formulation immediately and permanently across all markets. Thus, the
OxyContin reformulation did not have a producer-level substitution response.
       Second, there may be consumer-level substitution responses. By increasing the cost of
OxyContin abuse (including the cost of access), the reformulation reduced consumption of
OxyContin, but may have also led existing users to substitute to heroin or other
pharmacologically similar drugs. This response would undermine the effectiveness of the
intervention in reducing overall drug abuse. The magnitude of this consumer substitution
response will depend on cross-price elasticities of demand as well as the supply of alternative
drugs. The economics literature has long recognized the potential importance of substitution
patterns across drugs (e.g., Crost and Guerrero, 2012; DiNardo and Lemieux, 2001; Model,
1993). For example, DiNardo and Lemieux (2001) and Crost and Guerrero (2012) exploit
variation in alcohol availability due to the minimum legal drinking age, finding evidence of
substitution between alcohol and marijuana. In more closely related work, state medical
marijuana laws led to substitution from prescription opioids to marijuana (Powell et al., 2015).
Other studies find evidence of complementarities across drugs (e.g., Williams et al, 2004; Saffer
and Chaloupka, 1999; Pacula 1998).
       We add to this literature in several ways. First, we provide the first natural experiment
evidence on the empirical substitutability of prescription opioids and heroin and quantify its
importance in explaining recent heroin overdose trends. Second, we test how this effect evolves
over time, which is important given that the immediate consequences of reformulation may differ
from its future effects on abuse. Finally, we are able to isolate the effects of a large-scale supply
disruption on consumer-level substitution from producer-level substitution, since the latter
response is not possible in this unique context. Studies of other opioid interventions, such as
PDMPs, could potentially confound producer- and consumer-side responses. For example, a
PDMP may reduce the supply of opioids diverted from the medical side of the market (e.g.,
pharmacies) in the state. However, the black market could compensate for this supply reduction
by funneling in opioids from out-of-state pharmacies with less stringent PDMPs. The policy
implications are very different if supply-side interventions are being undermined by supply-side
substitution or demand-side substitution. We isolate the consumer-level substitution response.

                                                                                                   12
3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
         To estimate the impact of the introduction of abuse-deterrent OxyContin, we combine
several data sources to measure: 1) OxyContin and prescription pain reliever use and 2) opioid
and heroin-related overdose deaths and overall overdose deaths. In this section we provide
details about each of these data sources.

Nonmedical Opioid Use
     To measure nonmedical use of OxyContin and pain relievers, we use aggregated, state-level
data from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). The NSDUH, which is
sponsored by SAMHSA, is a nationally representative household survey of individuals ages 12
and older and is the largest annual survey collecting information on substance use and mental
health issues in the U.S. The survey provides information on self-reported “nonmedical
OxyContin use” as well as “nonmedical pain reliever use” within the past year. The publicly
available NSDUH data are available in two year waves. 14 The NSDUH began asking about
nonmedical use for pain relievers in 2002 and for OxyContin in 2004. We use nonmedical
OxyContin use rates from the 2004-2005, 2006-2007, 2008-2009, 2010-2011, and 2012-2013
waves, and we will refer to each wave by its first year.
         We use the NSDUH data to construct our main measure of OxyContin misuse for two
reasons. First, it specifies OxyContin in the survey question, which is the exact drug product
affected by the reformulation. Second, it specifies nonmedical use. Nonmedical use or misuse
has been defined in a variety of different ways but generally captures use by individuals who
either: a) were not the ones originally prescribed the medication or b) use it in a manner
inconsistent with what was prescribed by the physician. Alternative data sources on OxyContin
use through legal channels, such as pharmacy claims data or reports of legal distribution of
oxycodone, may not fully capture the differential effects of the reformulation—which we would
expect to affect nonmedical users more than medical users—across states, thus we consider
“nonmedical use” as our preferred measure. Our results are robust to using alternative data
sources and measures of OxyContin use, which we show in Section 5.3.B. We will also use the

14
  It should be noted that SAMHSA recently restricted access to the individual level NSDUH data. Specifically, the
portal allowing access to geographically identifiable individual level data in the NSDUH has been closed for over
the past year, making it impossible to conduct this work on the NSDUH microlevel data. We use the only NSDUH
data currently available to researchers which is aggregated to the state level and available in two year waves. These
data are sufficient for the purposes of constructing state-level measures of pre-reformulation OxyContin misuse.

                                                                                                                  13
more general measure of nonmedical pain reliever use to disentangle substitution patterns due
specifically to OxyContin reformulation from other concurrent policy and secular changes which
affected pain reliever misuse more broadly.
         Exposure to the reformulation is quantified as state-level pre-reformulation OxyContin
misuse. Specifically, we define exposure as the population-weighted rate of OxyContin misuse
in each state combining the 2004-2005, 2006-2007, and 2008-2009 waves. We select these years
because they precede the 2010 introduction of abuse-deterrent OxyContin and aggregate the
waves together to obtain more precise measures of OxyContin misuse rates, reducing concerns
about measurement error. We will also present sensitivity analyses where we construct our
measure of initial OxyContin misuse using only one wave at a time. The nonmedical pain
reliever use variable is constructed similarly. We do not use the NSDUH data to measure state-
level heroin use because heroin (unlike most other drugs) is known to be severely underreported
in these data. 15
        We complement these data with information about the legal supply of opioids at the state-
level from the DEA’s Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders System (ARCOS). 16 The
Controlled Substance Act of 1970 requires all manufacturers and distributors to report their
transactions and deliveries of all Scheduled II-V substances to the Attorney General. ARCOS is
the system that monitors and records the flows of these controlled substances as they move from
manufacturers to retail distributors at the state level. Only the active ingredients are reported in
this dataset, so we observe the total distribution of oxycodone by state, but not OxyContin
specifically. However, OxyContin accounts for a large share of oxycodone distribution. We will
use the ARCOS data to show that our measure of pre-reformulation OxyContin misuse is
correlated with legal distribution of oxycodone in a state. Also, we will use this data to define
alternative measures of exposure to the reformulation based on the relative importance of
oxycodone in the state compared to hydrocodone, prior to the reformulation. Hydrocodone (e.g.,
Vicodin) is another schedule II prescription opioid which is a clinical substitute for oxycodone
and is also commonly abused. In a study of opioid-dependent subjects entering drug treatment
programs, oxycodone and hydrocodone were the drugs of choice for 75% of patients (Cicero et


15
   https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/policy-and-research/wausid_results_report.pdf
(accessed May 29, 2016)
16
   This data was obtained through Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests to the DEA.

                                                                                                        14
al., 2013). States which disproportionately prescribe oxycodone relative to hydrocodone should
also be more affected by the reformulation.


Mortality
       We use the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) Multiple Cause of Death mortality
files—the census of deaths in the U.S.— to study annual overdose deaths from 1999-2013. We
use restricted data to access state identifiers.   We follow the coding used by the CDC to
categorize deaths as opiate-related. First, we code deaths as overdoses by using the ICD-10
external cause of injury codes X40-X44, X60-64, X85, or Y10-Y14. Further, we use drug
identification codes, which provide information about the substances found in the body at death.
There are four drug identification codes related to opiates. T40.1 indicates poisoning by heroin.
Opioid-related deaths (excluding heroin) are identified as: T40.2 for natural and semisynthetic
opioids (e.g., oxycodone and hydrocodone), T40.3 for methadone, and T40.4 for synthetic
opioids excluding methadone (e.g., fentanyl and tramadol). Following the CDC, we combine
T40.2-T40.4 as our measure of total opioid-related deaths. We also study more disaggregated
measures of opioid deaths, such as examining T40.2 alone (since the OxyContin reformulation
should have the most direct effect on this category) and examining substitution across categories.


Variation in Initial OxyContin Misuse
       As noted above, we measure a state’s exposure to the reformulation— initial OxyContin
prevalence— as the population-weighted rate of nonmedical OxyContin use pooling NSDUH
data from the 2004 through 2008 survey waves. There is significant geographic variation in
initial nonmedical OxyContin use, which is illustrated in Figure 3. We exploit this geographic
variation in our analysis. There are some clusters of misuse (such as Indiana, Kentucky, and
West Virginia), but we see high propensities to misuse throughout different parts of the country.
The OxyContin misuse rate ranges from 0.26% in Illinois to 1.15% in Rhode Island. Alternative
measures of initial OxyContin misuse are correlated with our chosen measure, as shown in
Appendix Figure A.1. These figures show that our measure is strongly correlated with the 2004-
2005 misuse rate and, separately, the 2008-2009 misuse rate. Using ARCOS data, we also show
that there is a strong correlation between OxyContin misuse and the per capita legal supply of
oxycodone.

                                                                                               15
       Variation in OxyContin misuse could be driven by a number of factors including:
variability in the prescribing of specific opioids (not unlike the observed geographic variation in
prescribing for other drugs and health care services more generally) due to a lack of consensus
on best practices for treating pain patients (Paulozzi et al., 2014); or variability in consumer
brand preferences across individuals. For example, OxyContin is more expensive than other
opioids, but also delivers a preferred high over hydrocodone. Hydrocodone is often preferred by
more risk-averse recreational users such as women and the elderly; while OxyContin is often
preferred by more risk-tolerant young men (Cicero et al., 2013).
       OxyContin misuse in a state could also be driven by some of the same underlying causes
for high rates of pain reliever misuse more generally. To address this, we will also present
analyses where we exploit differences in states’ total supply of oxycodone relative to
hydrocodone to isolate independent variation in OxyContin misuse. As shown in Appendix
Table A.1, states with high shares of oxycodone relative to hydrocodone distribution have higher
rates of OxyContin misuse but not higher rates of misuse of other types of pain relievers.
Conversely, states with a disproportionately high share of hydrocodone relative to oxycodone
have higher rates of misuse of other types of pain relievers. Our main analysis will proceed by
using OxyContin misuse rates as the measure of exposure because we hypothesize that this is the
margin determining substitution to heroin. However, we will also show results using variation in
the oxycodone-relative-to-hydrocodone share in order to further isolate changes in outcomes due
to the OxyContin reformulation rather than other opioid policies as well as showing that the
results are robust to exploiting the underlying legal variation in opioids which generates
disparities in nonmedical use.


Descriptive Statistics
       States with higher misuse rates of OxyContin may differ from states with lower misuse
rates. Table 1 shows mean outcomes and control variables before the reformulation for states
with above and below-median rates of initial OxyContin misuse as measured in the NSDUH. As
we would expect, high OxyContin misuse states have more oxycodone doses per capita, more
opioid overdoses, and more drug overdoses from all causes. However, the two groups of states
have similar heroin mortality rates prior to the OxyContin reformulation. In our analysis below,
we will show that these groups also have similar pre-reformulation trends in heroin deaths. The

                                                                                                16
age composition is relatively similar across states as are the economic indicators as measured in
2000. However, high OxyContin misuse states have smaller populations and a higher proportion
of whites. These differences motivate the inclusion of state fixed effects in our analyses while
also testing explicitly for differential trends. Our empirical approach will isolate causal trend
breaks due to the OxyContin reformulation from secular trends driven by cross-sectional
differences across states.


4. Empirical Strategy


       We estimate the causal impact of the OxyContin reformulation by exploiting variation in
states’ exposure to the reformulation due to differences in their initial prevalence of OxyContin
misuse. We examine whether states with higher initial rates of OxyContin misuse— which
should be more affected by the reformulation— experienced larger changes in heroin and opioid-
related deaths by estimating the following event-study specification:

                     𝑌𝑠𝑠 = 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛿𝑡 × 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑠𝑃𝑃𝑃 + 𝑋𝑠𝑠
                                                         ′
                                                            𝛽 + 𝜀𝑠𝑠 ,                          (1)

where 𝑌𝑠𝑠 is the number of heroin or opioid deaths per 100,000 in state s and year t.
𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑠𝑃𝑃𝑃 is the fixed rate of OxyContin misuse in state 𝑠 in the pre-reformulation period
(measured between the 2004-2008 NSDUH waves) and is interacted with a full set of year fixed
effects 𝛿𝑡 . 𝑋𝑠𝑠 is a vector of state and time-varying covariates including the unemployment rate,
fraction of the population ages 18-64, and fraction of the population ages 65+. We control for
state fixed effects 𝛼𝑠 to account for fixed cross-sectional differences across states as well as year
fixed effects 𝛾𝑡 to account for national shocks and trends in heroin availability, enforcement,
prices, and other factors common across states. Standard errors are clustered at the state level to
account for serial correlation.
       The main variables of interest are the full set of 𝛿𝑡 estimates, which we will show
graphically, normalizing the 2009 coefficient to equal zero.         These estimates identify the
differences in mortality across states with higher and lower initial rates of OxyContin misuse in
each year and we will test for a trend break after the reformulation in 2010. For example, when
the dependent variable is heroin deaths per capita, we expect the estimates of 𝛿𝑡 to increase
beginning after 2010 if higher initial OxyContin misuse in the state predicts a larger increase in

                                                                                                  17
heroin deaths after the OxyContin reformulation. The identifying assumption is that in the
absence of the reformulation, differences across states would have continued along the same
trends.
          We also parameterize the above model to estimate the average effect of the
reformulation. Specifically, we estimate a trend-break specification limiting the analysis sample
to the years 2008-2013. We focus on the time period close to the reformulation to estimate the
linear trend more precisely, although the results are similar if we use a longer pre-period. Our
specification is as follows:

                  𝑌𝑠𝑠 = 𝛼𝑠 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛿1 [𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑡 × 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑠𝑃𝑃𝑃 ]+𝛿2 [𝑡 × 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑠𝑃𝑃𝑃 ]
                          +𝛿3 [𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑡 × (𝑡 − 2010) × 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑠𝑃𝑃𝑃 ] + 𝑋𝑠𝑠
                                                                     ′
                                                                        𝛽 + 𝜀𝑠𝑠 ,                         (2)

where 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑡 is an indicator that turns on in 2011 and later and 𝑡 is a linear time trend—i.e.,
(𝑡 − 2010) equals 1 in 2011, 2 in 2012, and so forth. This specification controls for pre-existing
trends while allowing for both a level shift and trend break in 2011. We restrict the trend break
to occur in 2011 based on our results from the non-parametric specification in equation (1). Also,
since the discontinuation of the original formulation occurred late in 2010, we expect that
patients still had some access to this formulation as pharmacies drew down their inventories.17
To the extent that a partial effect occurred in 2010, our estimates should be biased towards zero.
In Section 5, we test the sensitivity of the results to the inclusion of 2010 in the analysis sample.
Equation (2) is a less flexible version of equation (1) but provides easier to interpret magnitudes
for the relationship between initial nonmedical OxyContin use and changes in mortality. After
estimating the parameters in equation (2), we report the effects of the OxyContin reformulation
through 2013 (𝛿1 + 3𝛿3), our last year of data.
          We will show that our results are robust to alternative specifications—such as controlling
for state-specific trends— and we also test for alternative explanations for the patterns in opioid
and heroin mortality. Specifically, we control for the differential adoption of PDMPs across
states and, in some specifications, we also exclude states such as Florida, West Virginia, and
Kentucky that were affected by changes in pain clinic laws occurring around the time of the
reformulation. We also test for differential changes in heroin prices and economic conditions.

17
  Prescriptions filled at pharmacies for the original formulation of OxyContin accounted for 7.4%, 1.8%, and 0.6%
of total OxyContin prescriptions in January 2011, June 2011, and December 2011, respectively (Butler, et al. 2013).

                                                                                                                 18
Finally, we provide estimates where we control for initial nonmedical pain reliever use in
addition to initial OxyContin misuse. Including both variables allows us to isolate the effect of
the OxyContin reformulation relative to other policies, such as PDMPs, which affect opioid
abuse more broadly. If OxyContin reformulation is the driving force behind the change in opioid
and heroin mortality rates, then we would expect that the changes in these outcomes would load
on the OxyContin misuse variable rather than on the more encompassing nonmedical pain
reliever use variable.


5. Results
       Our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we provide evidence for our key underlying
assumption that OxyContin misuse declined more after the reformulation in states with higher
initial OxyContin misuse. Second, we estimate the causal impact of this reduction in OxyContin
misuse due to reformulation on overall opioid abuse and substitution to other opiates. We
estimate mortality effects and separately identify deaths caused by different types of opioids and
heroin as well as the impact on overall overdose deaths. Third, we investigate alternative
channels for the observed substitution patterns across drugs, including other state-level opioid
policies, changes in heroin prices, and economic shocks.


5.1. First Stage Effects of Reformulation on OxyContin Use
       We begin by showing graphically that the initial rate of OxyContin misuse in a state is
strongly predictive of differential changes in OxyContin misuse after the 2010 reformulation.
This is a necessary condition for using variation in initial OxyContin misuse to identify the
reformulation’s impact. Figure 4 shows the “first stage” relationship between the pre-
reformulation OxyContin misuse rate and the change in the OxyContin misuse rate between the
2008 and 2012 waves in the NSDUH data. We divide states into quartiles based on their initial
OxyContin misuse and plot the histogram of rate changes.             As predicted, we observe a
monotonic relationship between initial OxyContin misuse and reductions in misuse after the
reformulation. In states with the highest initial OxyContin misuse, the rate of OxyContin misuse
declined by more than 50 percentage points after the reformulation, while OxyContin misuse
actually increased slightly in states with the lowest rates of initial OxyContin misuse.



                                                                                               19
       Figure 5 shows an analogous event study using the continuous measure of initial
OxyContin misuse instead of quartiles, estimating a specification analogous to equation (1).
NSDUH provides data for two-year waves so we should expect to observe a partial effect for the
2010-2011 estimate followed by a full effect for 2012-2013. We observe a relative decrease in
2010-2011 for states with higher initial misuse rates followed by an even larger decrease in
2012-2013, as expected. The 2012-2013 estimate indicates that each percentage point increase
in initial nonmedical OxyContin use is associated with a decrease in misuse of 0.8 percentage
points after reformulation.


5.2. Effects of OxyContin Reformulation on Mortality
       The previous results establish that states with high initial rates of OxyContin misuse
experienced a larger decrease in OxyContin misuse after the introduction of abuse-deterrent
OxyContin relative to states with low initial rates.        Next, we examine whether there are
corresponding changes in mortality as a result of this differential decrease in OxyContin misuse.


Graphical Event Study Results
       Figure 6 presents the full set of coefficients from estimating our baseline event-study
specification (equation 1) for several mortality outcomes. The first graph in Panel A shows the
point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for total opioid-related mortality. There is an
upward trend in opioid overdose deaths as a function of initial OxyContin misuse before the
reformulation. This shows, not surprisingly, that opioid deaths per capita were growing faster in
states with high initial OxyContin misuse. Following the 2010 reformulation, we observe some
evidence of a leveling off and a small relative decline in opioid deaths in states with higher initial
OxyContin misuse. However, while the point estimates decline, the confidence intervals widen
in 2010, making it difficult to reject that the reformulation had no effect on opioid mortality. It
should be noted that this figure includes all opioid overdoses, not just those specifically
involving OxyContin, adding noise to our overdose measure.              The outcome variable also
encompasses substitution to other types of opioids. In the analysis below, we will examine
disaggregated measures of opioid deaths to study the importance of substitution.
       The results for heroin overdose deaths are even more stark (second graph in Panel A).
The event study coefficients are close to zero and statistically insignificant in every year before

                                                                                                   20
the reformulation. This indicates that there were no differences in pre-reformulation trends in
heroin deaths per capita across states with high and low initial rates of OxyContin misuse.
Moreover, as shown in Table 1, there was almost no difference in the levels of per capita heroin
deaths across these states. In fact, the correlation between our OxyContin misuse measure and
per-capita heroin deaths before 2010 is only 0.015. However, following the reformulation in
2010, there is a sudden statistically significant relative increase in heroin deaths in states with the
highest initial rates of OxyContin misuse. The magnitude of this differential effect grows larger
in 2012 and again in 2013. The timing of this effect, which coincides precisely with the
reformulation, and the fact that this effect is concentrated among states with the highest initial
OxyContin use strongly suggests a causal relationship between the OxyContin reformulation and
the sharp increase in heroin deaths. We further explore the causality of this relationship in the
sections below.
       In Panel B, we show the net effects of the reformulation on all drug overdose deaths. For
opioid and heroin deaths combined, there is an increasing trend in the coefficients before the
reformulation which flattens slightly in 2012. We observe a similar trend for all drug overdoses,
which includes non-opiate drugs (e.g., cocaine). However, the confidence intervals also widen in
2011 which make it difficult to statistically reject that there is no effect, as we will discuss
further below. This suggests that substitution to heroin (and the corresponding increase in
deaths) largely offsets the effects of the reformulation on opioid deaths.


Regression Results
       In this section, we present the parameterized estimates from equation (2) to quantify the
total magnitude of the impacts of the OxyContin reformulation. In all tables, we report the
“three-year effect” of the reformulation (i.e., the effect through 2013), combining the intercept
and slope shift coefficients from equation (2). Specifically, we report estimates of 𝛿1 + 3𝛿3.


A. Heroin Mortality
       The results for heroin deaths from the parameterized model are presented in Table 2. In
Column (1), we report an effect of 2.2, implying that a 1 percentage point higher rate of initial
OxyContin misuse leads to an additional 2.2 heroin deaths per 100,000 through 2013, which is
statistically significant at the 5% level. This estimate indicates that each standard deviation

                                                                                                    21
increase in the initial OxyContin misuse rate is associated with an additional 0.50 heroin deaths
per 100,000 in 2013, a 47% increase relative to the baseline mean of 1.06.
         In Column (2) of Table 2, we include time-varying state-level covariates. The estimate
increases in magnitude to 2.5 and remains statistically different from zero. Column (3) presents
the results when both initial OxyContin misuse and initial pain reliever use 18 are included. This
test is important because the two variables are correlated and our initial OxyContin measure is
potentially picking up some effects related to initial pain reliever misuse more generally. The
Column (3) estimates, however, suggest that not accounting for pain reliever misuse is actually
biasing the estimates downward. In this specification, we estimate that an additional percentage
point of nonmedical OxyContin use before reformulation increases heroin deaths by 3.7 deaths
per 100,000 in 2013. 19
         In the final two columns of Table 2, we test the sensitivity of the results to functional
form by implementing Poisson regressions (the corresponding event studies are shown in
Appendix Figure A.2). Since states have different initial mortality rates, it may be useful to
model the effect of reformulation as having a proportional effect from these different baselines.
For heroin deaths, these baseline differences are not systematically related to initial nonmedical
OxyContin use so we do not expect that the use of a linear specification is driving our
conclusions, though they may be important for opioid deaths. Poisson regression permits the
estimation of proportional effects and has several advantages over estimating a linear
specification with a logarithmic outcome variable (see Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006),
especially when the outcome includes zeros (which occurs for about 12% of state-years in the
full sample and 6% in the 2008-2013 sample). 20 These estimates are reported in percentage
terms so they cannot be directly compared to the other coefficients. In Column (4), we estimate
that a 1 percentage point higher initial OxyContin misuse rate increases heroin deaths by 125%
(p-value=0.105).        This estimate implies that a standard deviation increase in the initial
OxyContin misuse rate would lead to a 41% increase in deaths relative to the baseline mean,

18
   This measure is constructed similarly to initial OxyContin misuse and is included in equation (2) on its own by
interacting the initial rate with a post-2010 indicator, a linear time trend, and a post-2010 time trend.
19
   This estimate implies that each standard deviation increase in the initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse rate
increased heroin deaths per 100,000 people in 2013 by 0.78.
20
   While it is commonly believed that Poisson regression requires that the mean equals the variance, this restriction
is not enforced to generate the estimates from Poisson regression. Similar estimators, such as negative binomial
regression, will impose related restrictions. Poisson regression, therefore, is often considered “more robust” than
these alternative estimators. See Wooldridge (2002), Chapter 19 for more details.

                                                                                                                    22
similar to the estimates from the linear specification estimated above. In Column (5), we include
both pre-reformulation misuse measures. The estimated relationship between initial OxyContin
misuse and heroin deaths increases and is statistically significant at the 5% level.


B. Opioid Mortality
        Table 3 presents the analogous estimates for opioid-related mortality. In Panel A, we
estimate the effects of the reformulation for total opioid deaths per 100,000 (drug codes T40.2-
T40.4). The point estimates suggest that the reformulation differentially decreased overall opioid
deaths in areas with high initial OxyContin misuse, but the estimates are too noisy to statistically
reject that there is no effect. In Column (1), we find that each percentage point of nonmedical
OxyContin use in the pre-period is associated with a decrease of 1.1 opioid deaths per 100,000
after reformulation, but this relationship is not statistically significant. Consistent with this, in
the corresponding event study shown in Figure 6, we observed a flattening trend around the time
of reformulation, though the confidence intervals were wide. Adding covariates in Column (2)
decreases the magnitude of the estimate to 0.8. When we jointly estimate the effects of initial
OxyContin and pain reliever misuse in Column (3), we find that high OxyContin misuse is
associated with a statistically insignificant increase in opioid-related deaths after reformulation.
Initial pain reliever use leads to a decrease in opioid-related mortality, though neither effect is
statistically significant. The Poisson estimates in Columns (4) and (5) also find no statistical
relationship between initial OxyContin misuse and changes in opioid-related mortality. In fact,
the point estimates are positive. For heroin mortality, there was almost no correlation between
initial OxyContin misuse and the death rate. This is not the case for opioid deaths which is one
reason that the OLS and Poisson estimates are different.
        Panel A represents the broadest definition of opioids, possibly explaining these null
results, at least in part. The analysis aggregates together all types of opioids (T40.2-T40.4),
though we might expect the reformulation to have a negative effect on deaths due to oxycodone
(T40.2) and a positive effect on deaths due to synthetic opioids (T40.4) due to substitution
effects. This may cause offsetting effects which mask changes in opioid deaths for specific types
of opioids. We explore this heterogeneity below.

C. Opioid Mortality due to Natural Opioids



                                                                                                        23
       In Panel B, we present estimates for deaths from natural opioids (T40.2), which includes
drugs such as oxycodone and hydrocodone (the corresponding event study is in Appendix Figure
A.3). For natural opioids, the point estimates more than double, but we still cannot statistically
reject that there is no effect. Since the class of natural opioids includes more than just
OxyContin, we may still be capturing some amount of substitution within the class.
       Parsing the data further, in Panel C, we consider the effects of the reformulation on
natural opioid-only mortality, excluding overdose deaths with multiple substances (the event
study is presented in Appendix Figure A.3). Specifically, we construct deaths due to natural
opioids excluding deaths that also involve methadone (T40.3) or synthetic opioids (T40.4). In
this specification, the effects become marginally statistically significant at the 10% level. The
pattern across Panels A through C shows that as we more precisely isolate deaths involving
OxyContin, we find greater evidence of a differential reduction in deaths following the
reformulation. However, there are limits to this exercise and, overall, the evidence of reductions
in natural opioid deaths due to the reformulation is only suggestive.


D. Opioid Mortality due to Synthetic Opioids
       While we find strong evidence of substitution to heroin after reformulation, we also
hypothesize that the reformulation may have caused substitution to other types of opioids. If this
occurred, it may explain part of the recent rise in deaths due to fentanyl and other synthetic
opioids which are more dangerous than oxycodone. Deaths associated with these drugs are
categorized as T40.4.
       Table 4 presents the estimates for synthetic opioid deaths (the corresponding event study
is in Appendix Figure A.3). In Columns (1) and (2) of Panel A, the effect of the reformulation is
positive, but not statistically significant. However, when we also control for initial pain reliever
use in Column (3), we estimate a statistically significant positive effect at the 5% level,
suggesting that each additional percentage point of initial OxyContin misuse led to an additional
0.8 synthetic opioid deaths per 100,000. Scaled differently, a standard deviation increase in
initial OxyContin misuse predicts an additional 0.2 synthetic opioids deaths per 100,000 in 2013.
When we estimate proportional effects using Poisson regression, we find much larger effects for
synthetic opioid deaths. Given that there are large cross-sectional differences in synthetic opioid
mortality correlated with initial OxyContin misuse before the reformulation, estimating

                                                                                                    24
proportional effects is more appropriate and explains the more precise estimates when using
Poisson regression. In Column (4), we estimate that a one standard deviation higher initial
OxyContin misuse rate leads to an additional 28% increase in synthetic opioid mortality after
reformulation. When we jointly estimate the effects of initial OxyContin and initial pain reliever
use, this OxyContin estimate increases to 34%. The graphical event study using Poisson
regression presents complementary evidence (see Appendix Figure A.2) that the post-
reformulation estimates are more precise than the OLS event study and imply statistically
significant increases with little evidence of differential pre-existing trends. In Panel B of Table
4, we estimate the effects for deaths due to synthetic opioids while excluding deaths that also
involve methadone or natural opioids. The estimates are similar. Taken together, this evidence
is suggestive that the reformulation of OxyContin may have increased deaths involving synthetic
opioids such as fentanyl.


E. Total Overdose Deaths
       In Table 5, we explore the effect of reformulation on total overdose deaths. We have
previously shown evidence that reformulation increased heroin mortality, but we also find
negative (though mostly insignificant) effects on opioid-related deaths. The overall effect is of
special interest to understand the net impact of reformulation on drug abuse.
       In Panel A, we first replicate our previous tables, but using opioid and heroin deaths
combined per 100,000 as the outcome. We estimate positive effects of the reformulation on
deaths from opioids and heroin across all models, though these estimates are never statistically
distinguishable from zero. We also examine total overdose deaths, including non-opiate drugs
(see Panel B). We find that initial nonmedical OxyContin use is not statistically significantly
related to changes in drug overdoses overall, regardless of specification or estimation technique.
The estimates are positive, though small, which is consistent with the heroin and synthetic opioid
effects dominating. However, for both outcome variables in Table 5, there is too much noise to
estimate the effects precisely. Overall, the results suggest that the increase in deaths from heroin
and fentanyl offset any reductions in natural opioid deaths.




                                                                                                    25
5.3. Robustness Tests
A. Alternative Specifications
       In this section, we explore the robustness of our findings. We focus our discussion on
heroin deaths, but find that the results for opioids deaths are also robust to alternative
specifications. These robustness tests are presented in Appendix Table A.2. Panel A shows the
tests for heroin deaths and Panel B for opioid-related deaths.
       In Column (1), we present our preferred estimate for heroin deaths (from Table 2,
Column 2) of 2.54 to compare to the results from our alternative specifications. In Column (2),
we exclude 2010 from the analysis, since this is a partially treated year. We estimate a slightly
larger effect of 2.86. In Column (3), we test for the importance of weighting by state population
(Solon et al., 2014). When we do not use population weights, we estimate a statistically
significant effect of 3.67. In Column (4), we include state-specific trends. Accounting for state-
specific trends is difficult in this context because the treatment effect is not constant over time
(as seen in the event studies) and there may be heterogeneity across states as well. Wolfers
(2006) suggests that state-specific trends may attenuate the estimates given such heterogeneous
effects. Our estimate does decrease as expected, but we still estimate a statistically significant
effect of 1.88. In Column (5), we present estimates using the full sample period (1999-2013).
We had used 2008-2013 in our primary analyses to restrict to the years around reformulation and
avoid fitting the pre-existing linear trend on data from over a decade before the intervention.
When we use the full sample, we estimate an effect of 2.10, which is similar to our main
estimate.
       In Column (6), we replace our initial OxyContin misuse measure, constructed using the
2004-2008 NSDUH waves, with a similar measure constructed using the 2004-2005 wave only.
The advantage of using this wave is that it pre-dates the 2008-2013 analysis sample. States
which experience a transitory shock to opioid abuse might experience different changes in heroin
abuse over time due to mean reversion, even in the absence of the reformulation. Using data
further from the time of treatment reduces concerns that mean reversion is driving our estimates.
On the other hand, the disadvantage of using only one year of data is that it exacerbates
measurement error concerns. Using the 2004-2005 measure, we estimate an effect of 2.41,
similar to our main estimate. In Column (7), we show the corresponding estimate using the
2008-2009 wave— the year before reformulation— to construct our initial OxyContin misuse

                                                                                                      26
measure and estimate an effect of 1.35, still statistically significant from zero. The decrease in
magnitude results partially from the noisiness of the measure constructed from one wave.
        In general, measurement error in our measure of OxyContin misuse should attenuate our
estimates. To explore this further, in a separate analysis, we replicate the Column (7) estimates
in an instrumental variables framework to address measurement error concerns. We use the rates
of initial OxyContin misuse from one wave to instrument the rates from a separate wave. 21 This
analysis, shown in Appendix Table A.3, provides further evidence that the single wave results
contain measurement error, motivating the aggregation of waves in our main analysis.
        Finally, it may be important to account for differences in age composition across states
and time when studying overdose rates, beyond the age composition control variables we include
in the regression model. Our summary statistics suggest that a state’s age distribution is not
predictive of OxyContin misuse, but we verify that age composition differences are not driving
our results by age-adjusting our mortality rates. In Column (8), we use an age-adjusted heroin
overdose rate. 22 We estimate a similar effect as our main result when we use the age-adjusted
measure.


B. Alternative Measures of Exposure to the Reformulation
        Our empirical strategy studies the differential effect of the OxyContin reformulation
across states with the idea that states with a high initial rate of OxyContin misuse should be most
affected by the reformulation. In this section, we show that our results are robust to alternative
measures of exposure to the reformulation. We present these results as graphical event studies in
Figure 7.
        First, in Panel A, we define a state’s exposure to the reformulation as the initial rate of
OxyContin misuse divided by the initial rate of pain reliever misuse. This variable captures the
fraction of individuals misusing pain relievers who are misusing OxyContin specifically. Thus,
it accounts for differences in the rate of overall pain reliever misuse across states. Second, in

21
   We replicate the Appendix Table A.2, Column (7) model but estimate it using 2SLS with the 2004-2005 misuse
measure to generate the excluded instruments. The 2SLS estimate (see Column 1 of Table A3) implies that each
percentage point increase in nonmedical OxyContin misuse in 2008-2009 leads to an additional 4.3 heroin-related
deaths per 100,000 people. The estimate is larger than the size of the OLS estimate, which is suggestive that the
year-by-year measures have measurement error. The corresponding event study is included in Appendix Figure
A.4.
22
   We construct age-specific mortality rates and then take a weighted average, where the weights are calculated
using the national 2008 age distribution and are held constant across all observations.

                                                                                                                    27
Panel B, we use ARCOS data to define a state’s exposure as the initial supply of oxycodone (in
morphine equivalent doses) divided by the total initial supply of oxycodone and hydrocodone
combined. While oxycodone and hydrocodone are generally considered to be substitutes, there is
state variation in the relative size of the supplies of these drugs. We previously discussed some
of the possible underlying mechanisms driving the cross-state variation in oxycodone vs.
hydrocodone supply in Section 3 (as previously shown in Appendix Table A.1). Finally, Panel C
replicates Panel B but uses the ratio of initial oxycodone supply to initial hydrocodone supply.
       Using all three measures, the event study pattern is very similar to our previous event
study results using the OxyContin misuse measure alone. Overall, we find that our results are not
sensitive to how we construct our measure of exposure to the reformulation. Moreover, these
alternative measures suggest that our results are due to policies targeting OxyContin/oxycodone
use specifically, and not due to policies for opioid abuse overall.


C. Alternative Explanations

       In Table 6, we consider an array of alternative explanations for the relationship between
initial OxyContin misuse rates and changes in heroin deaths. First, we repeat our main estimate
of 2.54 in Column (1). Next, in Column (2) we include a time-varying indicator variable for
whether the state has a PDMP. Including this variable in the model causes the estimate to
increase to 2.89. Evidence on the effectiveness of PDMPs is mixed, with a recent study
suggesting that “must access” PDMPs reduce opioid abuse while PDMPs without such
provisions have limited effects (Buchmueller and Carey, 2016). In Column (3), we control for
whether a state had a “must access” PDMP and find similar effects.
       Another concern is whether pill mill laws enacted in Florida around the time of the
reformulation may explain part of the observed heroin effect. Florida experienced a dramatic
rise in opioid supply in the 2000s due to lax regulations permitting the spread of “pill mills”
throughout the state. In response, a complementary package of laws was passed in 2010 and
2011 which increased the regulation of pill mills and shut down many of these pain clinics (see
Surrat et al., 2014 and Johnson et al., 2014 for more details). Given that the timing of this
crackdown coincided with the reformulation of OxyContin, we address whether the rise in heroin
mortality is primarily due to Florida policies. In Column (4) we exclude Florida from the
sample, finding an estimate that is very close to our main estimate, increasing slightly to 2.56.

                                                                                                    28
The Florida pill mills prescribed and sold opioids to out-of-state residents as well. There is some
evidence that a large share of these opioids were sold to residents of Kentucky 23 and West
Virginia. When we exclude Florida, Kentucky, and West Virginia, the estimate decreases to
2.06 but remains statistically significant from zero at the 5% level. More generally, the pill mills
primarily affected the eastern portion of the United States and there is little evidence of
noteworthy diversion to the western region. In Column (5), we include only the West Census
Region and estimate a coefficient of 3.11, which is even larger than our main estimate.
        Appendix Table A.4 replicates Table 6 for opioid-related mortality. As before, there is
little evidence of any effect for opioid overdose deaths. Overall, the estimated relationship
between initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse rates and growth in heroin deaths does not appear
to be driven by other policies such as PDMPs and changes in pain clinic laws.
        We also estimate our event study specification for heroin prices using the DEA’s System
to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE) database which includes information
from drug seizures, such as the type of drug, the purity, and the price. We construct state-level
measures of heroin prices for 2000-2012. Heroin prices dropped nationally during our time
period, continuing the long term downward trend observed over the past two decades (Kilmer et
al., 2014). Our time fixed effects account for these national price changes. However, a reduction
in heroin prices could explain the rise in heroin abuse if the price change was differential across
areas with higher initial rates of OxyContin misuse. In Panel A of Figure 8, we present event
study estimates (analogous to equation 1) to examine whether state-level heroin price changes
are correlated with initial OxyContin misuse. We find little evidence of any relationship. 24
        Similarly, differential economic shocks across states may also have an independent
influence on OxyContin misuse. In Panel B, we repeat the above exercise using the log of the
unemployment rate as the outcome variable. We do not observe any evidence that the
unemployment rate changed systematically over time in a manner that correlates with our
measure of OxyContin misuse.


D. Placebo Tests



23
  http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/01/us/01drugs.html?_r=1 (last accessed October 3, 2016)
24
  While we might expect to observe a price response due to the demand shock, the absence of a relationship is
reassuring that other confounding shocks are not affecting our analysis.

                                                                                                                29
       We also conduct placebo tests estimating our event study specification for cocaine
overdose deaths and, separately, for all drug overdoses excluding heroin and opioids. These
estimates are presented in Appendix Figure A5. We find little evidence of effects for other
drugs. Other drugs may be complements or substitutes for opioids so it is not clear whether we
would expect to observe any relationship, but the statistical absence of any effect is reassuring
that the heroin effect is not driven by concurrent demand shocks for drugs more generally that
are correlated with our measure of initial OxyContin misuse.


5.4. Counterfactual Growth in Heroin Deaths
       Finally, we quantify the effect of the reformulation in explaining the dramatic increasing
national trend in heroin deaths after 2010. We use the event study estimates shown in Figure 6
to predict per capita heroin deaths. To make this counterfactual prediction, we set the initial
OxyContin misuse rate to zero and calculate the heroin death rate in each year. We estimate that
reformulation can explain 0.37 heroin deaths per 100,000 in 2011, 0.94 deaths in 2012, and 1.10
deaths in 2013. Between 2010 and 2013, the actual heroin death rate increased by 101%. We
predict that in the absence of reformulation, we would have observed only a 21% increase.
Thus, our estimates imply that OxyContin reformulation is responsible for as much as 80% of the
recent growth in heroin deaths.


6. Conclusion
       The reformulation of OxyContin represents one of the largest disruptions to date to the
supply of abusable opioids. However, the benefits of any market disruption may unravel as
producers and consumers respond to the supply shock by substituting to different suppliers
(producers) or to other drugs (consumers). In this paper, we isolate the effects of consumer-level
substitution responses to quantify the scope for supply-side interventions to reduce overall drug
abuse and overdoses when close substitutes are available.
       While the prior literature has relied on time series evidence to estimate the effects of the
reformulation, we examine differential effects across states based on their pre-reformulation
prevalence of OxyContin misuse. We estimate that initial OxyContin misuse rates are predictive
of large and statistically significant increases in heroin mortality. This increase begins precisely
in the year following the reformulation. Moreover, more general nonmedical pain reliever use

                                                                                                    30
does not predict an increase in heroin mortality – the increase loads entirely on OxyContin
misuse specifically. Each additional percentage point of initial OxyContin misuse is associated
with a decrease in OxyContin misuse of 0.8 percentage points and 2.5 additional heroin deaths
per 100,000 (using our Table 2, Column 2 estimate). The implied instrumental variable (IV)
estimate is that each percentage point reduction of OxyContin misuse due to reformulation
increases heroin mortality by 3.1 deaths per 100,000. Overall, we find no evidence that
reformulation affected overdose rates overall (across all drugs), suggesting that consumer-side
substitution completely unraveled the benefits of the reformulation, at least in the three years
following reformulation. We also find suggestive evidence that consumers substituted to
synthetic opioids such as fentanyl.
       The findings from this study provide yet another example of how supply-side strategies
alone are inadequate for dealing with the drug problem, particularly when substitute drugs exist.
This is evident in the large substitution towards heroin (and towards other opioids) following the
reformulation. As summed up by Cicero and Ellis (2015), “as long as there is a demand for a
drug, that demand will be met in some way.” Treating underlying demand may prove to be the
more effective strategy for dealing with the current opioid epidemic, particularly because
substitutes are readily available.
       It is also important to recognize that opioid policies, such as the OxyContin
reformulation, will have different effects in the short and long run since the composition of new
and existing users will change over time. While the reformulation may lead to substitution
across drugs for existing users (mitigating the effectiveness in the short run), the policy to
reformulate the product may achieve long run effectiveness by deterring new abuse. This may be
particularly relevant for other countries whose opioid problems are now just emerging (Karanges
et al., 2016; van Amsterdam and van den Brink, 2015); supply-side policies, such as the
reformulation, may have higher effectiveness in these cases. Our study can only examine the
effects in the first three years, but we find sizable effects in the short-term and these effects only
grow over our time period.




                                                                                                    31
References
American Pain Society. “Guideline for the use of chronic opioid therapy in chronic noncancer
pain: evidence review.” American Academy of Pain Medicine Opioids Guidelines Panel (2009).
Chicago, IL.
Bartholow, M. “Top 200 Drugs of 2010.” Pharmacy Times. May 16, 2011.
Buchmueller, Thomas and Colleen Carey. "The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring
Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare." Mimeo (2016).

Butler, Stephen F., Theresa A. Cassidy, Howard Chilcoat, Ryan A. Black, Craig Landau, Simon
H. Budman, and Paul M. Coplan. "Abuse rates and routes of administration of reformulated
extended-release oxycodone: initial findings from a sentinel surveillance sample of individuals
assessed for substance abuse treatment." The Journal of Pain 14, no. 4 (2013): 351-358.
Cassidy, Theresa A., Pronabesh DasMahapatra, Ryan A. Black, Matthew S. Wieman, and
Stephen F. Butler. "Changes in prevalence of prescription opioid abuse after introduction of an
abuse-deterrent opioid formulation." Pain Medicine 15, no. 3 (2014): 440-451.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., and Peter Reuter. "How drug enforcement affects drug prices." Crime and
Justice 39, no. 1 (2010): 213-271.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Number and age-adjusted rates of drug-poisoning
deaths involving opioid analgesics and heroin: United States, 2000–2014.” National Vital
Statistics System, Mortality (2016) Available
at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/health_policy/AADR_drug_poisoning_involving_OA_Heroin
_US_2000-2014.pdf

Cicero, Theodore J., and Matthew S. Ellis. "Abuse-deterrent formulations and the prescription
opioid abuse epidemic in the United States: lessons learned from OxyContin." JAMA
Psychiatry 72, no. 5 (2015): 424-430.

Cicero TJ, Ellis MS, Surratt HL. “Effect of abuse-deterrent formulation of OxyContin.” New
England Journal of Medicine; 367, no. 2 (2012): 187–189.

Cicero, Theodore J., Matthew S. Ellis, Hilary L. Surratt, and Steven P. Kurtz. "Factors
influencing the selection of hydrocodone and oxycodone as primary opioids in substance abusers
seeking treatment in the United States." PAIN 154, no. 12 (2013): 2639-2648.

Cicero T, Inciardi J, Muñoz A. “Trends in abuse of Oxycontin and other opioid analgesics in the
United States: 2002-2004.” Journal of Pain. (2005); 6(10):662-72.
Coplan, Paul M., Hrishikesh Kale, Lauren Sandstrom, Craig Landau, and Howard D. Chilcoat.
"Changes in oxycodone and heroin exposures in the National Poison Data System after
introduction of extended‐release oxycodone with abuse‐deterrent
characteristics." Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety 22, no. 12 (2013): 1274-1282.


                                                                                                  32
Crost, Benjamin, and Santiago Guerrero. "The effect of alcohol availability on marijuana use:
evidence from the minimum legal drinking age." Journal of Health Economics 31, no. 1 (2012):
112-121.
Cunningham, Scott, and Keith Finlay. "Identifying demand responses to illegal drug supply
interdictions." Health Economics (2015).

Dart, Richard C., Hilary L. Surratt, Theodore J. Cicero, Mark W. Parrino, S. Geoff Severtson,
Becki Bucher-Bartelson, and Jody L. Green. "Trends in opioid analgesic abuse and mortality in
the United States." New England Journal of Medicine 372, no. 3 (2015): 241-248.
DiNardo, John, and Thomas Lemieux. "Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: the unintended
consequences of government regulation." Journal of Health Economics 20, no. 6 (2001): 991-
1010.
Dobkin, Carlos, Nicosia, Nancy, and Weinberg, Matthew. “Are supply-side drug control
efforts effective? Evaluating OTC regulations targeting methamphetamine
precursors.” Journal of Public Economics, 120 (2014): 48-61.
Dobkin, Carlos, and Nancy Nicosia. "The war on drugs: methamphetamine, public health, and
crime." The American Economic Review 99, no. 1 (2009): 324-349.
Florence, Curtis S., Chao Zhou, Feijun Luo, and Likang Xu. "The economic burden of
prescription opioid overdose, abuse, and dependence in the United States, 2013." Medical Care
54, no. 10 (2016): 901-906.

International Narcotics Control Board. “Report of the International Narcotics Control Board for
2008.” (2008): Available at https://www.incb.org/incb/en/publications/annual-reports/annual-
report-2008.html

Johnson, Hal, Leonard Paulozzi, Christina Porucznik, Karin Mack, and Blake Herter. "Decline in
drug overdose deaths after state policy changes—Florida, 2010–2012." MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 63, no. 26 (2014): 569-574.

Karanges, E.A., Blanch, B., Buckley, N.A. and Pearson, S.A.. Twenty‐five years of prescription
opioid use in Australia: a whole‐of‐population analysis using pharmaceutical claims. British
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology (2016).

Kilmer, Beau, Susan Everingham, Jonathan P. Caulkins, Greg Midgette, P. Reuter, R. L. Pacula,
R. Burns, B. Han, and R. Lundberg. "What America’s users spend on illicit drugs: 2000-2010."
Office of National Drug Control Policy (2014).

Kolodny, A., Courtwright, D., Hwang, C., Kreiner, P., Eadie, J., Clark, T., and G.C. Alexander.
"The Prescription Opioid and Heroin Crisis: A Public Health Approach to an Epidemic of
Addiction." Annual Review of Public Health. 36 (2015):559–74.




                                                                                              33
Larochelle M., Zhang F., Ross-Degnan D., Wharam J. “Rates of opioid dispensing and overdose
after introduction of abuse-deterrent extended-release oxycodone and withdrawal of
propoxyphene.” JAMA Intern Med; 175, no. 6 (2015):978-87.
Max, Mitchell B., Marilee Donovan, Christine A. Miaskowski, Sandra E. Ward, Debra Gordon,
Marilyn Bookbinder, Charles S. Cleeland et al. "Quality improvement guidelines for the
treatment of acute pain and cancer pain." JAMA 274, no. 23 (1995): 1874-1880.

McQuay, Henry. "Opioids in pain management." The Lancet 353, no. 9171 (1999): 2229-2232.
Model, Karyn E. "The effect of marijuana decriminalization on hospital emergency room drug
episodes: 1975–1978." Journal of the American Statistical Association 88, no. 423 (1993): 737-
747.

Pacula, Rosalie Liccardo. "Does increasing the beer tax reduce marijuana consumption?" Journal
of Health Economics 17, no. 5 (1998): 557-585.
Paulozzi, Leonard J. "Prescription drug overdoses: a review." Journal of Safety Research 43, no.
4 (2012): 283-289.
Paulozzi, Leonard J., Karin A. Mack, and Jason M. Hockenberry. "Vital signs: variation among
states in prescribing of opioid pain relievers and benzodiazepines—United States, 2012." MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 63, no. 26 (2014): 563-8.

Phillips, Donald M. "JCAHO pain management standards are unveiled." JAMA: The Journal of
the American Medical Association 284, no. 4 (2000): 428-429.

Pollack, Harold A., and Peter Reuter. "Does tougher enforcement make drugs more expensive?"
Addiction 109, no. 12 (2014): 1959-1966.

Powell, David, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, and Mireille Jacobson. Do Medical Marijuana Laws
Reduce Addictions and Deaths Related to Pain Killers? No. w21345. National Bureau of
Economic Research (2015).

Reuter, Peter, and Mark AR Kleiman. "Risks and prices: An economic analysis of drug
enforcement." Crime and Justice (1986): 289-340.

Rudd, R., Aleshire, N., Zibbell, J., and R.M. Gladden. "Increases in Drug and Opioid Overdose
Deaths — United States, 2000–2014." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). 64, no.
50 (2016); 1378-82.
Saffer, Henry, and Frank Chaloupka. "The demand for illicit drugs." Economic Inquiry 37, no. 3
(1999): 401-411.
Santos Silva, JMC, and Silvana Tenreyro. "The log of gravity." The Review of Economics and
Statistics 88, no. 4 (2006): 641-658



                                                                                              34
Sessler, Nelson E., Jerod M. Downing, Hrishikesh Kale, Howard D. Chilcoat, Todd F.
Baumgartner, and Paul M. Coplan. "Reductions in reported deaths following the introduction of
extended‐release oxycodone (OxyContin) with an abuse‐deterrent formulation."
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety 23, no. 12 (2014): 1238-1246.

Severtson, Stevan Geoffrey, Becki Bucher Bartelson, Jonathan M. Davis, Alvaro Munoz,
Michael F. Schneider, Howard Chilcoat, Paul M. Coplan, Hilary Surratt, and Richard C. Dart.
"Reduced abuse, therapeutic errors, and diversion following reformulation of extended-release
oxycodone in 2010." The Journal of Pain 14, no. 10 (2013): 1122-1130.

Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. "What are we weighting
for?" Journal of Human Resources 50, no. 2 (2015): 301-316.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. “Results from the 2014 National
Survey on Drug Use and Health: detailed tables” (2015). Available
at: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-
DetTabs2014.pdf
Surratt, Hilary L., Catherine O'Grady, Steven P. Kurtz, Yamilka Stivers, Theodore J. Cicero,
Richard C. Dart, and Minxing Chen. "Reductions in prescription opioid diversion following
recent legislative interventions in Florida." Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety 23, no. 3
(2014): 314-320.

U.S. Government Accountability Office. “OxyContin Abuse and Diversion and Efforts to
Address the Problem.” (2003): GAO-04-110.
Van Amsterdam, J and W van den Brink. “The Misuse of Prescription Opioids: A Threat for
Europe?” Current Drug Abuse Reviews 8 (2015): 3-14.
Warner, Margaret, H. Hedegaard, and L. H. Chen. "Trends in drug-poisoning deaths involving
opioid analgesics and heroin: United States, 1999-2012."NCHS Health E-Stat (2014).
WHO Expert Committee. "Cancer pain relief." World Health Organization, Geneva (1986).

Williams, Jenny, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Frank J. Chaloupka, and Henry Wechsler. "Alcohol
and marijuana use among college students: economic complements or substitutes?" Health
Economics 13, no. 9 (2004): 825-843.
Wolfers, Justin. "Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
results." The American Economic Review 96, no. 5 (2006): 1802-1820.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. "Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data." Cambridge, MA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2002).




                                                                                                35
Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Trends in Drug Overdose Deaths: Prescription Opioids and Heroin

                                                                                                 Monthly Overdose Deaths, 2009-11 -- Opioids
                                      Drug Overdose Deaths - Opioids




                                                                                  .55
                   6
  Deaths per 100,000 population
                            5




                                                                       Deaths per 100,000
                                                                                     .5
                   4




                                                                        .45
   2       3




                                                                                  .4
                                                                         20 m1
                                                                         20 m3
                                                                         20 m5
                                                                         20 m7

                                                                          09 9
                                                                         20 11
                                                                         20 m1
                                                                         20 m3
                                                                         20 m5
                                                                         20 m7

                                                                          10 9
                                                                         20 11
                                                                         20 m1
                                                                         20 m3
                                                                         20 m5
                                                                         20 m7

                                                                          11 9
                                                                               11
                   1




                                                                        20 9m




                                                                        20 m




                                                                        20 1m
                                                                             m




                                                                             m




                                                                             m
                                                                            09
                                                                            09
                                                                            09
                                                                            09




                                                                            10
                                                                            10
                                                                            10
                                                                            10
                                                                            10


                                                                            11
                                                                            11
                                                                            11
                                                                            11
                                                                            0




                                                                            1
                        99

                        00

                        01

                        02

                        03

                        04

                        05

                        06

                        07

                        08

                        09

                        10

                        11

                        12

                        13




                                                                         20
                     19

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20                                                                                             Year
                                                   Year



                                                                                                 Monthly Overdose Deaths, 2009-11 -- Heroin
                                      Drug Overdose Deaths - Heroin
                                                                                   .14
                                2.5
  Deaths per 100,000 population




                                                                                           .12
                                                                          Deaths per 100,000
                       2




                                                                                  .1
             1.5




                                                                        .08
    1




                                                                                    .06
                   .5




                                                                           20 m1
                                                                           20 m3
                                                                           20 m5
                                                                           20 m7

                                                                            09 9
                                                                           20 11
                                                                           20 m1
                                                                           20 m3
                                                                           20 m5
                                                                           20 m7

                                                                            10 9
                                                                           20 11
                                                                           20 m1
                                                                           20 m3
                                                                           20 m5
                                                                           20 m7

                                                                            11 9
                                                                                 11
                                                                          20 9m




                                                                          20 0m




                                                                          20 1m
                                                                               m




                                                                               m




                                                                               m
                                                                              09
                                                                              09
                                                                              09
                                                                              09




                                                                              10
                                                                              10
                                                                              10
                                                                              10




                                                                              11
                                                                              11
                                                                              11
                                                                              11
                                                                              0




                                                                              1




                                                                              1
                        99

                        00

                        01

                        02

                        03

                        04

                        05

                        06

                        07

                        08

                        09

                        10

                        11

                        12

                        13




                                                                           20
                     19

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20

                     20




                                                   Year                                                              Year




Notes: Deaths per 100,000 population from the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS). Opioid overdose deaths
are coded using ICD-10 codes for underlying cause of death X40–X44, X60–X64, X85, and Y10–Y14 with a
multiple cause code of T40.2 for natural and semisynthetic opioids (e.g., oxycodone and hydrocodone), T40.3 for
methadone, and T40.4 for synthetic opioids excluding methadone (e.g., fentanyl and tramadol). Heroin deaths are
coded using T40.1 and a drug poisoning underlying cause of death.




                                                                                                                                               36
Figure 2: Trends in Prescription Opioid Use


                                                         Opioid Utilization


                  .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                                              8
                 Rate of OxyContin Misuse (%)




                                                                                                   Oxycodone Doses Per Capita
                                                                                                    2   3   4   5    6   7
                                0




                                                                                                   1
                                    00

                                    01

                                    02

                                    03

                                    04

                                    05

                                    06

                                    07

                                    08

                                    09

                                    10

                                    11

                                    12
                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20

                                 20
                                                                 Year

                                                Rate of OxyContin Misuse
                                                Oxycodone (Morphine-Equivalent) Doses per Capita



Notes: Rate of OxyContin misuse is the percentage of the population ages 12+ “using OxyContin for nonmedical
use” in the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). The NSDUH pools consecutive years (e.g., 2004 is
2004 and 2005). Oxycodone doses are from the DEA’s Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders System
(ARCOS) and have been converted into morphine-equivalent doses per capita. Oxycodone is the primary ingredient
in OxyContin and is also contained in other opioid pain relievers.




                                                                                                                                  37
Figure 3: Geographic Variation in Rate of OxyContin Misuse, 2004-2008

Panel A: States with highest and lowest rates of OxyContin misuse


Top 10 Rates of OxyContin Misuse (%)              Bottom 10 Rates of OxyContin Misuse (%)
Rhode Island                               1.15   Washington D.C.                       0.47
West Virginia                              1.13   Minnesota                             0.47
Utah                                       1.04   Georgia                               0.39
Wisconsin                                  0.98   Nebraska                              0.39
Massachusetts                              0.97   Mississippi                           0.37
Kentucky                                   0.97   California                            0.30
Montana                                    0.96   Texas                                 0.29
Indiana                                    0.96   Iowa                                  0.27
Nevada                                     0.95   South Dakota                          0.26
Alaska                                     0.94   Illinois                              0.26

Panel B: State variation in Rate of OxyContin Misuse




                                                                                               38
Figure 4: Relationship between Pre-Reformulation Rate of OxyContin Misuse and Change
Between 2008-2012




                                                                  .2
                       Change in Rate of OxyContin Misuse 2008-2012
                     -.6        -.4         -.2         0




                                                                       Quartile 1      Quartile 2     Quartile 3      Quartile 4
                                                                              Pre-Reformulation Rate of OxyContin Misuse



Notes: Quartiles represent states with the highest and lowest pre-reformulation rates of OxyContin misuse (Quartile
4 includes the 25% of states with the highest pre-reformulation rates of OxyContin misuse). The change in the rate
of OxyContin misuse is weighted by state population.




                                                                                                                                   39
Figure 5: Relationship Between Initial OxyContin Misuse and Changes in OxyContin
Misuse – Event Study Specification

                                                     Nonmedical OxyContin Use




                                    0
                         Estimated Coefficient
                          -1           -.5
                                    20 -1.5
                                      04




                                                    06




                                                                08




                                                                            10




                                                                                        12
                                                 20




                                                             20




                                                                         20




                                                                                     20
                                                               Year



Notes: Each year on the x-axis refers to that year and the following year since each NSDUH wave includes two
years. Consequently, we should expect a partial effect in 2010 (which includes post-reformulation year 2011) and a
full year effect for 2012 (and 2013). The graph reports point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (which are
adjusted for within-state clustering).




                                                                                                                40
Figure 6: Effect of OxyContin Reformulation on Overdose Deaths– Baseline Event Study
Specification

Panel A: Opioid and Heroin Mortality

                                                                                      Heroin Deaths
                                    Opioid Deaths




                                                                         4
                   5




                                                            Estimated Coefficient
       Estimated Coefficient




                                                                            2
                       0




                                                              0
         -5




                                                                         -2
                         -10




                                                                              99

                                                                              00

                                                                              01

                                                                              02

                                                                              03

                                                                              04

                                                                              05

                                                                              06

                                                                              07

                                                                              08

                                                                              09

                                                                              10

                                                                              11

                                                                              12

                                                                              13
                      99

                      00

                      01

                      02

                      03

                      04

                      05

                      06

                      07

                      08

                      09

                      10

                      11

                      12

                      13




                                                                           19

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20

                                                                           20
                   19

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20

                   20


                                         Year                                              Year




Panel B: Net Impact on Mortality

                               Heroin and Opioid Deaths
                                                                                    Overdose Deaths
              10




                                                                      10
                        5
    Estimated Coefficient




                                                                                5
                                                          Estimated Coefficient
                                                                     0
             0




                                                           -5
  -5




                                                                      -10
              19 -10
                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06

                 07

                 08

                 09

                 10

                 11

                 12

                 13




                                                                          99

                                                                          00

                                                                          01

                                                                          02

                                                                          03

                                                                          04

                                                                          05

                                                                          06

                                                                          07

                                                                          08

                                                                          09

                                                                          10

                                                                          11

                                                                          12

                                                                          13
              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20




                                                                       19

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20

                                                                       20
                                         Year                                            Year




Notes: Each graph includes point estimates from event study (normalized to 0 in 2009) and 95% confidence
intervals which are adjusted for within-state clustering.




                                                                                                           41
Figure 7: Event Study Results for Heroin Deaths using Alternative Measures of the “Bite”
of OxyContin Reformulation

Panel A: OxyContin Misuse/Pain Reliever Misuse (NSDUH)




Panel B: Oxycodone/(Oxycodone+Hydrocodone) (ARCOS)




Panel C: Oxycodone/Hydrocodone (ARCOS)




Notes: Each graph includes point estimates from event study (normalized to 0 in 2009) and 95% confidence
intervals which are adjusted for within-state clustering.




                                                                                                           42
Figure 8 – Alternative Explanations: Event Study Results for Heroin Prices and Economic
Conditions

Panel A: Heroin Prices

                                                              Heroin Prices
               1000
  Estimated Coefficient
    0            500
               20 -500
                 00

                                01

                                        02

                                                03

                                                        04

                                                                05

                                                                        06

                                                                                07

                                                                                        08

                                                                                                09

                                                                                                        10

                                                                                                                11

                                                                                                                        12
                             20

                                     20

                                             20

                                                     20

                                                             20

                                                                     20

                                                                             20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                             20

                                                                       Year                                          20



Panel B: Unemployment Rate

                                                     log(Unemployment Rate)
               .2
     Estimated Coefficient
  -.4        -.2     -.60
                  99

                  00

                  01

                  02

                  03

                  04

                  05

                  06

                  07

                  08

                  09

                  10

                  11

                  12

                  13
               19

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20




                                                                       Year




                                                                                                                             43
Table 1: Summary Statistics, 2000-2009

                                                States with Low    States with High
                                                  OxyContin           OxyContin
Variable (Mean)                 All States       Misuse Rate         Misuse Rate                 Source
Outcomes
Oxycontin Misuse Rate (%)         0.567              0.447               0.842        NSDUH, 2004-2008
Oxycodone (Morphine-Equivalent)
Doses per Capita                  3.984              3.236               5.702        ARCOS, 2000-2009
Deaths per 100,000:
Opioids                           3.747              3.001               5.460        Vital Statistics, 2000-2009
Heroin                            0.803              0.787               0.839        Vital Statistics, 2000-2009
All Drug Overdoses               10.832              9.907               12.958       Vital Statistics, 2000-2009
Demographics Characteristics
Population                      5,532,597           7,888,832          3,266,986      Census, 2000
Age (%):
0-17                              25.65              25.98               24.88        Census, 2000
18-64                             61.92              62.08               61.55        Census, 2000
65+                               12.43              11.94               13.57        Census, 2000
Race (%):
White                             80.99               78.64              86.45        Census, 2000
Black                             12.69               14.41               8.70        Census, 2000
Other Race                         6.31                6.94               4.85        Census, 2000
Unemployment Rate (%)              4.01                4.12               3.76        BLS, 2000
Personal Income Per Capita      30,318.88           30,840.44          29,107.92      BEA, 2000
Poverty Rate (%)                  11.32               11.55              10.79        Census, 2000
Number of States                    51                  25                 26

Notes: Means are weighted by state population and pooled for 2000-2009 unless otherwise noted.




                                                                                                               44
Table 2: Relationship Between OxyContin Misuse and Changes in Heroin Death Rates

                        Outcome:                          Heroin Deaths per 100,000
                                                  (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)
         Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)     2.212** 2.537*** 3.466*** 1.254       1.732**
                                               (0.905) (0.897) (1.005) (0.773)       (0.761)
         Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                   -0.414**           -0.352***
                                                                  (0.199)            (0.137)
         Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):       1.060
         State-Varying Covariates                No       Yes       Yes     Yes        Yes
         Estimator                               OLS     OLS       OLS Poisson Poisson

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all specifications. Each model also
includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well as a post-2011 indicator
interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear trend interacted with
initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of the initial
OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. Years 2008-2013 are used.




                                                                                                                      45
Table 3: Relationship Between OxyContin Misuse and Changes in Opioid Death Rates

                    Outcome:                                      Overdose Deaths per 100,000
                                            (1)                     (2)        (3)         (4)                (5)
    A. Total Opioid Deaths per 100,000 (T40.2-T40.4)
    Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)     -1.135     -0.815                       0.019         0.007       0.051
                                          (1.712)    (1.624)                     (1.922)       (0.344)     (0.403)
    Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                                         -0.375                    -0.036
                                                                                 (0.403)                   (0.072)
    Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):                 5.192
    B. Natural Opioid Deaths per 100,000 (T40.2)
    Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)     -2.699                  -2.554          -2.287       -0.751*      -0.774
                                          (1.682)                 (1.650)        (1.901)       (0.447)     (0.489)
    Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                                         -0.116                    0.030
                                                                                 (0.373)                   (0.094)
    Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):                 3.233

    C. Natural Opioid-Only Deaths per 100,000 (T40.2, but not also T40.3 or T40.4)
    Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)     -2.505*   -2.387*       -2.202    -0.876*                        -0.915*
                                          (1.448)   (1.431)      (1.664)    (0.480)                        (0.519)
    Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                         -0.079                                    0.044
                                                                 (0.327)                                   (0.096)
    Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):        2.73
    State-Varying Covariates                 No       Yes          Yes        Yes                           Yes
    Estimator                              OLS        OLS          OLS      Poisson                        Poisson

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all specifications. Each model also
includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well as a post-2011 indicator
interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear trend interacted with
initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of the initial
OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. Years 2008-2013 are used.




                                                                                                                      46
Table 4: OxyContin Misuse and Changes in Synthetic Opioid Death Rates

                       Outcome:                       Overdose Deaths per 100,000
                                                (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)                          (5)
        A. Synthetic Opioid Deaths per 100,000 (T40.4)
        Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)      0.454   0.492   0.868** 1.237***                       1.494***
                                              (0.360) (0.387)   (0.423)    (0.366)                     (0.373)
        Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                    -0.169                               -0.169**
                                                                (0.105)                                (0.071)
        Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):       0.887

        B. Synthetic Opioid-Only Deaths per 100,000 (T40.4, but not also T40.2 or T40.3)
        Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)      0.228   0.257   0.528** 1.196*** 1.444***
                                              (0.237) (0.257)   (0.261)    (0.334) (0.330)
        Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                   -0.123*            -0.166***
                                                                (0.070)             (0.062)
        Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):       0.631
        State-Varying Covariates                No      Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
        Estimator                              OLS     OLS       OLS       Poisson Poisson

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all specifications. Each model also
includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well as a post-2011 indicator
interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear trend interacted with
initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of the initial
OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. Years 2008-2013 are used.




                                                                                                                      47
Table 5: Relationship Between OxyContin Misuse and Changes in Overall Overdose Death
Rates

                Outcome:                                      Overdose Deaths per 100,000
                                               (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)                   (5)
A. Opioid and Heroin Deaths
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)             1.077       1.722         3.485         0.159           0.304
                                             (2.172)     (2.020)       (2.419)       (0.364)         (0.444)
Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                                   -0.789                        -0.116
                                                                       (0.538)                       (0.084)
Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):              6.252
B. Total Overdose Deaths (All Causes)
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)      0.205              0.930         2.822         0.017           0.087
                                      (2.650)            (2.764)       (3.446)       (0.274)         (0.336)
Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)                                   -0.839                        -0.072
                                                                       (0.644)                       (0.058)
Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09):             13.097
State-Varying Covariates                       No          Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
Estimator                                     OLS          OLS          OLS          Poisson         Poisson

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects and year fixed effects included in all specifications. Each model also
includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well as a post-2011 indicator
interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear trend interacted with
initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of the initial
OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. Years 2008-2013 are used.




                                                                                                                      48
Table 6: Alternative Explanations for Increase in Heroin Deaths


             Outcome:                                     Heroin Deaths per 100,000
                                    Main Result Add PDMP Must Access No FL No Pill Mill States West Only
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)    2.537***    2.890**   2.101**    2.563***      2.062**    3.114***
                                      (0.897)     (0.923)   (0.911)     (0.951)     (0.970)     (0.685)
Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09)        1.060       1.060     1.060       1.091       1.101       1.187
Number of Observations                  306         306       300         300         288          78

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, and additional covariates are included in all
specifications. Each model also includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well
as a post-2011 indicator interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear
trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of
the initial OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. "No Pill Mill States" means that Florida,
Kentucky, and West Virginia are excluded. "West Only" means that only states in the West Census Region are
included in the sample.




                                                                                                                  49
Appendix Tables and Figures – FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

Appendix Figure A.1: Alternative Measures of OxyContin Misuse Rate

Panel A: Relationship between 2004-2008 OxyContin Misuse and 2004 OxyContin Misuse

                                                         Correlation=0.721



                                          .015
                         2004 Rate of OxyContin Misuse
                              .005        0 .01




                                                                      .002                     .004           .006          .008             .01     .012
                                                                                                       Pre-2010 Rate of OxyContin Misuse

                                                                                                       States             Regression Line



Panel B: Relationship between 2004-2008 OxyContin Misuse and 2008 OxyContin Misuse

                                                         Correlation=0.768
                                                            .015
                              2008 Rate of OxyContin Misuse
                                  .005         .010




                                                                              .002             .004           .006          .008            .01     .012
                                                                                                       Pre-2010 Rate of OxyContin Misuse

                                                                                                        States           Regression Line



Panel C: Relationship between 2004-2008 OxyContin Misuse and 2004-2008 Oxycodone Doses

                                                         Correlation=0.507
                                         Pre-2010 Oxycodone Morphine Equivalent Doses
                                              2       4      6        8        10




                                                                                        .002    .004          .006          .008            .01    .012
                                                                                                       Pre-2010 Rate of OxyContin Misuse

                                                                                                        States           Regression Line




                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                      Estimated Coefficient                                                                       Estimated Coefficient                                                                   Estimated Coefficient
                                                                                                                       19      -2   -1         0          1       2                                           19           -4         -2            0         2                                         19      -4   -3       -2     -1        0   1
                                                                                                                          99                                                                                     99                                                                                        99
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                          00                                                                                     00                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                          01                                                                                     01                                                                                        01
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                          02                                                                                     02                                                                                        02
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                          03                                                                                                                                                                               03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 03
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          04                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 04                                                                                        04
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          05                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 05                                                                                        05
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          06                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 06                                                                                        06




                                                                                                                Year
                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Year
                                                                                                                          07                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07                                                                                        07
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          08                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Opioid Deaths




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 08                                                                                        08
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          09                                                                                  20                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Natural Opioid Deaths
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 09                                                                                        09




                                                                                                                                                                           Heroin Plus Opioid Deaths
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          10                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                          11                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                        11                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                          12                                                                                  20                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                        12                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                          13                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13                                                                                        13


                                                                                                                                      Estimated Coefficient
                                                                                                                               -2   -1         0          1   2




     intervals which are adjusted for within-state clustering.
                                                                                                                       19                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficient
                                                                                                                          99                                                                                                                                                                                              Estimated Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                              19      -2        -1        0          1    2                                                     -4         -2             0            2
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                        99                                                                                     19
                                                                                                                          00                                                                                                                                                                               99




51
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                        00                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          01                                                                                                                                                                               00
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          02                                                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 02                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          03                                                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          04                                                                                     03                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           03
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix Figure A.2: Poisson Event Study Specification




                                                                                                                          05                                                                                     04                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           04
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          06                                                                                     05                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           05




                                                                                                                Year
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          07                                                                                     06                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           06

                                                                                                                                                                                                       Year
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Year




                                                                                                                          08                                                                                     07                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                  Overdose Deaths
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           07
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                          09                                                                                     08                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Heroin Deaths




                                                                                                                       20                                                                                                                                                                                  08
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                          10                                                                                     09                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Synthetic Opioid Deaths




                                                                                                                       20                                                                                                                                                                                  09
                                                                                                                          11                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                          12                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                       20                                                                                                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                                          13                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                              20                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           13




     Notes: Each graph includes point estimates from event study (normalized to 0 in 2009) and 95% confidence
Appendix Figure A.3: Baseline Event Study Specification for Different Types of Opioid
Deaths

                           Natural Opioid Deaths                                                         Natural Opioid-Only Deaths
              5




                                                                                   5
  Estimated Coefficient




                                                                        Estimated Coefficient
                  0




                                                                                  0
   -5




                                                                                   -5
                    -10
                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06

                 07

                 08

                 09

                 10

                 11

                 12

                 13




                                                                                       99

                                                                                       00

                                                                                       01

                                                                                       02

                                                                                       03

                                                                                       04

                                                                                       05

                                                                                       06

                                                                                       07

                                                                                       08

                                                                                       09

                                                                                       10

                                                                                       11

                                                                                       12

                                                                                       13
              19

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20




                                                                                    19

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20

                                                                                    20
                                     Year                                                                               Year




                          Synthetic Opioid Deaths
                                                                1
                                                                                                     Synthetic Opioid-Only Deaths
             1




                                                     Estimated Coefficient
  Estimated Coefficient




                                                                      0
     -1           0




                                                       -1
             -2




                                                                -2
                                                                    99

                                                                    00

                                                                    01

                                                                    02

                                                                    03

                                                                    04

                                                                    05

                                                                    06

                                                                    07

                                                                    08

                                                                    09

                                                                    10

                                                                    11

                                                                    12

                                                                    13
                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06

                 07

                 08

                 09

                 10

                 11

                 12

                 13




                                                                 19

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20

                                                                 20
              19

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20




                                   Year                                                                          Year




Notes: In the top figures, the left figure includes all drug overdoses involving T40.2 and the right figure uses the
same outcome but excludes overdoses that also involve T40.3 or T40.4. In the bottom figures, the left figure
includes all drug overdoses involving T40.4 and the right figure uses the same outcome but excludes T40.2 or
T40.3.




                                                                                                52
Appendix Figure A.4 – Instrumental Variables Event Study Specification for Heroin
Deaths
Panel A: Effects of Initial OxyContin Misuse

                                          Heroin Deaths
             6        4
  Estimated Coefficient
  0        2 -2
                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06

                 07

                 08

                 09

                 10

                 11

                 12

                 13
              19

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

                                               Year




Panel B: Jointly Estimating Effects of Initial OxyContin and Pain Reliever Misuse



                          Heroin Deaths: Coefficients on OxyContin Misuse                           Heroin Deaths: Coefficients on Pain Reliever Misuse
             10




                                                                                       1
  Estimated Coefficient




                                                                            Estimated Coefficient
                   5




                                                                                           0
    0




                                                                             -1        -2
             -5




                                                                                           99

                                                                                           00

                                                                                           01

                                                                                           02

                                                                                           03

                                                                                           04

                                                                                           05

                                                                                           06

                                                                                           07

                                                                                           08

                                                                                           09

                                                                                           10

                                                                                           11

                                                                                           12

                                                                                           13
                 99

                 00

                 01

                 02

                 03

                 04

                 05

                 06

                 07

                 08

                 09

                 10

                 11

                 12

                 13




                                                                                        19

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                        20
              19

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20

              20




                                               Year                                                                        Year




Notes: The graph on the left shows the estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the 2008 nonmedical OxyContin
misuse variable for each sample. The graph on the right shows the estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the
2008 nonmedical pain reliever misuse variable for each sample. The estimates in both figures are jointly estimated.
The specification uses the 2004 nonmedical OxyContin misuse rates and 2004 nonmedical pain reliever misuse rates
interacted with year indicators as instruments.




                                                                                         53
Appendix Figure A.5: Placebo Tests – Effect of Reformulation on Other Types of Drug
Overdoses
Panel A: Cocaine Overdoses

                                           Cocaine Deaths
              2         1
    Estimated Coefficient
  -1         0-2
                  99

                  00

                  01

                  02

                  03

                  04

                  05

                  06

                  07

                  08

                  09

                  10

                  11

                  12

                  13
               19

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20
                                                 Year



Panel B: All Drug Overdoses, Excluding Heroin and Opioids

                            Overdose Deaths (Excluding Heroin and Opioids)
              5
  Estimated Coefficient
           0  -5
                  99

                  00

                  01

                  02

                  03

                  04

                  05

                  06

                  07

                  08

                  09

                  10

                  11

                  12

                  13
               19

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20

               20




                                                 Year




                                                             54
Appendix Table A1: Relationship between Legal Opioid Supply (ARCOS) and Pain
Reliever Misuse Rates (NSDUH)

                            OxyContin misuse                Other Pain Reliever misuse
                                  (1)                                  (2)
  Per Capita oxycodone MED     0.071***                               0.025
                                (0.020)                              (0.078)
 Per Capita hydrocodone MED      0.026                              0.580***
                                (0.025)                              (0.143)
               N                   51                                   51
Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors shown
in parentheses. MED = morphine equivalent doses. Results are from cross-sectional regressions. All variables are
constructed by averaging over 2004-2009 data.




                                                       55
Appendix Table A2: Robustness Tests for Baseline Estimates for Opioid and Heroin
Deaths
Panel A: Heroin Deaths


           Outcome:                                            Heroin Deaths per 100,000
                                     (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)     (8)
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect) 2.537*** 2.858** 3.674*** 1.876** 2.099** 2.412*** 1.354** 2.692***
                                   (0.897)   (1.374)   (1.180)    (0.768)     (0.938)    (0.745) (0.690) (0.920)
State Linear Trends                  No        No        No         Yes         No         No      No      No
Weighted                             Yes       Yes       No         Yes         Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes
Years                             2008-2013 No 2010 2008-2013 2008-2013 1999-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013
Initial Abuse Measure             2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008       2004    2008 2004-2008
Age-Adjusted                         No        No        No          No         No         No      No      Yes

Panel B: Opioid Deaths

           Outcome:                                           Opioid Deaths per 100,000
                                    (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)     (8)
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect) -0.815      3.65     0.956      -0.910    -2.191**     0.835  -1.244  -0.815
                                  (1.624)   (4.925)   (1.854)     (1.621)    (0.859)    (1.561) (1.117) (1.686)
State Linear Trends                 No         No       No          Yes        No         No      No      No
Weighted                            Yes       Yes       No          Yes        Yes        Yes     Yes     Yes
Years                            2008-2013 No 2010 2008-2013 2008-2013 1999-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013
Initial Abuse Measure            2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008 2004-2008       2004    2008 2004-2008
Age-Adjusted                        No         No       No          No         No         No      No      Yes

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, and additional covariates are included in all
specifications. Each model also includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well
as a post-2011 indicator interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear
trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of
the initial OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population unless noted otherwise. “Age Adjusted”
uses an age-adjusted version of the outcome variable by weighting age-specific mortality rates, holding the weights
constant across states and time.




                                                         56
Appendix Table A3: IV Estimates using Alternative Measures of OxyContin Misuse

                                              Heroin             Opioids
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)      4.077*** 5.606**      1.44       2.989
                                        (1.392)   (2.369)  (2.601)     (3.966)
Initial Pain Reliever (3 Year Effect)            -1.366**              -1.374
                                                  (0.655)              (0.976)
Years                                 2008-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013 2008-2013
Initial Abuse Measure                    2008       2008    2008        2008
Estimator                                 IV         IV       IV         IV
Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, and additional covariates are included in all
specifications. Each model also includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well
as a post-2011 indicator interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear
trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of
the initial OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. IV estimation is used in which the
instruments are the same variables using the 2004 measures of initial nonmedical use.




                                                         57
Appendix Table A4: Alternative Explanations: Opioid Deaths

            Outcome:                                 Opioid Deaths per 100,000
                                  Main Result Add PDMP Must Access No FL No Pill Mill States West Only
Initial OxyContin (3 Year Effect)   -0.815      -0.659        -0.836     -0.18   1.204         0.661
                                   (1.624)      (1.595)      (1.618)    (1.584) (1.412)       (2.314)
Mean of Dep. Variable (2008-09)     5.192       5.192         5.192      5.012  4.895         6.262
Number of Observations               306          306          300        300    288             78

Notes: *10% Significance, **5% Significance, ***1% Significance. Standard errors in parentheses adjusted for
clustering at the state-level. State fixed effects, year fixed effects, and additional covariates are included in all
specifications. Each model also includes a linear trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse as well
as a post-2011 indicator interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse. Finally, a separate post-2011 linear
trend interacted with initial nonmedical OxyContin misuse is also included. We report the 3 year post-2011 effect of
the initial OxyContin variable. Regressions are weighted by population. "No Pill Mill States" means that Florida,
Kentucky, and West Virginia are excluded. "West Only" means that only states in the West Census Region are
included in the sample.




                                                         58
