NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACRO-ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT IN AN ELECTRONIC CREDIT/FINANCIAL
SYSTEM
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 23032
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23032

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

The author is indebted to the Institute for New Economic Thinking for financial support, and to
Martin Guzman and Andrew Kosenko, for comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Macro-economic Management in an Electronic Credit/Financial System
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 23032
January 2017
JEL No. E42,E44,E51,E52,F32,F38
ABSTRACT
Modern technology provides the basis of an efficient low-cost electronic payments as an
alternative to the current system where fiat money is the medium of exchange. This paper
explores possible macro-economic implication, showing how such a financial system might
enhance government’s ability to control the level of aggregate demand. As in other arenas, in
second-best situations with uncertainty, systems where there is an attempt to directly control
quantities directly may perform better (e.g. have less volatility) than those using prices and other
indirect control mechanisms. The paper identifies conditions under which in a system of
electronic money, macroeconomic variability is lower when the level and direction of credit
creation is directly controlled, through appropriately designed credit auctions, than in a system of
indirect control of, say, investment via the interest rate. This is especially important since much
macro-economic instability is associated with instability in credit creation and in the fraction
allocated to newly produced goods and services. The paper also explains how, in an open
economy, in a system of electronic money, credit auctions combined with trade chits might
enable the control of net exports, again enhancing macro-stability. Finally, we explain how under
a system of electronic money, the rents that are currently associated with credit creation and that
arise from bank franchises—that constitute a form of appropriation of the returns from trust in the
government and its ability and willingness to bail-out banks in the event of a crisis or bank run—
could be appropriated by the government to a greater degree than at present.

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

Macro-economic Management in an Electronic Credit/Financial System
Joseph E. Stiglitz1
There has been a long tradition in economics, dating at least back to Minsky (Minsky,
1992) tracing macro-instability to excessive volatility in credit creation and to volatility in
the fraction of credit going to the purchase of pre-existing assets (like land) rather than
to the purchase of newly produced goods and services (Stiglitz, 2016c).2 In open
economies, volatile cross-border flows of short-term capital have led to volatility in
exchange rates and trade flows, again leading to macro-economic volatility. 
Part of the problem is that policymakers have been relying on the use of price variables
(interest rates) to control macro-economic aggregates (investment, consumption, net
exports), in a world in which the relationship between those price variables and the
variables of interest is uncertain and variable. Monetary authorities previously
attempted to control another quantity variable (the quantity of money), which too was
only weakly related to the variables of interest.3
Modern technology provides the basis of a new low-cost “medium of exchange”-- an
electronic payments system. This paper explores a natural question that then arises:
how might such a change in our monetary system affect macro-economic management.
This paper describes new opportunities that a fully electronic system might provide for
enhanced macro-stability through credit auctions and trade chits.4 The remainder of
1

University Professor, Columbia University. The author is indebted to the Institute for New
Economic Thinking for financial support, and to Martin Guzman and Andrew Kosenko, for
comments and suggestions. This paper represents an extension of ideas first presented in
Stiglitz (2016a and 2016b).
2

Similarly, there is an extensive literature explaining some of the volatility in credit creation,
focusing, for instance, on banks as risk-averse firms, affected by shocks to their balance sheets
and risk perceptions, which induce variations in their ability and willingness to supply credit.
See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003) and Stiglitz 2016b.
3

See, for instance, Stiglitz (2016c).

4

As has happened in many areas of business practices, computerization and electronic
technology forces an often long overdue rethinking of practices. While credit auctions and trade
chits could have been introduced even without e-money, the enhanced ability to monitor flows
2

this introduction describes the basic ingredients of the system, while Part I focuses on
its credit creation mechanism in a closed economy. Part II then extends the analysis to
an open economy.
Creating a 21st-Century Financial Transactions System
Money serves multiple purposes. One of them is as a medium of exchange. The world
has several times made a change in the prevailing medium of exchange. Gold was once
used as a medium of exchange; then, at least in the United States, there was a move to
the bimetallic standard, where gold and silver were used, and finally we moved to paper
(or “fiat”) money.
For years, it is has been recognized that a move away from currency to electronic money
might enhance the efficiency of the payments mechanism. Our payments mechanism
has already changed dramatically. We have gone a long way towards an electronic
payments mechanism.5 Electronic money is more convenient for people on both sides of
the transaction, which is why it has become the dominant form of payment. It saves the
costs of printing money, which has increased as the sophistication of counterfeiters has
increased. Electronic money has a further advantage, especially in countries where small
businesses predominate—it significantly curtails the extent of tax avoidance.6
This paper, though, focuses on the question of whether, in such a system, the ability of
government to control the level of aggregate demand is enhanced, through enabling

and to organize markets that e-money and digitalization provides increases the potential gains
that might arise from these institutional innovations.
5

One of the reasons that there has not been more use of the electronics payments has to do
with market power. Electronic transfers are extraordinarily cheap, but banks and credit card
companies charge prices for the service that are considerably in excess of marginal or even
average costs. Regulators, legislatures, and courts in antitrust actions have begun intervening to
curtail the fees and certain other abusive practices.
6

Cyber security is one of the key problems faced in modern electronic payments mechanisms.
The advantages of electronic transactions appear, nonetheless, to be significant, explaining why
even with monopoly pricing, there has been a shift toward this system.

3

institutional innovations that might affect its ability to control the magnitude and
direction of credit creation and the magnitude and volatility of the trade deficit.
The key move in going from a current mostly electronic payments system to a fully
electronic payments system is the abolition of paper money. Today, an individual with
money in his bank system “withdraws” money from his bank account by converting it
into cash, into paper money. But what happens if there is no paper money? With a fully
electronic monetary system, the money inside a country’s banking system is effectively
“locked in.” It simply can’t be taken out of the country’s banking system. 7 But anybody
can transfer the money in his bank account to that of anyone else. Thus everybody has,
in effect, full use of his money.
Most individuals today have accounts; only the very poor are “unbanked,” and in recent
years governments and NGOs, like the Gates Foundation, have made great efforts to
bank the unbanked. In most countries, government pension payments are now
transferred through bank accounts, partly to reduce the risk of stolen checks, partly to
reduce the charges that are sometimes imposed by check-cashing services. Thus,
implementing a fully electronic banking system today is clearly manageable.8
Part I: E-money in a Closed Economy
To understand better the possible advantages of e-money, we have to review the
current system of credit creation (section 1) and the limits of monetary policy under the
current payments mechanism (section 2). Finally, section 3 describes the basics of
credit creation in an economy with e-money, while section 4 elaborates on several
critical details.
1. Fiat money and fractional banking
7

The major exception, for the purchase of goods and services from abroad, is discussed in Part
II.
8

The reluctance of merchants to take debit or credit cards for small purchases arises from the
high fees charged, related to the market power of the credit and debit card companies, not to
high real costs.

4

The invention of money, enabling more efficient exchange than simple barter, is viewed
as one of the great advances of mankind.9 Over the centuries, the medium of exchange
evolved. For long periods, gold (including gold coins) was the main medium of
exchange. A big advantage of the use of fiat money was that its supply did not seem
quite as capricious as that of gold: When gold was used as the medium of exchange,
when there was a large discovery of gold—or when the gold supply increased as Spain
conquered the new world—there would be inflation, as the price of gold would rise
relative to other goods; if there were few gold discoveries, then there would be
deflation. Both caused problems. Deflation, for instance, when it was unanticipated,
would redistribute income from debtors to creditors. The resulting inequality as well as
balance sheet effects on firms, can depress aggregate demand.10
While the modern financial system based on fiat money doesn’t suffer from the vagaries
of gold discoveries, it has sometimes suffered from something else: volatility in the
creation of money and credit by the banking system, giving rise to the booms and busts
that have characterized the capitalist system. Minsky put the fluctuations in credit
creation at the center of his theory of macro-economic fluctuations, and a large body of
other work, earlier, contemporaneous, and later, has similarly done so.11
The bases of bank credit creation
The traditional view of banking was based on a primitive agriculture economy. Farmers
with excess seed—with harvests greater than they wanted to consume or plant the next

9

See Weatherford (1997) and Ferguson (2008).

10

See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993b). These effects can arise just from inflation being less than
was anticipated. Recent attention on the risk of deflation in Europe and Japan highlights the
widespread recognition of the adverse effects of deflation and disinflation. America’s election
of 1896 was fought on the issue of the money supply. The deflation of the period imposed
significant hardships on farmers, and debtors wanted to increase the money supply by moving
from gold alone to gold and silver, a bimetallic standard.
11

See, e.g. Minsky (1992), Kalecki (1939). Beginning in the mid-1980s, this became a major
focus of my own research with Bruce Greenwald. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987, 1988a, 1988b,
1990, 1991, 1993a, 2003).

5

season—could bring the seed to the bank, which would lend, at interest, the seed to
some farmer who wanted more seed than he had, either for consumption (say, because
he had a bad harvest that year) or planting. The bank had to have seed deposits in order
to lend. In this view, the bank was intermediating between savers, those who had more
seed than they wanted, and borrowers, those who wanted to consume or invest more
than they had.
The evolution of the banking system from the primitive corn economy toward its
modern form is interesting and informative. Early banks were really based more on gold
deposits than on corn deposits. Those with more gold than they wanted to spend put it
in the bank, and the bank lent it out to others. Soon, banks discovered that they could
create pieces of paper, claims on gold, that others would accept, and that they could
produce more of such pieces of paper than they had gold, in the knowledge that not all
holders of these pieces of paper would ask for their money simultaneously. As it gave
gold to some who asked for it, it would receive gold from others.
Occasionally, there would be a panic when holders of these pieces of paper worried
whether the bank could fulfill its promises, and, of course, when they panicked and all
went to the bank to demand their gold, there was not enough to satisfy their demands.
The banks would go bankrupt, and the economy could be thrown into a depression.
These problems became worse with the move to fiat money. Banks effectively increase
the supply of money by increasing the supply of credit. From the perspective of any
individual bank, deposits and loans simply represent two sides of the balance sheet.
They can lend a fraction of whatever money is deposited in their bank. But that
“money,” when spent, becomes a deposit in another bank, which in turn can lend a
fraction of that amount. The result of this fractional banking system is that there is a
money multiplier.

6

Deposit insurance was invented to prevent bank panics: the government explicitly stood
behind the banks’ promises.12 This gave greater faith that the promises would be
honored (so long as there was faith in the government), and this in turn reduced the
likelihood of a panic. But if the government was to provide these guarantees, this
insurance, it had to make sure that the bank was acting responsibly—for example,
lending out money to people who could actually pay it back, not lending to the owners
of the bank and his friends, and holding enough money in reserves.
One can understand government taking on this new role, partially as a result of the
magnitude and frequency of the panics and downturns in the market economy in the
19th and early 20th centuries. Moreover, as advanced countries, like the United States,
transformed themselves from agricultural economies to industrial economies, with an
increasing fraction of the population dependent on manufacturing and other
nonagricultural jobs, these economic fluctuations took an increasing toll. With the
extension of the franchise and increasingly democratic engagement, it became
increasingly difficult for government to ignore macro-economic volatility and its
consequences.
Market intervention in banking
Markets on their own equilibrate the demand and supply of seeds, so there was really
little need for government intervention in the primitive agriculture economy. The
interest rate provided the natural mechanism: if for some reason,—the supply of
seeds—exceeded investment (the demand for seed), by lowering interest rates, the
supply of seeds would fall and the demand for seeds would increase, until the two were
equilibrated.

12

Gerry Caprio, with whom I worked at the World Bank and who studied government bank
rescues around the world, was fond of saying that there are two kinds of countries—those who
have deposit insurance and know it, and those who have deposit insurance and don’t know it.
Sweden, before its financial crisis in the 1990s, had no deposit insurance, but it rescued its banks
nonetheless. In the 2008 crisis, suddenly deposit insurance was extended to accounts that had
not been fully insured before.
7

But this reasoning misses the nature of credit in the 21st century. In a modern economy,
banks don’t intermediate between “savers” and “investors,” as claimed in the standard
textbook models. Banks effectively create credit out of thin air, backed by general
confidence in government, including its ability and willingness to bail out the banks,
which is based in part on its power to tax and borrow.13 But the maximum amount of
credit that they can create is controlled by the central bank, through its reserve
requirements; and the central bank can also attempt to affect the magnitude of credit
creation indirectly, by changing the opportunity cost of lending, the return on T-bills.14
2. The limits of monetary policy under current arrangements
In a modern economy, central banks regulate banks’ creation of credit only indirectly.
They are supposed to do it in just the right amount, so there is a Goldilocks economy,
neither under- or overheated but “just right.” It is apparent that they have often failed
to do so. This has partly to do with the often noted “long and variable lags” associated
with monetary policy, with monetary authorities having to base their actions on
predictions concerning the future course of the economy; the central bank has to
forecast what GDP will be over the next eighteen months or so, to know how much
money to create. There is always error in such forecasts.
But more important, for our purpose, is “instrument uncertainty,” the “noise” in the link
between what monetary authorities do and GDP.15 Particularly after the Great

13

See J. E. Stiglitz (2016b), Turner (2015).

14

More broadly, all of the regulations affecting banks, e.g. capital adequacy and liquidity
requirements, affect credit creation. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003).

15

Lags are important, because in their absence, monetary authorities could observe the
consequences of, say, a particular level of M or interest rate, and adjust policy in response.
With long lags, the danger is that monetary policy will be tightened, just when it should be
loosened. Longstanding critics of discretionary policy argued that that was typically the case, so
that it would be preferable to stick to a simple rule, and not attempt countercyclical policy. The
evidence, however, is that discretionary macro-economic policy has resulted in more economic
stability in the period after World War II. (See Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 1998, and references
therein.)

8

Recession, the link between standard monetary variables and economic activity seemed
weak:


Standard monetary theory held that the demand for money, M, was a function
of the (nominal) value of produced goods and the interest rate (the
opportunity cost of holding funds.) Thus, except in certain limiting cases, an
increase in the money supply (which would follow from an increase in base
money, the assets of the central bank) led to lower interest rates, and lower
interest rates led to more investment, and possibly consumption. But each
of the underlying hypotheses of standard money theory was questionable—
at least they have been for the past quarter century: Most money is interest
bearing, so the interest rate was not the measure of opportunity cost; most
transactions are not directly related to the purchases of newly produced
goods and services but rather to buying and selling of pre-existing assets; and
credit, not money, is required for the purchase of goods and services. With
the central hypotheses of standard monetary theory no longer being true,
there was little reason to have much faith in the conclusion that there was a
direct and strong link between the money supply and economic activity.



The theoretical doubts about the underpinnings of standard monetary theory
had their counterpart in the empirics: In the recent crisis, increases in the
monetary base did not translate into increased lending and especially, it did
not translate into increased investment. More broadly, the relationship
between M and economic activity has exhibited considerable instability over
the past forty years, partly as a result of advances in technology and the
banking sector, with “innovations” like money market funds. This led to a
shift of focus by monetary authorities: in the belief that what mattered for

9

the determination of aggregate demand was the interest rate16, they decided
to target that directly, rather than indirectly through controlling M.


The link between the interest rate and real economic activity has proven just as
elusive as the link between money and real economic activity (see Stiglitz,
2016c). One reason, already noted, is that what matters is not just the
interest rate, but the availability of credit17 (credit is often rationed) and the
terms at which credit is available (e.g. collateral requirements). A second
reason is that the interest rate that matters is the lending rate (for borrowers
with different risk characteristics), and the spread between that and the Tbill rate—upon which monetary authorities typically focus—is endogenous.
(See Greenwald-Stiglitz, 2003.) Thirdly, even in the absence of credit
rationing, there are several first order variables affecting, say, investment or
consumption, including expectations of future sales and technology, changes
in market power (so that the relationship between marginal and average
returns may vary), and perceptions of risk. Some of these variables, such as
perceptions of risk, may even be affected by how monetary policy is
conducted.
Just as expanding the monetary base did not have the stimulative effect
expected, or at least hoped, so too for lowering interest rates; and this has
been true even as increasingly innovative monetary policies have been tried,
including crashing through the zero lower bound barrier to negative interest
rates.

16

Though it was presumably the real interest rate through which economic behavior was
affected in standard models, so long as (expectations) of the real interest rate did not change
too rapidly, controlling the nominal interest rate would suffice.

17

Though, to be sure, that was also an older literature arguing that what mattered was the
availability of credit (the Bank of England’s availability doctrine (see Smith and Micksell, (1957)),
those ideas had been put on sounder macro-economic footing by the development of the
theory of credit rationing (Stiglitz-Weiss, 1981), and subsequently extended to macro-economic
settings, sometimes on conjunction with equity-rationing as well. (See, e.g. Stiglitz-Weiss, 1992
and Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003) and the studies cited there.)

10



But even the stability of the link between credit and macro-economic activity
has come to be questioned: Increases in lending do not translate into
increases in purchases of newly produced goods and services—and therefore
into increases in the level of aggregate demand and economic activity.
Credit creation also goes to the purchase of pre-existing assets, especially
land, and to financing margin on futures and other speculative transactions. 18
This has a direct policy implication: If monetary authorities could do a better
job at directing the uses to which credit is put, then they might be better able
to control the economy.



In the post-crisis period, seemingly there was a new form of liquidity trap, where
monetary authorities expanded banks’ ability to lend, but banks did not
increase lending. The phenomenon, a kind of liquidity trap, had earlier been
noted in the context of other financial crises.19 It was unlike the standard
Keynesian liquidity trap, where households’ demand for money became
infinitely elastic at some point, so that it was impossible to lower the interest
rate below a critical threshold, and therefore impossible to increase
investment; rather, this liquidity trap arose from banks’ risk aversion, and
their unwillingness to extend further credit even as their ability to do so was
increased. The recognition of this naturally led to a renewed focus on banks
and their role in credit creation.

These insights fundamentally undermined what had developed as a consensus among
macro-economists in the latter part of the twentieth century—that monetary policy
should be the basis for macro-economic stabilization, leaving fiscal policy the task of
balancing longer run concerns between investment and consumption and public and
private spending. They also raised questions about other aspects of the pre-crisis

18

See Stiglitz (2015b, 2016b) and Turner (2015). In an open economy, it can also go to the
purchases of goods abroad. See Part II.

19

E.g. by Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003) in their discussion of the East Asia crisis.

11

prevailing wisdom, which held that Central Banks should not intervene in the allocation
of credit—that should be left to the market. That presumption was based on the
premise that markets were efficient in allocating resources—the first fundamental
theorem of welfare economics; but that conclusion had been shown not to be true
whenever information was imperfect20—and gathering and processing information was
at the heart of credit allocation.
At the very least, the stability of the relationship between money, interest rates, and
economic activity was questionable, making the formulation of monetary policy difficult
and making monetary policy an unreliable basis for macro-economic stabilization. 21
In short, even with fiat money, monetary authorities are unable to control the supply of
money in such a way as to stabilize the economy. For instance, there may still be a
deficiency of domestic aggregate demand—a deficiency that could seemingly be easily
corrected: there are individuals and firms who would like to spend but cannot get access
to credit. A near-zero interest rate does not mean businesses can get access to credit at
such a rate—or at any rate. Indeed, some critics of fiat money contend that the
volatility in the economy with fiat money is even greater than that with gold, implying
that it might be preferable to go back to the gold standard.
3. Restoring domestic control over credit creation
The previous section identified the central problem in our current system: because the
central bank’s control mechanisms over the purchases of produced goods and services is
typically very indirect, the economy is often over- or under heated. Sometimes there is
too much credit creation, leading to an excess of aggregate demand, and prices rise;
there is inflation. Sometimes there is too little credit creation and too much of what
credit is created goes to the purchase of pre-existing assets; as a result, there is a lack of

20

Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986).

21

See, in particular, the appendix to Stiglitz (2016c).

12

aggregate demand, and prices fall; there is disinflation, sometimes even deflation,22 and
unemployment. Thus, after the 2008 crisis, there was a massive increase in liquidity, as
the Fed pumped money into the economy. But relatively little of this went to buy goods
and services produced in the United States, so in spite of the huge expansion of the
money supply as conventionally measured23, the economy remained weak.
The electronic payments mechanism holds out the possibility of allowing a country to
assert control over the supply of credit and the uses to which it can be put.24 (The
conditions under which the control of credit issuance leads to less volatility in GDP than
the control of the interest rate are described below.)
Think of this most directly as occurring through a Government Bank. The Bank can add
“money” to the payments mechanism by lending money to a small enterprise with a
proven reputation that wants to make an investment. The Government Bank simply
puts more “money” into the bank account of the enterprise, which the enterprise can
then use to pay contractors. Of course, in providing credit there is always a risk of nonrepayment, and standards have to be established for evaluating the likelihood of
repayment and charging an interest rate to compensate for that risk.
In recent decades, faith in government’s ability to make such evaluations has
diminished, and confidence has been placed in the private financial system. The 2008
crisis, as well as other frequent crises that have marked the last third of a century, has
undermined that confidence.25 Arguably, not only didn’t the banks make good
22

Deflation refers to a fall in prices, disinflation to a decrease in the rate of deflation. Either can
have adverse effects on debtors, at least when not expected. Though the US has not
experienced deflation since the Great Depression, Japan has had mild deflation.

23

The assets of the Federal Reserve increased from around $850 billion in 2007 before the crisis
to $4.5 trillion in 2015. There were similar increases in Japan and by the ECB. M2 increased
from $7.4 trillion to $12.3 trillion.

24

Even if this cannot be done perfectly, it is possible that it might be done with greater precision
than is the case under current arrangements.
25

There have been numerous instances in which widespread judgments have been questioned,
including at various times those associated with over-lending to fiber optics, to fracking, to
housing in a third, to Latin America or East Asia. Of course, these mistakes do not in themselves

13

judgments—as evidenced by the massive, repeated bailouts—but they systematically
failed to fulfill what they should have seen as their major responsibility, providing credit
to create new jobs and expand enterprises. By some accounts, such “real” lending
amounts to just 3 percent of their activities; by others, to some 15 percent. But by any
account, the activities of banks, including bank finance, has been directly elsewhere.26
There were always obvious problems in delegating the power of credit creation, backed
by government, to private institutions: they could use their power to benefit their
owners. If they made bad loans, the government might have to engineer a bailout.
Governments tried to circumscribe the most obvious “abuses,” for instance connected
lending and excessively risky lending, through regulations and supervision. But these
regulations didn’t address one of the key underlying problems: credit is scarce; giving
private banks the right to create credit with government backing gave rise to the
possibility of the capture of enormous “economic rents.” Russia provides the
quintessential example: those with banking licenses could use that power to obtain
loans that enabled them and their associates to buy enormously valuable state assets,
especially in natural resources. It was through the banking system that the Russian
oligarchs were largely created. In Western countries, there is a need for more subtlety,
but critics allege that the consequences for the creation of wealth inequality are similar,
if not as extreme: banks lend money to those whom they “trust” and judge
creditworthy, with collateral that they value: in short, the bankers lend money to those
who are similar to themselves.27 In the current system much of the “value” of the
establish that there were flaws in lending practices or that decisions concerning whether to
obtain further information were themselves “unreasonable.” They show only that ex post
judgments were wrong. But they do not establish that ex ante they were unreasonable on the
basis of information available at the time. But at least in some cases, such as the excessive
lending to Latin America in the 1970s and to housing in the years prior to the 2008 crisis, there is
a considerable body of evidence that that is the case. See, for instance, Stiglitz (2010). Indeed,
in the housing crisis, there have been several findings by Courts of fraudulent behavior on the
part of key market participants. See Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011).
26

See, for example, Kay (2015); and Turner, (2015).

27

Even if banker A can’t lend to himself or his relatives, banker A can lend to the relatives of
banker B, and banker B can lend to the relatives of banker A.
14

underlying government credit guarantee is thus captured by the private sector.28 29 In
doing so, the financial sector has become one of the major sources of the increased
inequality (Galbraith (2012)).30
Credit auctions
The government may still want to delegate responsibility for making credit decisions to
private enterprises. Credit auctions provide one way of doing so, while simultaneously
addressing the issues discussed in the previous paragraphs (including making it more
likely that the government captures a larger share of the rents associated with the value
of its credibility and guarantees) and providing for greater economic stability.
The basic idea is straightforward: the central bank (government) auctions off the rights
to issue new credit.31 The amounts would be added to the “money” that is within the
financial system. The magnitude of net credit that it allows to be added each month will
be determined by the country’s central bank on the basis of its assessment of the
macroeconomic situation—that is, if the economy is weaker, it will provide more credit
to stimulate the economy. The winners of the credit auction then allocate this “money”

28

This is especially so, through the privatization of gains and the socialization of losses that has
become a regular feature in economies with too-big-to-fail banks. (See Stiglitz (2010).)
29

Critics suggest that they have been able to do so, without performing the societal functions
that banks were supposed to perform e.g. lending to small and medium sized enterprises.

30

There is an especial concern about the frequency of certain practices, such as predatory
lending, market manipulation (Libor and ForEx), and abusive credit card practices, which have
particularly deleterious effects on the poor. See the references in the previous footnote and
Akerlof and Shiller (2015).
31

There are many details about the design of the auction process, the analysis of which we leave
for another occasion. To avoid the possibility of banks (the buyers of the right to issue credit)
speculating, buying up credit now against the risk that its price will be higher at a later date—
thereby adding uncertainty to the amount of new credit actually issued—the right to issue credit
would be date-stamped, i.e. banks would have the right to issue new credit, but only for a
specified period, e.g. three months, and under other conditions to be described below.
15

to borrowers, on the basis of their judgments about repayment capacity, within the
constraints that the central bank may impose (described below).32
Note that in this system, banks cannot create credit out of thin air. The winners of the
credit auction can only transfer money from their account to the borrowers’ accounts.
Accordingly, even with a system of delegated credit allocation, the Central Bank can
control the magnitude of credit creation with some precision—and thereby the level of
macro-economic activity.
A simple model
In this subsection, we present a simple model providing conditions under which one can
obtain greater macro-stability by controlling directly the amount of credit than by doing
so indirectly, setting the real interest rate (assuming one could do that.) Assume that
output (GDP) is a linear function of investment33:
1) Q = a + b I + ϵ1
The monetary authority wishes to achieve full employment output, Q*, with a quadratic
loss function for deviations from that target (exceeding that output risks inflation):
2) L = (Q* – EQ)2 + k var Q
If ϵ1 = 0, and if the monetary authority could directly control I, this implies simply setting
3) I = I* = (Q* - a)/b.
In the absence of instrument uncertainty,

32

The system is symmetric. The central bank may decide that there is too much money in the
economic system—that is, the banks are lending too much, using “money” that they receive in
repayment to make new loans. In that case, the government can buy back rights to issue credit:
they buy back the money that they have allowed the banks to effectively manage on their
behalf. Again, there can be an open auction for those most willing to give up rights to issue
credit. This would literally drain money out of the banking system.
33

It is easy to extend this model to include consumption, net exports, and government
expenditures.

16

4) var Q = Var ϵ1.
In fact, the monetary authorities do not control I directly. We have discussed two
alternative ways of controlling I indirectly, one through monetary authorities’ control of
the interest rate, and the other through the control of credit, C. In the former case, we
ignore instrument uncertainty (i.e. the government can precisely set r), but assume that
investment is a stochastic function of r, i.e.
5) I = (µ+ϵ3) r + ϵ2,
where for simplicity we assume ϵ1, ϵ2, and ϵ3 are uncorrelated and have zero mean, so
investment is a linear function of r, with variance
6) Var I = r2 var ϵ3 + var ϵ2 .
Then
7) L = [Q* - (a + b µ r)]2 + k[ b2 r2 var ϵ3 + b2 var ϵ2 + var ϵ1 ],
so the optimal interest rate is
8) r∗ = µ(Q∗−a)/ b(µ2 +kVar e3)
Alternatively, there is conventional monetary policy, where government tries to
regulate investment (and thus GDP) indirectly through the regulation of credit creation
by the banking system. Now, investment is assumed to be a function of credit creation,
C,
9) I = α C + ϵ4
And credit creation itself is a function of the money supply
10) C = β M + ϵ5
So
11) I = α β M + α ϵ5 + ϵ4,
And assuming again that ϵ1, ϵ4, and ϵ5 are uncorrelated and have zero mean,
17

12) var I = α2 var ϵ5 + var ϵ4
It should be apparent that if
13) α2 var ϵ5 + var ϵ4 < r*2 var ϵ3 + var ϵ2 =
[µ(Q∗−a)/ b(µ2 +kVar e3)]2 var ϵ3 + var ϵ2,
then controlling credit creation through the money supply is preferable to controlling
investment through the interest rate. The more precisely the government controls
credit creation and the closer the link between credit creation and investment (the
smaller is var ϵ4 ), the more likely is the inequality in (13) satisfied. Our credit auctions
provide a more precise way of controlling credit creation (effectively reducing var ϵ5),
and therefore reducing the variability in GDP. If one could reduce the uncertainty in the
link between credit creation and investment, economic stability would increase still
more. The next section shows how this might be done.
4. Elaborating on a System of Credit Creation in an e-Economy
This section elaborates on the basic idea of how credit auctions in an e-Economy can
increase macro-stability.
4.1. Ensuring that credit creation is directed at produced goods and services
It is straightforward for monetary authorities to attach conditions (beyond the usual
ones, e.g. concerning connected lending and excessive risk taking) in selling the “rights
to lend” to the banks. It could, for instance, proscribe the extension of credit for margin
on speculative loans or for real estate or other existing assets. Of course, funds are
fungible, and restricting the use of new credit does not restrict the use of other funds.
But the Central Bank could impose broader restrictions on lending “banks,” those
institutions eligible to participate in credit auctions. Credit bubbles are associated with

18

the excessive creation of credit for particular purposes, e.g. real estate, and our
restricted credit auctions might enable monetary authorities to prevent such excesses.34
If it wished, the monetary authority could target credit even more narrowly, to be used
to purchase goods which are in excess supply, or which use labor of types which
confront high levels of unemployment. There is always a trade-off: such targeted
lending may be subject to political pressure, in ways that more broad based measures
may not be.
4.2. Bank licenses
In this 21st-century banking system, a bank’s ability to lend is given only temporarily. It
is conditional on compliance with the rules and standards established.35 The
government could allow for entry into the banking system.36 Indeed, separating the
depository and lending functions37 and the open auction of rights to issue credit could

34

Monetary authorities have often said that it is difficult if not impossible for them to prevent
the growth of bubbles—monetary policy is a blunt instrument, and raising interest rates to
dampen bubbles would at the same time force down the level of real economic activity. Such
claims of impotence are, I believe, exaggerated: Macro-prudential regulations can be an
effective instrument. Still, the direct control of the uses to which credit can be put is likely to be
more effective.
35

Thus, to avoid the kinds of practices described earlier in the previous section (such as
predatory lending), the government might find it desirable or necessary to impose regulations
attempting to proscribe such activities. There is a large literature on the design of such
regulatory measures and their effectiveness.
36

Even with well-designed auctions with a limited number of banks, returns might exceed the
normal risk adjusted level. Firms might wish to enter until the after tax return to capital
(measured over the business cycle) would be equal to the normal return to capital. But since
lending is an information-based activity, and the gathering of information is a fixed cost, the
government might like stability in the new banking system, and this will require that banks not
live on the edge; entry would be allowed only to the point where there was some excess return,
to encourage prudential behavior. (See Hellman, Murdoch, and Stiglitz (2000)).
37

In the banking model presented in the previous section, banks still could accept deposits: a
deposit is simply a (temporary) transfer of the right to spend money from an individual to the
bank. The bank then has the right to allocate this spending power to another individual or firm.
The bank operates much as the “seed bank” described earlier in this paper. As we have noted,
banks could not, in this system, create money effectively out of thin air.
19

make entry easier, and thus competition more vigorous than under current
arrangements. At the same time, the system of auctioning of credit might ensure that
banks not earn excessive returns; most of the value of the public’s backing to the
creation of money/credit could be captured by the public, rather than as now by the
bankers.
Whence bank capital?
The beauty of this modern credit system is it doesn’t really require the same kind of
capital as required by banking systems of the past. Recapitalizing a destroyed banking
system would not require gold or borrowing to buy seeds as it did in the old days. As we
have seen, the government itself can simply create credit.38
The fact that the money created by the government can be used to pay the taxes that
are owed to the government, and that the government has the power to levy taxes,
ensures the value of the credit it has created. Indeed, because the credit that has been
created is electronic money, the movement of which can easily be monitored, the
government has not only the ability to levy taxes; it also has an enhanced ability to
collect taxes.
The only reason for bank capital in this world is as a partial guarantee that the bank has
the capacity to repay the credit—the bank’s “purchases” from the government of the
right to issue credit are only temporary, and the credit thus created has to be repaid to
the government. (The fact that the bank will lose its own capital has, in addition, strong
incentive effects, incentivizing the bank to make good decisions about to whom to give
credit and to monitor loans well.) But if the government is doing an adequate job of
The depository and lending functions could be further separated by having the government
assume the role of the depository institution (like postal savings banks), with commercial banks
being licensed to act as agents on its behalf. The government would then have more precise
information about the amount of money not being spent; such information would be critical in
determining the amount of credit to be created. Virtually the entire credit allocation could be
managed through the auction process described in the previous section. (Of course, individuals
might still lend directly to other individuals.)
38

Either through a government bank or through the auction mechanism just described.

20

bank supervision and has imposed appropriate regulations (for example, on connected
and excessively risky lending), the amount of capital required will be limited. And that
fact alone should, as we have noted, lead to more competition in the market for the
provision of credit—reducing the likelihood of excessive returns.
4.4. Macro-stability and income (state) contingent loans
To achieve full employment may entail an auction of credit in sufficiently large amount
that the price is negative, i.e. the only terms at which potential lenders are willing to
“accept” the temporary use of funds, to be repaid later, entail a negative interest rate.
The auction may entail a provision where a negative “bank rate” has to be passed on, at
least partially, to borrowers, in the form of a negative lending rate. Presumably there is
some negative rate at which the desired credit creation—that viewed as necessary to
ensure full employment—related to new spending, either investment or consumption, is
achieved. (This can be viewed as a partial “money rain.”) But it may be a very negative
rate, and the distributive and even allocative consequences of that negative rate may be
adverse.
Accordingly, it makes sense to look for alternative and perhaps more effective and
efficient ways of stimulating the economy. One such way—ensuring a trade surplus or
limiting the trade deficit—is discussed in the next section. Here we consider another
way—state contingent loans, whereby the amount the borrower has to repay depends
on the state of the economy.
There is a widespread consensus that one of the reasons that consumption and
investment are depressed in a deep economic downturn is “lack of confidence,” or
slightly more precisely, uncertainty about the future. Consumers are not sure of their
future wages; retirees of the future return on their savings; and producers of the returns
on their investment. They worry that if the downturn persists, unemployment may be
high, wages low, interest rates low, and sales poor. Traditional monetary policy has
tried to compensate for the absence of insurance markets by which individuals might
mitigate these risks by changing the intertemporal price. It is, to say the least, a peculiar
21

response: it makes far more sense to try to address the market failure directly than to
increase one distortion in response to another.39 As we noted in Stiglitz (2016c), it is not
even clear that lowering the interest rate is even an effective response, not just because
of the distributive and distortionary effects, but because as the interest rate is lowered,
risk perceptions may increase, and the adverse risk-perception effects could overwhelm
the intertemporal price effects.
State-contingent credit auctions, where the amount the bank would have to repay the
government would depend on the state of the economy during the period of the loan,
provide a direct way of public risk absorption. By reducing the amount to be repaid in
the event of a serious economic downturn, the risk of lending is reduced, and thus the
supply of lending increased.40
4.5. Concluding Remarks
One of the major contributors to macroeconomic instability is the instability in credit
supply. The 2008 crisis suggested that all the advances in markets, including financial
markets, and in our understanding of markets has not lead to greater macro-economic
stability—in fact, quite the opposite. The electronic banking system described here,
together with credit auctions, may, under certain conditions, enhance stability in the
equilibrium provision of credit for productive purposes, and thus enhance macroeconomic stability. This may be especially so if repayments are made state-contingent
as described in the previous sub-section. It thus may provide the basis of a virtuous
circle, leading to an increase in overall stability of the economy. One of the most
39

It should be clear that the generalized Ricardian equivalence theorem (which holds that
government financial risk has no effect (Stiglitz, (1988)) does not hold in general, and that there
are real benefits to this socialization of risk. In particular, the firms and consumers who are
effectively “buying” this state-contingent insurance are engaging in bets which increase their
expected wealth more than the losses in expected wealth of the rest of society which assumes
these losses, so that there is a positive pseudo-wealth effect. There is also a “substitution”
effect. Both increase investment, consumption, and production. (For a discussion of the
concept of pseudo-wealth, see Guzman and Stiglitz 2016a, 2016b.)
40

In other contexts, such income contingent loans have been shown to be welfare enhancing,
increasing GDP as well as individuals’ expected utility. See Stiglitz and Yun (2016).
22

important reasons that small businesses don’t repay loans is macroeconomic
fluctuation: loans simply can’t be repaid when an economy is in depression.41 Ensuring
greater macro-stability than under the current regime would do as much as anything
else to ensure the viability of the banking system, and increase the willingness of banks
to lend and firms to invest. We have explained how this system could in fact also lead
to a more competitive banking system.

Part II. Monetary Policy in an Open Economy with e-Money
The analysis so far has been for a closed economy. Extending the analysis to an open
economy is at least conceptually easy. When a firm exports some good, say a widget, it
receives dollars. The dollars could be kept out of the country, say in a dollar account in
New York. But the exporter may want to bring the dollars home, depositing them into
the country’s electronic banking system. The number of, say, euro’s that the exporter
would receive in return for the dollars would be market determined. Importers may
want dollars to buy goods from the US. Exporters thus transfer money in their bank
account to that of the importer. By the same token, an individual in the country
wanting to make an investment abroad, say in the US, might want dollars, and be willing
to transfer euros in his electronic banking system to someone who is willing to sell him
dollars in exchange for euros.
These capital flows may, however, be very destabilizing—leading to large
fluctuations in exports and imports as the exchange rate changes, leading in turn to
macro-economic instability. The central bank can attempt to offset these effects
through the system of credit creation (auctions) described earlier. But there is another

41

There are thus significant macro-economic externalities, providing part of the explanation for
why there may be an undersupply of such lending privately. (See Korinek (2011).)
23

way of enhancing macro-stability, by regulating trade flows, in ways that may be more
efficient and effective.42
5. Managing the Current Account Deficit through Trade Chits
Government could provide to any exporter a chit, a “token” (in this case, electronically
recorded) (alternatively called trade chits or Buffett chits43), the number in proportion
to the value of what was exported; to import a euro worth of goods, there would be a
requirement to pay, in addition to the cash price, a euro’s worth of chits or “trade
tokens.” There would be a free market in chits, so the demand and supply of chits would
be equal; and by equating the demand and supply of chits, one would automatically
balance the current account.
In practice, the value of the chit might normally be very small, at least for a country
currently with a small trade deficit.
This system would be a way of managing the high level of volatility in market economies
associated with short term capital flows. With the free flow of capital, the exchange rate
is determined by the vagaries of the market. And those changes in exchange rate then
drive exports, imports, the trade deficit, and borrowing, and in doing so, give rise to
macroeconomic instability. With the system of trading chits, the trade deficit can be
controlled, enhancing overall stability.44
In the analysis above, where every import needs a chit, there is neither a trade surplus
or trade balance. The government could use this system to limit the size of the deficit or

42

If there are costs of adjustment, e.g. to investment, then there may be significant costs
associated with putting the burden of adjustment on investment and other activities that are
sensitive to the supply of credit. See Kraemer (2015).

43

See Buffet (2003).

44

To prevent the buildup of chits—speculators might buy them on the bet that a chit is more
valuable some years into the future—the chits should be date-stamped; they would have to be
used, for example, within a period of one year. (It’s possible that some international rules, such
as those currently stipulated by the WTO, might need to be changed to accommodate the
system of chits, which could be viewed as a system of multiple exchange rates.)

24

surplus within any desired bounds. For instance, if it wants to limit imports to be no
more than 20 percent greater than exports, it can issue 1.2 import chits for every euro
of exports. By contrast, when there would be an excessive surplus in the absence of
trade-chits, every import would be granted an “export” chit. Then every export would
require a chit. This would automatically bring exports down to the level of imports.
The fact that the country could thus stabilize the size of the trade deficit or surplus has
an enormous macroeconomic advantage: it facilitates macroeconomic stabilization
itself. It means, for instance, that a small country doesn’t have to suffer from the
vagaries of its “external balance,” its net export position. These fluctuations impose
enormous costs on society, of which the market, in generating them, takes no account.45
But ensuring stability in the trade deficit also engenders longer-term stability, for
national indebtedness, built up over many years, can suddenly become unsustainable.
The market sees the world through very myopic lenses. It is willing to lend year after
year—until it suddenly changes its mind.46 By limiting the trade deficit, a country is in
effect limiting national borrowing; this framework thus reduces a key source of
instability in open economies.47
Moreover, this system helps stabilize exchange rates. In the absence of the chit system,
an increase in the demand for imports (that is, for, say, dollars to buy American cars)
would lead to a fall in the price of the euro. But now, with imports discouraged by the
necessity of also paying to purchase a chit, the increased demand for imports would be

45

These are an example of macro-economic externalities, such as discussed by Anton Korinek
(2011) and Jeanne and Korinek (2010), themselves a generalization of the pervasive pecuniary
externalities to which Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) called attention.

46

See Calvo (1998) for a discussion of sudden stops.

47

The experience of Europe and elsewhere has shown that it is not so much government
borrowing that gives rise to crises, but national borrowing (including both private and public
debt). In some cases, the national borrowing was government borrowing (Greece), but in many
other cases (Ireland and Spain) it was private borrowing. When a crisis hits, the debt quickly
moves from the private balance sheet to that of the public.

25

reflected in an increased price of a chit, rather than a decrease in the value of the euro.
The euro will be stronger than it otherwise would be.

Concluding Remarks
In the Arrow Debreu world with perfect markets, prices play a critical role in ensuring
economic efficiency. But in the real world in which we live, as Marty Weitzman (1974)
explained long ago, it is often better not to just rely on prices—to try, as this framework
does, to control the quantity of credit and net exports, and to regulate the uses to which
credit is put. There is a large literature showing under a variety of conditions when
there is a departure from the first best world that such quantity controls are a better
way of regulating the economy.48
The management of the economy in the electronic monetary framework analyzed in this
paper relies, however, heavily on the use of prices and market mechanisms, but not
fully so; there is no micro-management, but more macro-management than exists
today. There are credit auctions and fully developed markets for trade-chits, though the
amount of credit to be auctioned and the rules governing trade chits (how many export
or import chits are granted per dollar of exports or imports) are determined by the
government. But, of course, under any monetary system there is extensive
intervention: In some, it attempts to set interest rates, in others, the money supply.
Decades ago, we learned that one could not let a market economy manage itself. That is
why, for instance, every country has a central bank determining interest rates and/or
the money supply, and regulatory authorities overseeing banking.
Anyone observing macroeconomic performance in recent years will see that things have
not gone well in many countries around the world, even in advanced countries, with
supposedly well-functioning markets and institutions and individuals who are
supposedly well-informed about economics and presumably know how to manage the
economy.
48

See also Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1977).

26

Advances in technology in recent years has made construction of a fully electronic
monetary system feasible. This paper has addressed the question: in such a fully
electronic system, are there new ways in which monetary policy could be conducted?
And what might be the effects of these alternatives?
This paper has analyzed the effects of three institutional innovations, credit auctions,
state-contingent loans, and trade chits. We have shown that credit auctions in
particular may increase the fraction of rents associated with public guarantees that are
captured by the government. State-contingent loans might reduce the limitations
confronting monetary policy in deep recession, facilitating the return of the economy to
full employment when faced with a liquidity trap, such as associated with a zero lower
bound. The efficiency of capital markets might increase, by directly addressing the
problems posed by perceptions of excessive risk, rather than attempting to address such
problems indirectly by changing intertemporal prices.
But the most important impacts of the electronic payments system and the new
mechanisms for macro-management that they may enable may be on macro-economic
stability. We have analyzed conditions under which credit auctions may reduce the
volatility in investment; and our analysis suggests that trade chits may enable the
reduction in the volatility of net exports. Together these new instruments may provide
additional tools that, at least under certain conditions, may enable the enhancement of
macro-stability.

27

References

Akerlof, George A., & Shiller, Robert J. (2015). Phishing for Phools: The Economics of
Manipulation and Deception. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Financial Services for the Poor.
http://www.gatesfoundation.org/What-We-Do/Global-Development/Financial-Servicesfor-the-Poor. Accessed on 13 Dec 2016.
Buffet, Warren. (2003, November 10). “America’s Growing Trade Deficit Is Selling the
Nation out from Under Us. Here’s a Way to Fix the Problem—And We Need to Do It
Now,” Fortune.
Calvo, Guillermo A. (1998). "Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
Economics of Sudden Stops". Journal of Applied Economics. 1 (1): 35–54.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. (2000). “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics (2000) 115 (1): 147-180.
Davies, Glyn. A History of money from ancient times to the present day, 4th. ed. revised
by Duncan Connors, Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2016.
Dasgupta, Partha, & Joseph E. Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977, December). “Tariffs vs. Quotas as
Revenue Raising Devices Under Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 67(5),
pp. 975-98.
Delli Gatti, D., Gallegati, M., Greenwald, B., Russo, A. & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012)
“Mobility Constraints, Productivity Trends, and Extended Crises,” with, Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 83(3): 375– 393.
Ferguson, Niall (2009). The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the World, London:
Penguin.
Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy." American Economic Review,
vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-17.
Galbraith, James K. (2012). Inequality and Instability: A Study of the World Economy Just
before the Great Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1986). “Externalities in Economies with
Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
101, No. 2, May, pp. 229-264.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1987), “Imperfect Information, Credit Markets
and Unemployment,” European Economic Review, 31, 1987, pp. 444-456.
28

Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1988a), “Imperfect Information, Finance
Constraints and Business Fluctuations,” in Finance Constraints, Expectations, and
Macroeconomics, M. Kohn and S.C. Tsiang (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988,
pp. 103-140.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1988b), “Money, Imperfect Information and
Economic Fluctuations,” in Finance Constraints, Expectations and Macroeconomics, M.
Kohn and S.C. Tsiang (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988, pp.141-165. Also
NBER Working Paper 2188.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1990), “Macroeconomic Models with Equity and
Credit Rationing,” in Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance, and Investment, R. B.
Hubbard (ed.), University of Chicago Press, 1990, pp. 15-42.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1991, October). “Toward a Reformulation of
Monetary Theory: Competitive Banking”, Economic and Social Review 23(1), pp. 1-34.
Also NBER Working Paper 4117.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1993a). Monetary policy and the theory of the
risk-averse bank. Working Papers in Applied Economic Theory 93-04, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1993b), “Financial Market Imperfections and
Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1), February 1993, pp. 77-114.
Greenwald, Bruce, & Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2003). Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary
Economics. Cambridge University Press.
Guzman, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, 2016a “A Theory of Pseudo-Wealth,” in Contemporary
Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond, Joseph E. Stiglitz and
Martin Guzman (eds.), IEA Conference Volume, No.155-II, Houndmills, UK and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan. (Paper presented at a special session of the International
Economic Association World Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June 2014, sponsored by the
OECD.)
Guzman, M. and J. E. Stiglitz, 2016b, “Pseudo-Wealth and Consumption Fluctuations,”
NBER Working Paper, Working Paper Series 22838, November 2016.
Hellmann, T., K. Murdock and J. E. Stiglitz (2000) “Liberalization, Moral Hazard in
Banking and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American
Economic Review, 90(1), March, pp. 147-165.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. (2010). “Managing credit booms and busts: A
Pigouvian taxation approach,” NBER Working Paper, Working Paper Series 16377,
September 2010.
Kay, John. (2015). Other People’s Money: The Real Business of Finance. PublicAffairs.
29

Korinek, Anton. (2011). "Systemic risk-taking: amplification effects,
externalities, and regulatory responses," Working Paper Series 1345,
European Central Bank.
Kreamer, Jonathan. (2015). Credit and Liquidity in the Macroeconomy. PhD Dissertation,
University of Maryland, College Park.
Minsky, Hyman P. (1992). “The Financial Instability Hypothesis”. The Jerome Levy
Economics Institute of Bard College Working Paper No. 74.
The National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in the
United States (2011), The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, New York: Public Affairs.
Smith, Warren L. and Raymond F. Mikesell (1957). “The Effctiveness of Monetary Policy:
Recent British Experience”. Journal of Political Economy 1957 65:1, 18-39.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1988). “On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy,” in
The Economics of Public Debt, Proceedings of the 1986 International Economics
Association Meeting, London: Macmillan Press, pp. 4-76.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2010). Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World
Economy. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012). The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers
Our Future. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2014) "The Lessons of the North Atlantic Crisis for Economic Theory
and Policy," in What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis, George
Akerlof, Olivier Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (eds.) Cambridge, Mass.
and London: MIT Press, pp. 335-347.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015a, April). “Fed policy, Inequality, and Equality of Opportunity”.
paper presented to the Ninth Biennial Federal Reserve System Community Development
Research Conference, April 2015, and to be published in proceedings; available online at
http://rooseveltinstitute.org/fed-policy-inequality-and-equality-opportunity/.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2015b, May). “New Theoretical Perspectives on the Distribution of
Income and Wealth Among Individuals: Part IV” NBER Working Papers 21192.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016a). The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of
Europe. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016b). Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns, IEA
Conference Volume, 155-VI, Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016;
previously NBER Working Paper 21444, August 2015 and Presidential Address to the
17th World Congress of the International Economic Congress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June,
2014.
30

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2016c), “The Theory of Credit and Macro-economic Stability,” NBER
Working Paper No. 22837 and to be published in Development Policy in a Globalised
World: Recent Trends, Theories and Lessons, Essays in Honor of Deepak Nayyar, Ananya
Ghosh Dastidar, Rajeev Malhotra and Vivek Suneja (eds.), Routledge.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and A. Weiss (1981), “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information,” American Economic Review, 71(3), June 1981, pp. 393-410.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and A. Weiss (1986) “Credit Rationing and Collateral,” in Recent
Developments in Corporate Finance, Jeremy Edwards, et al. (eds.), New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1986, pp. 101-135.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and A. Weiss (1992), “Asymmetric Information in Credit Markets and
Its Implications for Macroeconomics,” Oxford Economic Papers, 44(4), October 1992,
pp. 694-724.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. and J. Yun (2016), “Income-Contingent Loans as an Unemployment
Benefit,” Columbia University Working Paper.
Turner, Adair. (2015). Between Debt and the Devil: Money, Credit, and Fixing Global
Finance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Weatherford, Jack (1997), The History of Money. New York: Random House.
Weitzman, Martin. (1974). “Prices vs. Quantities”, Review of Economic Studies, 41, issue
4, p. 477-491.

31

