                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      'ACTING WIFE': MARRIAGE MARKET INCENTIVES AND LABOR MARKET
                               INVESTMENTS

                                       Leonardo Bursztyn
                                        Thomas Fujiwara
                                         Amanda Pallais

                                      Working Paper 23043
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23043


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We would like to thank Nava Ashraf, David Autor, Marianne Bertrand, Stéphane Bonhomme,
Stefano DellaVigna, David Deming, Esther Duflo, John Friedman, Paola Giuliano, Lawrence
Katz, Alexandre Mas, Emily Oster, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Gautam Rao, Jesse Shapiro, and
seminar participants at LSE, Princeton, UCLA, and Zurich for helpful comments and suggestions.
Maxim Ananyev, George Cheimonitis, Stephanie Cheng, Mikhail Galashin, Vasily Korovkin,
Juan Matamala, Imil Nurutdinov, Sebastian Ottinger, Benjamin Smith, Maria Lucia Yanguas, and
especially Jenna Anders provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from NSF
CAREER Grant No. 1454476 (Pallais) is gratefully acknowledged. This project received IRB
approval from Harvard, Princeton, and UCLA. The experiments and survey reported in this study
can be found in the AEA RCT Registry (#0001456, #0001686, and #0001774). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
'Acting Wife': Marriage Market Incentives and Labor Market Investments
Leonardo Bursztyn, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 23043
January 2017
JEL No. C93,J12,J16,Z10

                                          ABSTRACT

Do single women avoid career-enhancing actions because these actions could signal personality
traits, like ambition, that are undesirable in the marriage market? We answer this question
through two field experiments in an elite U.S. MBA program. Newly-admitted MBA students
filled out a questionnaire on job preferences and personality traits to be used by the career center
in internship placement; randomly-selected students thought their answers would be shared with
classmates. When they believed their classmates would not see their responses, single and non-
single women answered similarly. However, single women reported desired yearly compensation
$18,000 lower and being willing to travel seven fewer days per month and work four fewer hours
per week when they expected their classmates would see their answers. They also reported less
professional ambition and tendency for leadership. Neither men nor non-single women changed
their answers in response to peer observability. A supplementary experiment asked students to
make choices over hypothetical jobs before discussing their choices in their career class small
groups; we randomly varied the groups' gender composition. Single women were much less likely
to select career-focused jobs when their answers would be shared with male peers, especially
single ones. Two results from observational data support our experimental results. First, in a new
survey, almost three-quarters of single female students reported avoiding activities they thought
would help their career because they did not want to appear ambitious. They eschewed these
activities at higher rates than did men and non-single women. Second, while unmarried women
perform similarly to married women in class when their performance is kept private from
classmates (on exams and problem sets), they have significantly lower participation grades.

Leonardo Bursztyn                                Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Chicago                            Harvard University
1126 E. 59th Street                              Littauer Center
Chicago, IL 60637                                Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         and NBER
bursztyn@uchicago.edu                            apallais@fas.harvard.edu

Thomas Fujiwara
Department of Economics
Princeton University
131 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
fujiwara@princeton.edu
1        Introduction
Even in the 21st century, men prefer female partners who are less professionally ambitious than they
are (Fisman et al., 2006). Men tend to avoid female partners with characteristics usually associated
with professional ambition, such as high levels of education (Hitsch et al., 2010; Greitemeyer, 2007;
Brown and Lewis, 2004). It is relatively unlikely that a woman will earn more than her husband,
and when she does, marital satisfaction is lower and divorce is more likely (Bertrand et al., 2015).
Promotions increase the chance of divorce for women, but not for men (Folke and Rickne, 2016).
        Single women may thus face a trade-o¤: actions that lead to professional success might be
sanctioned in the marriage market because they signal ambition and assertiveness.1 For example,
while volunteering for leadership roles or asking for a promotion might help women’s careers, they
may also send negative signals to the marriage market. This trade-o¤ can be pervasive and is
not limited to large, discrete decisions. Daily activities such as speaking up in meetings, taking
charge of a project, working late, or even certain out…ts, haircuts, and make-up can be desirable in
one market and not in the other. Hiding career-enhancing actions from potential partners might
be challenging for single women: it is likely di¢ cult to hide working late or traveling for work,
for example. Moreover, the workplace is the most common place to meet a partner.2 Similar to
minority students who shy away from educational investments to avoid “acting white,” (Austen-
Smith and Fryer, 2005; Fryer and Torelli, 2010), single women might try to improve their marriage
options by “acting wife.”3 On the other hand, for men, the consequences of actions in the labor and
marriage markets are more closely aligned: women value their partner’s intelligence and education,
even when these exceed their own (Fisman et al., 2006; Lee, 2009).
        In this paper, we test for the existence and the implications of this trade-o¤ by studying students
in an elite U.S. MBA program. Graduate school is a natural place to study this trade-o¤. Many
students are both investing in their professional career and looking for a long-term partner.4 For
example, a 2015 survey of Harvard Business School (HBS) MBA alumni indicates that among the
    1
      Throughout the paper, we refer to the marriage market. However, this trade-o¤ is not necessarily limited to
women seeking a spouse. It may also exist for women seeking a romantic relationship that is not expected to lead to
marriage (i.e., it may apply to a more general “dating market”).
    2
      According to the survey by Rosenfeld et al. (2015), 16% of partnered people reported meeting their partner at
work, the most common response. A 2011 survey by Careerbuilder.com of 7,780 full-time US workers found that 38%
had dated a co-worker at least once and that 31% of those who did so married a co-worker.
    3
      In Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005), students might avoid educational investments that would help them in the
labor market because these investments would send a negative signal (about their “social type”) to their peer group.
In our setting, single women might similarly avoid actions that would help them in the labor market because these
actions would send a negative signal (about their personality type) to the marriage market.
    4
      For example, a New York Times article describes how a female Harvard MBA student dealt with such trade-o¤:
“Judging from comments from male friends about other women (‘She’s kind of hot, but she’s so assertive’), Ms. Navab
feared that seeming too ambitious could hurt what she half-jokingly called her social cap, referring to capitalization,”
and wondered about her goals: “Were her priorities purely professional, were they academic, were they to start dating
someone?” It also describes how after she “started dating ... [she] felt freer to focus on her career once she was paired
o¤ .” (Kantor, 2013).



                                                           1
youngest surveyed cohort (“Generation Y”, aged 25-30), 31% of married women and 16% of married
men are married to an HBS alum.5 Many actions in graduate school are observable to peers –and
thus may in‡uence marriage outcomes –and are potentially important for the labor market. These
include joining professional clubs and organizations, on-campus interviews, trips to career fairs,
and participation in case competitions. There are substantial gender di¤erences in career outcomes
for elite MBA program graduates (Bertrand et al., 2010). Even these highly-ambitious men prefer
less ambitious women (see Fisman et al., 2006, who study Columbia University graduate students,
including MBA students).
       We start by providing observational evidence that single women avoid activities that could help
their careers to avoid signaling traits that may be penalized in the marriage market. We conducted
a survey asking …rst-year MBA students whether in the two years before business school they had
avoided certain actions they thought would help their careers because they were concerned it would
make them “look too ambitious, assertive, or pushy.”Sixty-four percent of single females said they
had avoided asking for a raise or a promotion for that reason, relative to only 39% of women who
were married or in a serious relationship and 27% of men. Over half (52%) of single women reported
avoiding speaking up in meetings, relative to 33% of non-single women, and 28% of men. Overall,
almost three quarters (73%) of single women said they had avoided actions they believed would
help their career because they were worried about looking too ambitious.
       Next, we document that unmarried female MBA students have lower class participation grades
than married ones. Class participation is observable to peers and may signal students’ambition or
assertiveness.6 It is not the case that unmarried women, in general, perform worse in class than
married women: both groups perform similarly on their midterm exam, …nal exam, and problem
sets. The di¤erence – approximately a third of a standard deviation – is only present for the
observable part of the grade. It is not driven by observable di¤erences between the two groups. For
men, who do not face the same trade-o¤, marital status predicts neither participation grades nor
grades in the rest of the class. Note that lower participation grades are consequential: they are a
component of …nal grades, which this school discloses to potential employers.
       Our main results come from two …eld experiments that directly test whether single women
respond to the studied trade-o¤ by explicitly changing their behavior, making themselves look less
professionally appealing. In the …rst (primary) experiment, we randomize whether actions with
positive labor market consequences (potential signals of ambition) are expected to be observed
by one’s classmates. Classmate observability allows the actions to have larger marriage market
   5
     The rates of marriage within the HBS alumni network are also high for other cohorts. In the “Generation X”
cohort (aged 31-47), 23% of married women and 9% of married men are married to an HBS alum. In the “Baby
Boomer” generation (aged 48-66), these rates are 23% and 5%, respectively (Ely, 2015). We do not know which
marriages occurred before business school.
   6
     A New York Times article about HBS reports that “after years of observation, administrators and professors
agreed that one particular factor was torpedoing female class participation grades: women, especially single women,
often felt they had to choose between academic and social success” (Kantor, 2013).



                                                        2
consequences.
       On the …rst day of the MBA program, during a career advising session for the newly-admitted
class, a career counselor asked students to complete a questionnaire about their job preferences. The
questionnaire asked about students’preferences over …elds and geography and included a number
of questions for which we expect that the answers that would make respondents more appealing
job candidates would also make women less attractive spouses. It asked about students’ desired
compensation, hours of work, and days per month of travel. It also asked students to rate their
leadership abilities and professional ambition. These questions are commonly used in recruiting
MBA students and shape what positions are considered a good …t for a candidate. From the
students’standpoint, this questionnaire had substantial stakes. This was the …rst information the
career center collected on students’preferences and they were told the information would be used
to place them into summer internships.7 The career o¢ ce informed us that students’ reported
preferences would have impacted their placement: for example, if a student was not willing to
travel at least four days per week, she would be steered away from consulting, while if she reported
not wanting to work long hours, she should not be placed in investment banking.8
       There were two slightly di¤erent versions of the instructions; which version a student received
was randomized. Both stated that a career counselor would see their answers. In the public
version, students were also told that “your” answers will be discussed in the career class, while in
the private version, students were told that “anonymized” answers would be discussed. The two
versions of the questionnaire looked essentially identical – they only di¤ered by one word (“your”
vs. “anonymized”) –so students did not know there were two versions of the questionnaire.9 When
students thought that their answers would only be viewed by a career counselor, single and non-
single women answered similarly.10 However, when single women expected their classmates to see
their answers, they portrayed themselves much less favorably to the labor market. They reported
desired compensation $18,000 per year lower. They said they would be willing to travel seven fewer
days per month and work four fewer hours per week.11 They also reported signi…cantly lower levels
of professional ambition and tendency for leadership. Neither non-single women nor men, regardless
of their relationship status, changed their answers when they expected their peers to observe their
   7
     The summer internship is perhaps the most important step for post-MBA placement. In the last graduating
cohort, 38% of MBA students accepted a post-graduation job at the same …rm at which they completed their
summer internship (from personal correspondence with the career o¢ ce).
   8
     In practice, after learning about the large e¤ects of our treatment for single women, the career center decided
not to use the questionnaires in placement. However, when completing the questionnaires, students did not know
this was an experiment or have any reason to believe the questionnaires would not be used.
   9
     This is similar to the design used in Bursztyn and Jensen (2015). Note that both versions of the questionnaire
were factually true: students’answers were eventually discussed in their career class, but anonymously.
  10
     While the grades data indicate only students’ marital status, the questionnaire asked a more detailed question
about their relationship status. We classify as non-single all students who do not indicate they are single: those who
are “in a serious relationship”, “cohabiting”, “engaged”, or “married.”
  11
     In the private treatment, single female students reported desired compensation of $131,000, and were willing to
travel 14 days a month and work 52 hours a week, on average.



                                                          3
choices.12
       To rule out an alternative interpretation that single women are simply more humble in public,
we included a placebo question on self-reported writing ability. Writing skills are valued in the
labor market, but not sanctioned in the marriage market. Thus, while we would predict that single
women would report similar writing abilities in both treatments, a humility explanation would not.
Consistent with our hypothesis, single women (and all other groups) rate their writing skills equally
in the public and private treatments.
       Perhaps surprisingly, there are very small gender di¤erences in the private treatment. Women
report lower desired compensation than men, but similar willingness to travel and work long hours,
professional ambition, and leadership abilities. Gender gaps emerge once students expect their
preferences to be shared with their peers. In other words, the bulk of the gender gap in responses
is driven by (single women’s response to) expected observability and not by di¤erences in private,
which are perhaps more likely to re‡ect “true” preferences.
       The primary experiment results indicate that single women, but not women in a relationship,
avoid actions that could help their careers when these actions have negative marriage market con-
sequences. A supplementary experiment shows that single women present themselves less favorably
to the labor market –and more favorably to the marriage market –when they believe their choices
will be seen by men as opposed to women. During a career class, students were asked to make
choices over three pairs of hypothetical jobs. Students made these choices individually, but were
told that if there was time at the end of class, the instructor would discuss their answers with the
small groups in which they were completing the rest of the class activities. These small groups
change from day-to-day and, on this day, they were randomized such that some single women were
in all-female groups while the remainder had all male groupmates. This was a natural activity
during a session discussing job …t and students did not know this was an experiment. They were
told that these forms would be collected at the end of class, so they knew the career center would
see them.
       When placed in all-female groups, 68% of women reported that they would prefer a job with a
higher salary that required 55-60 hours of work per week over a job with a lower salary requiring
only 45-50 hours per week. But, when placed with male peers, women were 26 percentage points less
likely to make this choice. Similarly, in all-female groups, 79% of single women reported preferring
a job with quicker promotion to partner but substantial travel over a job with slower and less
certain promotion but no travel. When placed with male peers, women were 42 percentage points
less likely to choose this option. Single women’s answers to a placebo choice between a job with
  12
    Of course, regardless of the questionnaire instructions, students’ internship and some personality traits will
eventually be observed. Having classmates observe their questionnaire answers both provides information more quickly
and provides information about student preferences that might not be perfectly inferred from actual placement. For
example, a student could tell her classmates that she was lucky to get a high-paying internship, without revealing her
underlying ambition. Similarly, some students may aim for, but not receive a prestigious internship. In the private
treatment, potential romantic partners would not necessarily observe the student’s career goals.


                                                          4
a positive social impact and a job with collegial coworkers were not a¤ected by their groupmates’
gender. We also exploit the random variation in the share of married men within the groups. Single
women are less likely to choose the career-focused option when there are more single –as opposed
to married - men in the group, consistent with marriage market signaling.13
       General di¤erences between single and non-single women are unlikely to drive our results. In the
primary experiment, single and non-single women report similar preferences and self-assessments in
the private treatment and even in the public treatment when answers are unlikely to be sanctioned
in the marriage market. Single and non-single women do not di¤er on observable characteristics.
Di¤erences in single and non-single women’s responses to the public treatment are robust to adding
interactions of the public treatment dummy with covariates. Similarly, in the observational data,
married and unmarried women have similar performance on exams and problem sets: di¤erences
only arise for the participation grades, and remain unchanged after controlling for covariates. Fi-
nally, the supplementary experiment shows that single women’s decision to portray themselves as
less ambitious in public is driven by the presence of male peers, and especially single male peers.
       Our results suggest that single women avoid actions that would help their careers because of
marriage market concerns. Many schooling and initial career decisions – such as whether to take
advanced math in high school, major in engineering, or become an entrepreneur – occur early in
life when most women are single. These decisions can have labor market consequences that last
long after these women get married. While extrapolating to other settings is beyond the scope of
this paper, elite female MBA students comprise a selected group that presumably places a higher
value on career success than the general female population. This suggests the e¤ects of marriage
market signaling are perhaps even larger in other contexts.
       These …ndings point to marriage market signaling as an additional explanation for gender
di¤erences in the labor market. Marriage market signaling is related to explanations surrounding
norms over gender identity and the propensity to negotiate.14 However, these existing explanations
have di¢ culty explaining our results. Gender di¤erences stemming from these explanations would
have likely appeared when comparing answers by male and female students in private and would
have likely not been restricted to single women, particularly given that single and non-single women
  13
      To keep the discussion of the results concise, we implicitly abstract from the possibility that some respondents
might be interested in same-sex partners. No data on students’sexual orientation is collected. Ninety-seven percent
of the US population labels itself as heterosexual (2014 National Health Interview Survey). The interpretation of our
observational and primary experiment results is unchanged if one assumes that homosexual and bisexual women have
similar partner preferences as heterosexual men, although whether this is true is an open question. The interpretation
of the supplementary experiment is based on the assumption that single women in our sample are interested in male
partners. The presence of a substantial share of women interested in same-sex partners would attenuate the results.
   14
      See, for example, Alesina et al. (2013), Akerlof and Kranton (2000), Baldiga (2014), Bertrand et al. (2015),
Bordalo et al. (2016), Co¤man (2014), Dohmen et al. (2011), Eckel and Grossman (2008), Fernández and Fogli
(2009), Fernández et al. (2004), and Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) on gender norms and identity and Exley et
al. (2016), Flory et al. (2014), and Leibbrandt and List (2015) on the propensity to negotiate. A large literature,
surveyed by Jayachandran (2015), studies the role of social norms in explaining gender inequality in developing
countries.



                                                          5
behave similarly in private. Our results also add to the literature on how individuals’ economic
decisions are a¤ected by social image concerns.15
         The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present descriptive
statistics on our sample and present results from the observational data: the survey about pre-MBA
career choices and classroom grades. Section 3 lays out the design of the primary and supplementary
experiments and presents the experimental results. Section 4 concludes.


2         Observational Evidence
2.1        Descriptive Statistics
We have four datasets on students in an elite MBA program. The …rst is administrative data on stu-
dents’grades in their (required) introductory economics class for the 2010 to 2015 entering cohorts.
The other three datasets –the survey, the primary experiment, and the supplementary experiment
–were collected on the 2016 entering cohort. Except for the survey, which was anonymous, we link
all of the datasets to admissions records, which has information on student characteristics.
         The …rst column of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on the 1,880 students who entered the
program between 2010 and 2015. Almost 70% of students are male. They average 28 years old, with
…ve years of work experience. Two-thirds are U.S. citizens, with most of the remainder coming from
Asia. The average GMAT score is above the 90th percentile of the national distribution, consistent
with admission to an elite business school. The second column provides statistics on the primary
experiment sample. Because the experiment was conducted on the …rst day of the program at the
career center introductory session, 98% of the class participated. The 2016 cohort looks similar to
the earlier cohorts.
         Admissions records for the 2010 to 2015 cohorts contain information on whether students were
married or in a domestic partnership at the time they applied to the program: only 18% of students
were.16 In the data we collect from the 2016 cohort, we have more detailed information on students’
relationship status.17 In the primary experiment, while only 20% of students are married, less than
half (46%) call themselves single. Twenty-two percent of students are in a serious relationship at
the start of the MBA program, while just under 10 percent are cohabiting or engaged. These frac-
tions are similar in the survey data (Column 3). The survey was voluntary and conducted during
    15
      See Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005), Bursztyn and Jensen (2015), and Fryer and Torelli (2010) on educational
choices; DellaVigna et al. (2017) on voting; Bénabou and Tirole (2006) on prosocial behavior in general; Charles et
al. (2009) on consumption; and Bursztyn and Jensen (2017) for a review of the topic.
   16
      The admissions o¢ ce did not collect this information for the 2016 entering cohort.
   17
      We did not ask for this information in the supplementary experiment. In the supplementary experiment analysis,
we use students’reported relationship status from the primary experiment.




                                                         6
the economics class during the middle of the semester and 76% of the class participated.18 In the
grades analysis, we can only compare married and unmarried students, while in the experimental
and survey data, we compare single students and students in serious relationships, including en-
gagements, cohabitations, and marriages. To distinguish this from the comparison of married and
unmarried students, we refer to these students as “single” and “non-single.”
       Appendix Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the grades and primary experiment samples
separately by gender and marital status. Married women are about two years older on average than
unmarried women and have more work experience. They are less likely to be U.S. citizens and are
more likely to be from Asia or Central or South America. However, their GMAT scores are similar
to those of unmarried women. Married men are also older (2.4 years on average), less likely to be
U.S. citizens, and more likely to be from Asia or Central or South America than unmarried men.
Married and unmarried men also have similar GMAT scores.
       Single and non-single women look much more similar. Non-single women are neither signi…cantly
older nor do they have signi…cantly more work experience. Single women are less likely to be U.S.
citizens, although the di¤erence is not statistically signi…cant. Again, there is little di¤erence in
the GMAT scores between single and non-single women. In the supplementary experiment, we only
analyze data from women who reported being single in the primary experiment. We discuss the
descriptive statistics of this sample in Section 3.4.

2.2      Survey on Past Behaviors
In October 2016, the …rst-year MBA cohort was asked to answer a short anonymous survey on
its prior work experience.19 The survey, presented in Appendix Figure 1, was conducted during
a required class (economics). It was intended as motivational evidence to assess (1) how often
single women avoid actions bene…cial to their careers to avoid appearing too ambitious or assertive
and (2) whether single women avoid these actions more than other groups, in particular non-single
women. Speci…cally, it asked:

         In the last two years, are there behaviors or activities at your work that could have
         helped you professionally that you didn’t undertake because you might have looked too
         ambitious, assertive, or pushy?

       We asked students who responded a¢ rmatively to mark any of four behaviors they did not
undertake for that reason: (1) speaking up at meetings, (2) o¤ering to make a presentation or sales
pitch, (3) asking for a leadership role in a team or task force, and (4) taking initiative in negotiating
  18
      We do not know whether students who did not take the survey were absent or simply chose not to participate.
Based on typical absence rates, we estimate an approximate 90% response rate among present students. Attendance
is not required or measured in this course.
   19
      Admissions data show that 96% of students in the 2016 cohort had at least two years of prior work experience.



                                                        7
a raise or asking for a promotion. We also left space for students to write in other activities that
they avoided, but no one did.20 We also asked students’ age and gender and information about
their relationship status.
       While this survey was not intended to provide causal evidence that single women adjust their
behavior because of marriage market concerns, the results displayed in Table 2 are striking. Relative
to the other groups and across all options provided, single women were more likely to report
having avoided these workplace behaviors, by amounts that are both economically and statistically
signi…cant. For example, 64% of single women did not take initiative in asking for a raise or a
promotion because they were worried about looking too ambitious, relative to 39% of non-single
women (the p-value of the di¤erence is 0.030), 30% of non-single men, and 25% of single men (the
p-value of the di¤erence between single women and all other groups is below 0.001). Fifty-two
percent of single women avoided speaking up at meetings for the same reason, relative to 33% of
non-single women (the p-value of the di¤erence is 0.095), 29% of non-single men, and 28% of single
men (the p-value of the di¤erence between single women and all other groups is 0.002). Moreover,
forty percent of single women avoided asking for a leadership role, and one quarter refrained from
o¤ering to make a presentation or a sales pitch, despite the fact that they thought these activities
could help them in their careers. Almost three quarters of single women (73%) reported avoiding
activities that they thought would help them professionally because they were concerned about
how it would make them look. Adding up the number of these actions that each group avoided
in the past generates a similar picture: the average number of avoided actions was 1.77 for single
women, 1.12 for non-single women (p-value of the di¤erence is 0.018), 0.92 for single men and 0.88
for non-single men (the p-value of the di¤erence between single women and all other groups is
below 0.001). Overall, women’s relationship status is predictive of avoiding these behaviors. Across
all four actions, non-single women look more similar to men than to single women; the largest
di¤erences are between single and non-single women.21

2.3      Results from Students Grades
As additional observational evidence, we compare students’ participation and non-participation
(midterm, …nal, and problem set) grades in their required …rst-year economics course. Students’
participation is visible to their classmates and can a¤ect the marriage market, whereas their perfor-
mance in the rest of the class can be kept private. Thus, we expect that unmarried women should
perform relatively worse on class participation than married women.
  20
      In practice, almost all students (98%) who said they avoided some activity marked one of the four activities we
listed. This indicates either that we captured the set of activities that students had avoided or that students largely
only considered whether they avoided the speci…c activities we listed when answering the umbrella question.
   21
      As described in the registration of the survey (AEARCTR-0001686), the di¤erences we observe between single
and non-single women may actually underestimate the behavior di¤erences between these two groups. Many of
the currently single women may have been in relationships within the two-year window, and vice versa. Moreover,
non-single women may be in relationships speci…cally because they avoided these seemingly-ambitious behaviors.


                                                          8
       All economics sections are graded in the same way: grades from the midterm exam, the …nal
exam, problem sets, and class participation combine to produce the overall class grade. Unlike
some other top business schools, this one reports grades to potential employers, so that grades
can have direct labor market consequences. Figure 1A compares married and unmarried women’s
participation and non-participation grades. Married and unmarried women perform virtually the
same on exams and problem sets. Unmarried women receive a 79.2, compared to 79.7 for married
women (p-value of di¤erence: 0.668). Married and unmarried women also perform similarly on
each of the individual components of this grade (Appendix Figure 2A).
       However, unmarried women perform almost six points, or a third of a standard deviation, lower
on class participation (71.9 vs. 77.6, p-value=0.013).22 In contrast, married and unmarried men
perform similarly on exams and problem sets (82.0 for unmarried men vs. 82.6 for married men, p-
value=0.259) and the components of this grade (Appendix Figure 2B). There is also little di¤erence
in their participation grades (76.9 vs. 76.1, p-value=0.488) (Figure 1B).23
       Figure 2 shows the distribution of single and married women’s participation (Panel A) and
non-participation grades (Panel B). Consistent with Figure 1, the distributions of non-participation
grades for married and unmarried women look very similar. However, the distribution of unmarried
women’s participation grades is shifted to the left. This shift appears throughout the distribution.
It is not the case, for example, that the top married and unmarried women participate equally or
that, below a certain threshold, there is no longer a di¤erence in participation grades by marital
status. Figure 3 shows that the distributions of participation and non-participation grades for
married and unmarried men are almost identical.
       While married and unmarried women do have di¤erent observable characteristics, these char-
acteristics do not drive the di¤erences in their participation grades. Appendix Table 2 shows that
the di¤erence in participation grades is almost identical and there is still no di¤erence in the non-
observable parts of the grade when controlling for other covariates observed at admission: age,
GMAT score, number of years of work experience, U.S. citizenship, and section (class) …xed ef-
fects.24 The di¤erence in participation grades by marital status is present throughout the GMAT
score distribution and for both U.S. and non-U.S. citizens. It is stronger for younger women in the
sample, but this may be in part because younger women are more likely to be truly single (not
in long-term relationships), even among the unmarried set. Because some unmarried students are
  22
     The p-values reported in this section are based on robust standard errors (regression coe¢ cients are presented
in Appendix Table 2). Clustering at the classroom level leads to similar conclusions: the p-value of the di¤erence in
participation grades between single and married women is 0.008. Given the relatively small number of clusters (27),
we also calculated a p-value equal to 0.006 using the wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure proposed by Cameron et al.
(2008).
  23
     We can reject that the di¤erence in participation grades by marital status for women is equal to the di¤erence
in their exam and problem set grades (p-value: 0.034) and that it is equal to the di¤erence in men’s participation
grades by marital status (p-value: 0.012).
  24
     Unmarried women tend to be younger than married women and younger women have (insigni…cantly) lower
participation grades. Yet unmarried women are more likely to be U.S. citizens, who have higher participation grades.


                                                         9
actually in relationships, the true di¤erence in participation grades between single and non-single
women may be larger than what we observe.25
         While professors have discretion over participation grades and these grades are by their nature
subjective, it is unlikely that our results are driven by professors discriminating against unmarried
women. Unconscious bias could lead professors to give women lower participation grades than men
for the same comments.26 However, it seems less likely that professors would discriminate against
unmarried women relative to married women. In personal correspondence, these professors reported
that they did not know their students’ relationship status. Additionally, the point estimates are
very similar when we restrict the sample to individual professors, indicating the behavior of a subset
of instructors cannot drive the results. The di¤erence in female participation grades by marital
status is equally present under male and female professors.


3         Experimental Evidence
3.1        Primary Experiment Design
The primary experiment took place on the …rst day of the MBA program during a 45-minute session
the career center hosted for the entire incoming class to discuss its role in student placement. The
instructor asked students to …ll out an introductory questionnaire that would be used to help
with summer internship placement. Summer internships are a key stepping stone to landing a
permanent position. Roughly 50% of students in the program’s last graduating cohort received
a post-graduation job o¤er from their internship company, and over two-thirds of these students
accepted it.27 Because summer internships are so important for ultimate placement, MBA programs
spend substantial time and resources preparing students for internship interviews.
         Two versions of the introductory questionnaire were distributed: a public and a private version
which were identical aside from one word in the instructions. Both versions said that students’
career advisor would see their answers and that employers would not. However, the public version
told students that “your” answers will be discussed in the career class, while the private version
told students that “anonymized” answers will be discussed.28 Speci…cally, the instructions read:

           The information on this survey will help the career o¢ ce get to know you and help
           it …nd the right …t for your …rst-year internship. This information will not be shared
    25
     In the 2016 cohort, 41% of unmarried women were in serious relationships. If we assume this statistic is similar in
previous cohorts and that married women and women in relationships have similar participation grades, the di¤erence
between the participation grades of single and non-single women is 57% of a standard deviation (9.6 points).
  26
     Women perform 4.2 points lower than men on participation, relative to 2.9 points lower on exams and problem
sets. We have no reason to believe this di¤erence is due to professor bias.
  27
     This is from personal correspondence with the career center.
  28
     The career class is a for-credit class that is required for all students. It covers skills such as networking, resume
creation, interviewing, and negotiating.



                                                           10
         with employers, so please express your true preferences, not just what you think em-
         ployers want to hear. This information will be shared with your career advisor and
         [your/anonymized] answers will be discussed during the [name of the career class].

       In practice, only de-identi…ed survey answers were discussed in class.29 This is a subtle treat-
ment: to the extent that some students did not read the instructions carefully or some students
in the public treatment assumed that they could opt out of discussing their responses, our results
provide a lower bound estimate of the true impact of making responses public.
       An equal number of public and private questionnaires were randomly sorted into a pile that
was passed out in class.30 Students received their questionnaire with a cover page, so when they
were passing the questionnaires, they would neither have seen their classmates’answers (consistent
with answer privacy in the private treatment), nor would they have noticed the slight di¤erence in
instruction wording between the versions. To our knowledge, no one noticed the di¤erence in the
questionnaires.
       The questionnaire, which is presented in Appendix Figure 3, was developed to ask informa-
tion that is important when helping students …nd internships. The questionnaire …rst asks for
demographic information – students’ age, gender, and relationship and parental status. It then
asks for students’ preferences over industries and geography. The most popular industries were
technology (mentioned by 59% of women and 50% of men) and consulting (mentioned by 37% of
women and 41% of men).31 Nine percent of students indicated they were willing to move anywhere
in the world, while an additional 14% were ‡exible within the United States. An additional 40%
of students speci…cally indicated interest in staying in the metropolitan area of the university (in
addition to possibly other areas). Whether students were in the public or private treatment did
not a¤ect their stated preferences over industries or geography.
       For our purposes, the heart of the questionnaire is a series of questions designed to present a
trade-o¤ for single women: responses which would improve women’s careers would have potentially
negative marriage market consequences. The questionnaire asks how often students are willing
to travel for work, the number of hours per week they are willing to work, and their desired
compensation.32 They were also asked to rate their ambition relative to their most recent work
colleagues and their tendency to lead in day-to-day interactions on a 1-to-5 scale.
       Positive answers to all these questions can all be seen as signals of professional ambition. Fisman
et al. (2006) show male Columbia graduate students (including MBAs) …nd ambition in female
  29
     This is consistent with both sets of instructions as the public version did not explicitly say that the answers
would be identi…able when discussed.
  30
     The randomization was strati…ed as follows. Let n index the questionnaire’s place in the pile. For any odd n;
questionnaire n and n + 1 were never of the same version. Questionnaire n had equal likelihood of being the public
or private version.
  31
     On average, students listed two to three industries.
  32
     Desired compensation was asked for students’ …rst year after graduation, including base pay, performance pay,
and equity, but excluding the signing bonus.


                                                        11
partners undesirable when it exceeds their own. Willingness to travel and work long hours signal
less availability for home production. Bertrand et al. (2010) …nd that di¤erences in work hours
partly explains the gender gap in earnings among Booth MBA graduates. Research in psychology
also indicates that an inclination for leadership is viewed more negatively in women than men (e.g.,
Eagly and Karau, 2002; Rudman et al., 2012).
       Finally, we asked students to rate their agreement (on a 1-to-5 scale) with the statement that
they have above-average writing skills. This was intended as a placebo to di¤erentiate our theory
–in which single women avoid traits sanctioned in the marriage market –from one in which single
women want to appear more humble and rate themselves worse on any positive attribute when
they think others will see their answers. Focus group testing on Mechanical Turk supported our
hypothesis that men typically view writing skills as having a positive or no impact on a relationship.
Students were also asked to rate their comfort in competitive environments. While we had intended
this to capture students’competitiveness, our results and focus grouping suggest that men did not
view this as a negative signal in the marriage market. The focus group suggested that many men
did not read this to imply that women were themselves competitive, but instead that they were
comfortable in a variety of settings. We deliberately chose not to ask respondents to rate their own
competitiveness since, unlike ambition and leadership, competitiveness is not necessarily viewed
positively by employers (per our discussions with human resources and career services personnel).
       Because students were told that the questionnaire would be used in …rst-year internship place-
ment, it had relatively high stakes for them. This was the …rst information the career center had
on students’ work preferences (outside of general …elds of interest reported on the application).
Students’ preferences heavily a¤ect what jobs the career center views as good …ts for them. For
example, the director of the career center told us that if students reported desiring less travel,
they would be steered away from consulting (which commonly requires traveling four or more days
per week), and if students reported not wanting to work long hours, they should not be placed in
investment banking. However, after the questionnaire was administered, the career center decided
not to use the questionnaire in placement since the large e¤ects of the public treatment would have
harmed single women.33 Students did not know the questionnaire was part of a research project,
making the possibility of experimenter demand e¤ects unlikely. Three months after the experi-
ment took place, we presented the results to interested students and no one mentioned that they
suspected these questionnaires could have been part of a research project.
  33
    The career center was not surprised by the direction of our measured e¤ects. It was interested in running this
experiment because it believed that single women were less willing to take jobs with substantial travel or long hours
due to marriage market concerns. However, the center was surprised by the magnitude of the e¤ects.




                                                         12
3.2      Supplementary Experiment Design
Three months after the primary experiment, we ran a supplementary experiment designed to iden-
tify whether single women would disproportionately represent themselves as less ambitious and
career-focused in front of their male classmates.
       During the career class’s last meeting of the semester (on job …t), students were given a ques-
tionnaire with three pairs of hypothetical jobs and asked to choose their preferred job in each pair.
The questionnaire is presented in Appendix Figure 4. Each job was described by one sentence and
the pairs were designed to present a clear trade-o¤. Students chose between a job with a high
salary requiring 55-60 hours per week and a job with a lower salary requiring 45-50 hours per week.
They also chose between a job with constant travel, but with the opportunity of rapid promotion to
partner and a job with no travel, but in which promotion was slower and less certain. To disguise
the intent of the exercise and to act as a placebo students were asked to choose between a job
with a positive social impact but little interaction with coworkers and a job with a collegial and
collaborative work environment, but no social impact.
       The two questions of interest were designed to capture – as in the primary experiment – the
trade-o¤ between labor market success (higher salary, quick promotion to partner) and desirability
in the marriage market (shorter hours, no travel). We presented a choice between two jobs so this
would not seem too similar to the primary experiment questionnaire. These are relevant choices
that students need to consider and it seems natural for them to do so in a class on job …t.34
       Students were placed into small groups of six or seven for other class activities, a common
practice in the course. They were asked to complete the questionnaire before they started the day’s
group work and were told to move onto the rest of the group work when …nished. Speci…cally, the
instructions read:

         Please …ll out the following questionnaire. There are no right or wrong answers. Once
         you have …nished the questionnaire, continue onto the rest of the group work. If there
         is time at the end of class, the instructor will circulate and discuss your answers with
         your small group. The forms will be collected at the end of class.

       Thus, students thought their answers would be seen by the career counselor and potentially by
the rest of their small group. While students likely believed that this questionnaire did not have
as high stakes as the primary experiment questionnaire, they still had reason to believe the career
center was interested in their answers and thus, their answers could a¤ect their placement.35
       The key manipulation was that we randomized the gender composition of the small groups.
Approximately half of single women were placed into all-female groups and the remainder were
  34
     After this experiment, we presented the results to interested students and no one mentioned that they suspected
these questionnaires could have been part of a research project.
  35
     Students’responses were not actually used in placement, given the large e¤ects of groupmates’gender we …nd.


                                                        13
placed with all male groupmates. Thus, some single women thought that their answers could be
shared with other women, while the remainder thought their answers could be shared with men.36
       Due to limited power and the …nding from the primary experiment that only single women’s
answers are a¤ected by peer observability, we focus on the e¤ect of peer gender on single women’s
responses. To form enough all-female groups so that half of single women could be in them and
to maximize the number of separate all-female groups single women were in, all non-single women
were placed into all-female groups. Some men were in groups with one single woman, while the
remainder formed all-male groups. Since there is no variation in gender group composition for non-
single women and very little for men (all are in predominantly male groups), we only report the
e¤ect of group gender composition on single women. The other three groups’average choices are
presented in an appendix …gure. Men were allocated to their groups at random, without reference to
their relationship status.37 While the groups were randomized within section, students’allocation
to sections was determined in part by their schedule and …eld of interest.38 Thus, we control for
section …xed e¤ects throughout.

3.3      Primary Experiment Results
Because the primary experiment was conducted on the …rst day of the program, virtually the
whole class (98%) participated. Throughout the analysis, we compare single students to non-single
students: those who are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married. This provides
more precision than categorizing students by their marital status alone since students in serious
relationships are less likely to be a¤ected by marriage market concerns.39 Table 3 shows that the
randomization produced balanced samples within each of the four gender-by-relationship-status
subgroups, while Appendix Table 3 shows that the randomization was balanced within the sample
as a whole. We …nd no signi…cant di¤erences between the public and private treatment samples
in any of the four subgroups or the entire sample. Table 3 also shows that single and non-single
women look relatively similar on observable characteristics: they are of similar ages with similar
work experience and have similar GMAT scores. The only di¤erence is that single women are
(insigni…cantly) less likely to be U.S. citizens.
       Before discussing each outcome individually, we provide an overall test of our main hypothesis.
Following Kling et al. (2007), we construct an index pooling all six of our outcomes, directly ad-
  36
     This questionnaire did not ask for students’ relationship status. While this type of demographic information is
commonly asked on placement questionnaires, it would be odd to ask this information in a class exercise. Because we
needed to know students’relationship status before the experiment to create the groups, we used students’reported
relationship status from the primary experiment.
  37
     These decisions were pre-registered in AEARCTR-0001774.
  38
     These factors do not a¤ect students’allocation to the economics sections analyzed in Section 2.3.
  39
     Separating out students who are in serious relationships from those who are married shows that neither group
systematically changes their answers when they believe their answers will be public. However, we cannot rule out
small changes by unmarried women in relationships.



                                                        14
                                                                              P
                                                                              6
dressing the issue of multiple hypothesis testing. The index is (1=6)             (k   k )= k ,   where k indexes
                                                                             k=1
an outcome, and       k   and   k   are the mean and standard deviation of that outcome for non-single
female students in the private treatment. Results are similar using the mean and standard devia-
tions of other groups. The index conservatively includes the comfort-with-competitive-environment
question for which, as previously discussed, our predictions are not as clear. It does not include
the writing skills question as that was designed as a placebo.
    The …rst column of Table 4 provides the results of regressing the index on an indicator for being
in the public treatment, separately for each of the four gender-by-relationship-status subgroups.
Non-single women and single and non-single men do not change their answers when they expect
their answers to be shared with classmates. The e¤ect for these groups is not only insigni…cant
but also relatively small. Yet single women do change their answers. Single women decrease
their responses by an average of 0.56 standard deviations due to peer observability. This e¤ect is
signi…cant at the 1% level. We can formally reject that the e¤ect for single women is the same as
for non-single women (p-value: 0.032) and all other students (p-value below 0.001).
    A natural question about Table 4 is whether our statistical inferences are sound, given the rela-
tively small number of observations in each experimental condition. As an alternative to standard
t-tests to determine statistical signi…cance, throughout the discussion of our experimental …ndings,
we also report results from (Fisher-exact) permutation tests. The permutation test for the e¤ect
for single women leads to a p-value of 0.0002: out of the 10,000 random reassignments of treatment
status we performed, only two generated e¤ects of absolute size equal or greater to the one observed
in the data.40
    The four subgroups have similar mean values of this index in the private treatment. Single
women have average private responses that are only 0.06 standard deviations lower than non-single
women (p-value: 0.677). In other words, single and non-single women respond di¤erently when
they believe their answers will be public, but they behave similarly in private. This suggests that
single and non-single women have similar career goals and would like to send similar signals to
their career advisor, but that single women face a more signi…cant trade-o¤ between signaling their
career advisor and their classmates. Appendix Table 4 shows these results do not change when we
include controls for student characteristics.
    The e¤ects of the public treatment on responses to each individual question are presented in
Figures 4 through 10. Table 4 and Appendix Table 4 show regression results are similar without
and with controls, while Appendix Figures 5 through 11 show the CDFs of responses.
    In the private treatment, single women and women in a relationship report similar desired
   40
      All reported permutation p-values use 10,000 repetitions and are two-sided. The permutation p-values for the
e¤ect of the treatment on the other three groups (non-single women, single men, and non-single men) are not
signi…cant (all above 0.29).




                                                       15
compensation ($131,000 and $135,000, respectively, Figure 4).41 Students aiming for higher-paying
industries report desiring higher salaries. Even in the private treatment, men report higher desired
compensation than do women ($147,000 and $141,000 for single men and men in a relationship,
respectively). This is not driven by industry preferences; men report higher desired compensation
that women conditional on the industries they report wanting to work in.
       Single women dramatically decrease their reported desired compensation –by $18,000 per year
or 14% –when they think their classmates will see their responses.42 This di¤erence is signi…cant
using both robust standard errors (p-value: 0.030) and a permutation test (p-value: 0.029). As in
the grade analysis, the e¤ect shows up throughout the distribution. While 16% of single women
in the private treatment report desired compensation above $150,000, only 3% of single women in
the public treatment do. Meanwhile, while 10% of women in the private treatment report desired
compensation below $100,000, 21% of women in public do (Appendix Figure 5). In contrast, non-
single women and single and non-single men’s reported desired compensation does not change with
the treatment.
       Single women also report being willing to travel signi…cantly less in the public treatment. In the
private treatment, they report being willing to travel an average of 14 days per month. However,
this decreases to seven in the public treatment (Figure 5). This e¤ect is signi…cant at the 1% level
using both the robust standard errors (p-value: 0.005) or a permutation test (p-value: 0.006). In
the private treatment, 32% say they would rather not travel or are only willing to travel a few days
a month. The public treatment does not increase this fraction. However, in the private treatment,
32% of single women report being willing to travel as much as necessary. No single women reported
that in the public treatment. According to the career center, students should not be placed in
consulting jobs unless they are willing to travel at least four days per week for extended periods
of time. While 39% of single women in the private treatment reported they were willing to travel
that much, only 14% of single women in the public treatment did. As above, the treatment did
not signi…cantly a¤ect the reported preferences of non-single women (for which the e¤ect is close
to zero) or single or non-single men (who both report more willingness to travel in public, although
the e¤ect is not statistically signi…cant).
       In the private treatment, all four groups reported being willing to work between 51 and 53
hours per week on average (Figure 6). In the public treatment, however, both single and non-single
women reported wanting to work four fewer hours.43 Single men did not change their responses,
  41
     For all questions where students chose a range –desired compensation, hours of work, and days of travel –we code
answers as the midpoint of the chosen range. As suggested by the distribution of responses presented in Appendix
Figures 5 through 11, our results are robust to coding responses as the maximum or minimum of the chosen range
and to di¤erent codings of the endpoint ranges.
  42
     Because the career center decided not to use this questionnaire in placement, we do not know the causal impact
of reporting lower desired compensation on ultimate career outcomes. A small dataset from a recruiting …rm with
data on desired and eventual compensation …nds that they are highly correlated: a $1 increase in desired salary is
correlated with an additional $0.77 in actual salary. However, this may not be causal.
  43
     The p-value of this di¤erence for single women is 0.071 (robust standard errors) or 0.091 (permutation test).


                                                         16
but surprisingly, non-single men reported wanting to work three more hours per week in the public
treatment. Overall, very few people (2%) reported wanting to work 40 hours or fewer per week. The
disparities in the public and private treatments come at higher hours of work. For example, while
52% of single women are willing to work more than 50 hours per week in the private treatment,
only 31% are willing to do so in the public treatment (Appendix Figure 7).44
       Figures 7 and 8 show self-reported tendency to lead and professional ambition, reported on a 1-
to-5 scale. When they think their classmates will see their responses, single women rate themselves
substantially lower on both metrics.45 No single woman in the public treatment rated herself as a
5 (the top rating) in either question. However, in the private treatment, 16% and 42% of single
women rated themselves as a 5 on leadership and professional ambition, respectively (Appendix
Figures 8 and 9). Single women’s self-reports in the private treatment were similar to those of
non-single women, single men, and non-single men, none of whose self-reports were a¤ected by the
treatment.
       Throughout the questionnaire, single women change their answers to look less professionally
ambitious – and hence less desirable to the labor market – when they think their classmates will
see their answers. Non-single women are much less likely to do so. In principle, this could result
from general di¤erences in how single and non-single women portray themselves in public (single
women could be shyer, for example). However, four pieces of evidence suggest this is not the case.
       First, the supplementary experiment shows that single women’s self-portrayal varies substan-
tially with their audience’s gender (see Section 3.4). Second, single and non-single women provide
similar answers in the private treatment. This suggests that they have similar skills and career
preferences. Additionally, any di¤erence between single and non-single women that drives sin-
gle women’s di¤erential responsiveness to the public treatment must be uncorrelated with their
behavior in private.46
       Third, Appendix Table 5 directly addresses whether observable di¤erences between single and
non-single women can explain our results. We regress survey responses on the interaction of the
single dummy and public treatment indicator, controlling for observable characteristics (age, years
of work experience, GMAT score, and U.S. citizenship) and the interactions of these characteristics
with the public treatment indicator. Regressions are limited to women and include controls for the
single and public indicators themselves. If it were not women’s relationship status that made them
di¤erentially responsive to the public treatment, but instead some other characteristic correlated
  44
     Bertrand et al. (2010) …nd that in only one of 27 job categories (management) did Chicago Booth MBA graduates
work fewer than 50 hours per week on average. The two industries with the longest hours are investment banking
(74 hours per week) and consulting (61 hours per week).
  45
     The permutation-based p-values of the e¤ects for single women are 0.055 for tendency to lead and below 0.001
for professional ambition.
  46
     For example, suppose single women are more humble than non-single ones, and hence more likely to avoid
portraying themselves positively to classmates. Then, we would also expect single women to portray themselves less
positively to their career advisor, which they do not.



                                                       17
with relationship status, adding these interactions should reduce the measured e¤ect of the treat-
ment for single women. But this is not the case. For example, on the index, the regressions indicate
that single women decrease their responses in the public treatment by a statistically signi…cant 0.47
standard deviations more than do non-single women, which is similar to the 0.41 standard devia-
tions we obtain without controls (Table 4). While adding the controls decreases power, across all
outcomes the coe¢ cients with controls are similar to the results without. This also shows that if
di¤erences between single and non-single women’s unobservable characteristics are driving the re-
sults, these unobservable characteristics must be more highly correlated with women’s relationship
status than with any of the other controls.
   Fourth, to directly test whether single women rate themselves more poorly on all dimensions in
public or only those that may harm them in the marriage market, we asked students to rate their
writing skills, skills we do not expect to be penalized in the marriage market. All four groups rated
themselves highly in private: about 70% rated themselves as a four or a …ve. However, neither single
women nor any other group signi…cantly changed their answers in the public treatment (Figure 9
and Appendix Figure 10).
   Figure 10 shows that single women (and all other groups) rated their comfort in competitive
environments similarly in the public and private treatments. While this question was originally
intended to measure individuals’ own competitiveness, as discussed above, it is likely that indi-
viduals did not interpret it this way. In fact, our focus group indicated many men prefer women
who are comfortable in a range of environments. Hence, this result is consistent with single women
changing their responses in public to look less appealing to the labor market only when this can
improve their marriage market prospects.
   Finally, we assess how much peer observability contributes to the gender gap in responses. Table
5 shows the results of regressing outcomes on a female dummy separately in the public and private
treatments. In the private treatment, men and women behave similarly. Men desire approximately
$11,000 more in annual compensation, but have similar willingness to travel and work long hours.
In fact, despite the fact that female MBAs work fewer hours after leaving school (Bertrand et al.,
2010), in the private treatment, women report being willing to work (an insigni…cant) 0.9 hours
per week more than do men. Men also report similar ambition and tendency for leadership in the
private treatment. However, gender gaps emerge in the public treatment. In the public treatment,
women report being willing to travel 7 fewer days per month and work 5 fewer hours per week.
They also rate themselves as less ambitious with less tendency towards leadership. The gap in
desired compensation increases by about 50% as well.
   While we are reluctant to extrapolate the results of these regressions to gender gaps in other
contexts, this analysis suggests that the trade-o¤ between maximizing labor and marriage market
success has the potential to explain at least a part of existing gender gaps.




                                                 18
3.4      Supplementary Experiment Results
The supplementary experiment was designed to assess whether single women would portray them-
selves less favorably to the labor market in front of male than female peers. Only students who
came to the last session of the career class participated. The two-thirds of single women who par-
ticipated look similar to the remainder who did not (Appendix Table 6). The randomization is also
balanced: the characteristics of single women with male and female peers are similar, conditional
on section …xed e¤ects (Appendix Table 7). Intended treatment was unknown to students before
the experiment and does not predict participation.
       Figure 11 shows the key results. The Female Peers bars contain the fraction of single women in
all-female groups who chose the indicated job. Because treatment was only random within section,
the Male Peers bars are calculated through regressions. First, we determine the e¤ect of being
with male (relative to female) peers from regressions with section …xed e¤ects. Then, we add this
treatment e¤ect to the Female Peers mean. Standard errors are clustered at the group level.47
       The …rst question asked students to choose between a job with a high salary requiring 55-60
hours per week and a job with a lower salary, requiring 45-50 hours per week. When placed in all-
female groups, 68% of single women chose the higher salary job. However, with male peers, single
women were 26 percentage points less likely to do so (p-value: 0.067). Similarly, when asked to
choose between a job with the opportunity of quick promotion to partner, but constant travel and
a job with no travel but in which promotion to partner was slower and less certain, 79% of single
women in all-female groups chose the job with better promotion possibilities. Single women were 42
percentage points less likely to do so (p-value: 0.012) when placed with male peers. Unsurprisingly,
single women’s reported preferences over a job with a social impact relative to a job with a collegial
work environment were una¤ected by peer gender.
       These results are not driven by within-group correlation in responses. Consistent with students
completing the questionnaires on their own, there is no correlation between an individual’s responses
and the responses of the rest of the group, conditional on treatment status. The results are robust
to adding controls for students’ demographic characteristics (Appendix Table 8). Table 6 shows
regression results, including results for the Kling et al. (2007) index for the two questions of interest
(excluding the placebo question).48 Single women decrease the career-focus of their answers on this
index by approximately 0.8 standard deviations when male, as opposed to female peers, will see
their answers. This e¤ect has a p-value of 0.002 using standard errors clustered at the group level
(Table 6). To account for the relatively small number of observations and groups, we also performed
permutation-based inference (p-value: 0.006) and the wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure proposed
  47
    Appendix Figure 12 displays the choices of non-single women and single and non-single men.
  48
    Here, when constructing the index, we use the mean and standard deviation from single women in all-female
groups. Results are robust to using other groups’mean and standard deviation instead.




                                                     19
by Cameron et al. (2008) (p-value: 0.006).49
    Our group assignment procedure also generated random variation in the marital status of male
peers.50 Because of limited power and the career center’s belief that women would not know their
groupmates’ relationship status, we did not plan to utilize this variation (AEARCTR-0001774).
However, with the caveat that this was not pre-registered, we can assess how single women’s answers
change with the fraction of their male peers who are unmarried.51 Panel B of Table 6 shows that
single women represent themselves as less career-focused when there are more unmarried –relative
to married – men in their group. There is a negative and signi…cant (at the 1% level) e¤ect of
the share of unmarried male groupmates on the index and the preference for a high salary relative
to a better work schedule. However, there is no signi…cant e¤ect of this share on single women’s
reported preference for quick promotion relative to less travel.
    These results are based on a broad variation in the share of single men across groups, and do
not appear to be driven by a few outliers (Appendix Figure 13). They are robust to the inclusion
of controls (Appendix Table 8). Given the small number of groups, we also performed inference
based on permutations and the Cameron et al. (2008) wild cluster bootstrap-t procedure and …nd
similar p-values.52 ’53


4     Conclusion
Single women shy away from actions that could improve their careers to avoid signaling undesirable
personality traits to the marriage market. Three-quarters of single female students at an elite U.S.
MBA program report having avoided activities they thought would help their careers to avoid
looking ambitious, assertive, or pushy. They are more likely to have avoided these activities than
non-single women or men. Unmarried women participate much less in class than married women,
despite the fact that they perform equivalently on the parts of the grade unobservable to their peers.
When they expect their classmates to observe their answers, single women report substantially less
  49
     Single women were in 32 separate groups. The permutation-based p-values for the individual answers are 0.130
(prefers salary over fewer hours), 0.010 (prefers promotion over less travel), and 0.953 (placebo question). The
respective bootstrap-based p-values are 0.064, 0.030, and 0.976.
  50
     The share of unmarried men in a group is uncorrelated with characteristics of their single female groupmates, as
expected given the random assignment (Appendix Table 7).
  51
     We consider the share of men who are unmarried as opposed to not in a relationship since marital status is more
observable (i.e., by wedding rings).
  52
     The permutation p-value for the index is 0.050, while for the salary, promotion, and placebo questions they are
0.001, 0.851, and 0.243, respectively. The bootstrapped p-values are 0.060, 0.008, 0.780, and 0.210, respectively.
  53
     Because of limited power and the nature of the class setting, we did not include a control group in this experiment
in which single women’s answers were not shared with any classmates. Thus, the results from this experiment alone
could be explained by single women trying to look more ambitious (than they would in private communication with
the career center) around female and married male peers. However, this is hard to reconcile with our results from
the primary experiment. If single women wanted to look more ambitious in front of women and married men, to
rationalize our results in the primary experiment, they would have to want to look extremely unambitious in front of
unmarried male classmates.



                                                          20
career ambition in a questionnaire designed to be instrumental in …nding them a summer internship.
They also express much less career ambition in front of their (single) male than female classmates.
   Our results have implications for understanding gender gaps in labor market outcomes. It also
highlights the importance of social norms – particularly what is di¤erentially expected from (and
preferred in) a husband and a wife – in explaining gender gaps. Women make many important
schooling and career decisions while looking for a romantic partner. Our results raise the possibility
that a desire to succeed in the dating or marriage markets may a¤ect choices that range from
investment in middle- or high-school math to college major or industry of work that have long-
term consequences for women’s careers. We hope future work extends the analysis to other contexts,
explores the long-run consequences of this trade-o¤, and assesses interventions that may mitigate its
e¤ects on women’s careers. For example, schools and workplaces often have to decide the extent to
which students’and employees’actions are observable to others. Our results suggest that obscuring
certain actions could a¤ect gender gaps.
   Another open question is whether women hold accurate beliefs about men’s marriage market
preferences. Existing work (e.g., Fisman et al., 2006) suggests that even men in elite graduate
school programs prefer less ambitious and assertive partners. Nevertheless, women may be over-
or under-estimating these preferences.


References
Akerlof, G. A., and R. E. Kranton (2000): “Economics and Identity,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 115(3), 715–753.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
  the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469–530.

Austen-Smith, D., and R. G. Fryer (2005): “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White’,”Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 551–583.

Baldiga, K. (2014): “Gender Di¤erences in Willingness to Guess,” Management Science, 60(2),
  434–448.

Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2006): “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic
  Review, 96(5), 1652–1678.

Bertrand, M., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2010): “Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young
  Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2(3), 228–255.

Bertrand, M., E. Kamenica, and J. Pan (2015): “Gender Identity and Relative Income Within
  Households,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(2), 571–614.

                                                 21
Bordalo, P., K. B. Coffman, N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2016): “Beliefs about Gen-
  der,” NBER Working Paper No. 22972.

Brown, S. L., and B. P. Lewis (2004): “Relational Dominance and Mate-Selection Criteria:
  Evidence that Males Attend to Female Dominance,” Evolution and Human Behavior, 25(6),
  406–415.

Bursztyn, L., and R. Jensen (2015): “How Does Peer Pressure A¤ect Educational Invest-
  ments?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1329–1367.

            (2017): “Social Image and Economic Behavior in the Field: Identifying, Understanding
  and Shaping Social Pressure,” Annual Review of Economics, 9.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008): “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
  for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 414–427.

Careerbuilder.com (2012): “Nearly One-Third of Workers Who Had O¢ ce Romances Married
  Their Co-Worker, Finds Annual CareerBuilder Valentine’s Day Survey,” Webpage.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and N. Roussanov (2009): “Conspicuous Consumption and Race,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 425–467.

Coffman, K. B. (2014): “Evidence on Self-Stereotyping and the Contribution of Ideas,”Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1625–1660.

DellaVigna, S., J. A. List, U. Malmendier, and G. Rao (2017): “Voting to Tell Others,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 84(1), 143–181.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, U. Sunde, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011): “In-
  dividual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and Behavioral Consequences,” Journal
  of the European Economic Assocation, 9(3), 522–550.

Eagly, A. H., and S. J. Karau (2002): “Role Congruity Theory of Prejudice Toward Female
  Leaders,” Psychological Review, 109(3), 573–598.

Eckel, C. C., and P. J. Grossman (2008): “Men, Women and Risk Aversion: Experimental
  Evidence,”in Handbook of Experimental Economic Results, ed. by C. R. Plott, and V. L. Smith,
  vol. 1.

Ely, R. J. (2015): “Life and Leadership After HBS,” [Data set]. Gender Initiative, Harvard
  Business School.

Exley, C. L., M. Niederle, and L. Vesterlund (2016): “Knowing When to Ask: The Cost
  of Leaning In,” NBER Working Paper No. 22961.

                                                22
Fernández, R., and A. Fogli (2009): “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
  and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 146–177.

Fernández, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004): “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation
  and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1249–1299.

Fisman, R., S. S. Iyengar, E. Kamenica, and I. Simonson (2006): “Gender Di¤erences in
  Mate Selection: Evidence from a Speed Dating Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  121(2), 673–697.

Flory, J. A., A. Libbrandt, and J. A. List (2014): “Do Competitive Workplaces Deter
  Female Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Job-Entry Decisions,”The Review
  of Economic Studies, 82(1), 122–155.

Folke, O., and J. Rickne (2016): “All the Single Ladies: Job Promotions and the Durability of
  Marriage,” IFN Working Paper No. 1146.

Fryer, R. G., and P. Torelli (2010): “An Empirical Analysis of ‘Acting White’,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 95(5), 380–396.

Greitemeyer, T. (2007): “What Do Men and Women Want in a Partner? Are Educated Partners
  Always More Desirable?,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 180–194.

Hitsch, G. J., A. Hortaçsu, and D. Ariely (2010): “Matching and Sorting in Online Dating,”
  American Economic Review, 100(1), 130–163.

Jayachandran, S. (2015): “The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries,” Annual
  Review of Economics, 7, 63–88.

Kantor, J. (2013): “Harvard Business School Case Study: Gender Equity,”The New York Times.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007): “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
  E¤ects,” Econometrica, 75(1), 83–119.

Lee, S. (2009): “Marriage and Online Mate-Search Services: Evidence From South Korea,” Uni-
  versity of Maryland, College Park.

Leibbrandt, A., and J. A. List (2015): “Do Women Avoid Salary Negotiations? Evidence from
  a Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment,” Management Science, 61(9), 2016–2024.

National Center for Health Statistics (2015):               “National Health Interview Sur-
  vey,   2014,” Public-use data …le and documentation. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/
  quest_data_related_1997_forward.htm.


                                              23
Niederle, M., and L. Vesterlund (2007): “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men
 Compete Too Much?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067–1101.

Rosenfeld, M. J., R. J. Thomas, and M. Falcon (2015): “How Couples Meet and Stay
 Together, Waves 1, 2, and 3: Public version 3.04,” [Computer …les].

Rudman, L. A., C. A. Moss-Racusin, J. E. Phelan, and S. Nauts (2012): “Status In-
 congruity and Backlash E¤ects: Defending the Gender Hierarchy Motivates Prejudice Against
 Female Leaders,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(1), 165–179.




                                              24
                                                  Figure 1A. Women's Grades



    100
                            p-value = 0.013                                                                p-value = 0.668


    80 60
  Grade
40  20




                      77.64                     71.93                                               79.66                     79.22
    0




                              Participation                                                         Exams and Problem Sets

                                                             Married                          Unmarried
            Notes: "Participation" is the participation grade assigned by the instructor. "Exams and Problem Sets" is a weighted average of
            grades on the midterm exam, the final exam, and problem sets, where the weights are the ones used by instructors in calculating
            the final grade. Both measures are out of 100. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from a regression of the outcome
            on an indicator for being unmarried using robust standard errors.




                                                      Figure 1B. Men's Grades
    100




                            p-value = 0.488                                                                p-value = 0.259
    80 60
  Grade
40  20




                      76.10                     76.94                                               82.62                     82.00
    0




                              Participation                                                         Exams and Problem Sets

                                                             Married                          Unmarried
            Notes: "Participation" is the participation grade assigned by the instructor. "Exams and Problem Sets" is a weighted average of
            grades on the midterm exam, the final exam, and problem sets, where the weights are the ones used by instructors in calculating
            the final grade. Both measures are out of 100. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from a regression of the outcome
            on an indicator for being unmarried using robust standard errors.




                                                                     25
                                  Figure 2. Distribution of Women's Grades
                        A. Participation Grades                                             B. Exams and Problem Sets Grades


   .03




                                                                                .03
     .02




                                                                                  .02
Density




                                                                             Density
   .01




                                                                                .01
   0




                                                                                0
            0         20        40        60    80                100                   0       20     40      60      80                  100
                            Participation Grade                                                Exams and Problem Sets Grade


                                                         Married                             Unmarried
           Notes: Binwidth of kernel density estimate in Panel A is one standard deviation of women's participation grades (17.01). Binwidth in
           Panel B is one standard deviation of women's exams and problem sets grades (8.78).




                                     Figure 3. Distribution of Men's Grades
                        A. Participation Grades                                             B. Exams and Problem Sets Grades
   .03




                                                                                .03
     .02




                                                                                  .02
Density




                                                                             Density
   .01




                                                                                .01
   0




                                                                                0




            0         20        40        60    80                100                   0       20     40      60      80                  100
                            Participation Grade                                                Exams and Problem Sets Grade


                                                         Married                             Unmarried
           Notes: Binwidth of kernel density estimate in Panel A is one standard deviation of men's participation grades (17.11). Binwidth in
           Panel B is one standard deviation of men's exams and problem sets grades (8.27).




                                                                        26
                                                           Figure 4. Desired Compensation
                                                                           Primary Experiment

                                                 Women                                                                   Men
30 60 90 120 150 180       p-value = 0.030                    p-value = 0.876                    p-value = 0.906                    p-value = 0.243
  Thousands of Dollars




                           131.05     112.93                  134.72     133.50                  146.88     145.98                  140.86     133.73
           0




                                 Single                          Non-Single                            Single                          Non-Single

                                                                             Private                         Public
                         Notes: Students were asked their desired compensation in their first year after graduation, including base pay, performance
                         pay, and equity, but excluding signing bonus. Desired compensation is coded as the midpoint of the chosen range, except for
                         “under $75,000” (coded as $62,500) and “above $250,000” (coded as $262,500). Some respondents chose two or more consecutive
                         answers. Their responses are coded as the midpoint of the full range chosen. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval
                         calculated from regressions of desired compensation on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard
                         errors. Non-single respondents are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                  Figure 5. Days per Month Willing to Travel
                                                                           Primary Experiment

                                                 Women                                                                   Men
             25




                            p-value = 0.005                    p-value = 0.836                   p-value = 0.252                    p-value = 0.220
            20
Days per Month
 10    15    5




                            13.55       6.62                    9.67      10.32                   15.38      18.11                   9.94       12.33
             0




                                  Single                         Non-Single                            Single                          Non-Single

                                                                              Private                         Public
                         Notes: Students were asked how often they are willing to travel for work. Willingness to travel is coded as the midpoint of the
                         chosen range, except for “rather not travel” (coded as 0) and “as much as necessary” (coded as 30). Whiskers show the 95%
                         confidence interval calculated from regressions of the number of days per month the respondent was willing to travel on an
                         indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard errors. Non-single respondents are in a serious relationship,
                         cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                                 27
                                               Figure 6. Desired Weekly Hours of Work
                                                                      Primary Experiment

                                             Women                                                                  Men
                        p-value = 0.071                   p-value = 0.035                   p-value = 0.852                   p-value = 0.063
         60
  Hours Per Week
15    30    45




                        52.21      48.32                  52.54      48.48                  52.25       52.64                  51.14      54.48
         0




                             Single                          Non-Single                           Single                         Non-Single

                                                                         Private                        Public
                     Notes: Students were asked how many hours per week they are willing to work on a regular basis. Desired hours of work is coded
                     as the midpoint of the chosen range, except for “over 80” (coded as 85.5, which would be the midpoint of an 81 to 90 hour range,
                     since ranges are 41-50 hours, 51-60 hours, etc.). Some respondents chose two or more consecutive answers. Their responses are
                     coded as the midpoint of the full range chosen. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from regressions of the
                     number of hours the respondent was willing to work on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard
                     errors. Non-single respondents are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                           Figure 7. Tendency to Lead
                                                                      Primary Experiment

                                             Women                                                                  Men
          5




                        p-value = 0.043                   p-value = 0.792                   p-value = 0.306                   p-value = 0.391
  Agreement Rating
1    2    3      4




                         3.87       3.48                   3.89       3.84                   3.69        3.84                  3.75        3.86
          0




                             Single                          Non-Single                           Single                         Non-Single

                                                                         Private                        Public
                     Notes: Students rated agreement with the statement "You tend to lead in your day-to-day interactions" on a 1-5 scale, where 1 is
                     Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from regressions of students'
                     answers on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard errors. Non-single respondents are in a serious
                     relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                             28
                                                       Figure 8. Professional Ambition
                                                                      Primary Experiment

                                             Women                                                                  Men

         5              pvalue < 0.001                    p-value = 0.472                   p-value = 0.695                   p-value = 0.846
  Agreement Rating
1    2    3      4




                         4.13       3.38                   4.26       4.12                   4.23       4.16                   4.15        4.13
         0




                             Single                         Non-Single                            Single                         Non-Single

                                                                         Private                        Public
                     Notes: Students rated agreement with the statement "You are more professionally ambitious than your most recent work colleagues"
                     on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated
                     from regressions of students' answers on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard errors. Non-single
                     respondents are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                               Figure 9. Writing Ability
                                                                      Primary Experiment

                                             Women                                                                  Men
          5




                        p-value = 0.586                   p-value = 0.686                   p-value = 0.856                   p-value = 0.496
  Agreement Rating
1    2    3      4




                         3.84       3.97                   4.11       4.04                   3.90        3.93                  3.82        3.70
          0




                              Single                         Non-Single                           Single                         Non-Single

                                                                         Private                        Public
                     Notes: Students rated agreement with the statement "You have above-average writing skills" on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is
                     Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from regressions of students'
                     answers on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard errors. Non-single respondents are in a serious
                     relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                             29
                                           Figure 10. Comfort in Competitive Environments
                                                                         Primary Experiment

                                               Women                                                                   Men

           5              p-value = 0.552                   p-value = 0.711                    p-value = 0.471                    p-value = 0.999
  Agreement Rating
1    2    3      4




                           3.29       3.41                   3.63        3.54                   4.02        3.91                   3.67       3.67
           0




                                Single                         Non-Single                            Single                         Non-Single

                                                                            Private                        Public
                       Notes: Students rated agreement with the statement "You feel very comfortable in competitive environments" on a 1-to-5 scale,
                       where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from regressions of
                       students' answers on an indicator for being in the public treatment using robust standard errors. Non-single respondents are in
                       a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                       Figure 11. Group Gender Composition and Reported Job Preferences
                                                    Supplementary Experiment, Single Women Only
           1




                              p-value = 0.067                                 p-value = 0.012                                 p-value = 0.949                p-value =
Share of Respondents
.2    .4    .6    .8




                             0.68            0.43                            0.79            0.37                           0.42            0.43
           0




                           Salary > Work Hours                          Promotion > Less Travel                        Social Impact > Coworkers

                                                                   Female Peers                             Male Peers
                       Notes: Each set of bars represents the fraction of single women who reported a preference for (1) a job with a higher salary over a
                       job with shorter work hours, (2) a job with better promotion opportunities over a job with less travel, or (3) a job with a social
                       impact over a job with more interactions with coworkers. The "Female Peers" bars show the mean for single women in all-female
                       groups. The "Male Peers" bars are constructed by adding the treatment effect of having male peers from a regression with section
                       fixed effects to the female peer mean. Standard errors are clustered at the group level. Only single women are included. Whiskers
                       show the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                                30
                                     Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

                                         2010-2015 Cohorts                    2016 Cohort
                                            Grades Data            Primary Experiment     Survey

Male                                           68.5%                        67.9%           67.3%

Age                                             27.9                        27.9            28.1

Has Children                                    4.6%                        5.7%

Years of Work Experience                         5.0                         5.2

GMAT Score                                      708                         715

Marital/Relationship Status (Self-Reported)
 Single                                                                     46.2%           53.3%

  In a Serious Relationship                                                 22.0%           18.0%

  Cohabiting                                                                3.7%            2.9%

  Engaged                                                                   5.9%            4.8%

  Married                                                                   20.0%           19.9%

  No Response                                                               2.3%            1.1%

Marital/Relationship Status (Admissions Data)
 Single                                       77.3%

  Married or In a Domestic
  Partnership                                  18.4%

  No Response                                   4.3%

Citizenship
  United States                                66.7%                        62.5%

  North America (without U.S.)                  4.1%                        3.9%

  Asia                                         21.1%                        24.5%

  Europe                                        4.2%                        2.0%

  Central or South America                      3.1%                        6.2%

  Africa                                        0.5%                        0.6%

  Oceania                                       0.3%                        0.0%

Observations                                     1,880                     355                272
Notes: The table shows descriptive statistics from the grades primary experiment, and survey samples.
The grades and primary experiment data are linked to admissions records, though admissions records
for the 2016 entering cohort do not contain information on marital status. The survey was anonymous
and cannot be linked to admissions records.




                                                                       31
                                               Table 2. Avoidance of Workplace Behaviors by Gender and Relationship Status
                                                                               Survey Data

                                        Taking Initiative in       Asking for a        Offering to Make a        Speaking Up at          Any Behavior         Observations
                                        Negotiating a Wage     Leadership Role in a   Presentation or Sales        Meetings
                                        Raise or Promotion     Team or Task Force             Pitch
Single Women                                   63.5%                  40.4%                   25.0%                  51.9%                  73.1%                  52

Non-Single Women                               39.4%                  24.2%                   15.2%                  33.3%                  60.6%                  33

Single Men                                     25.3%                  23.0%                   18.4%                  27.6%                  43.7%                  87

Non-Single Men                                 30.3%                  23.6%                   6.7%                   29.2%                  50.6%                  89

p-values of Differences
  Single vs. Non-Single Women                  0.030                 0.129                    0.284                   0.095                  0.234                   85
  Single Women vs. Others                      0.000                 0.014                    0.031                   0.002                  0.002                  261
Notes: Data are from a survey administered to first-year MBA students in the fall of 2016. Each percentage in the first four rows of data provides the fraction of the group
indicated by the row that avoided the action indicated by the column in their previous two years of work, despite the fact that they believed it could help their careers
because they were concerned about appearing too ambitious, assertive, or pushy. Non-Single refers to respondents in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or
married.




                                                                                      32
                                              Table 3. Randomization Assessment by Subgroup
                                                            Primary Experiment

                                      Private           Public            p-Value of          Private        Public         p-Value of
                                    Treatment         Treatment           Difference        Treatment      Treatment        Difference

                                                   A. Single Women                                    B. Non-Single Women
Age                                    27.4              27.2               0.715              27.7           27.3        0.483

Has Children                           3.3%             0.0%                0.338              0.0%           0.0%              -

GMAT Score                             703               712                0.205              701             700            0.974

Years of Work Experience                5.0              4.8                0.644              5.0             4.9            0.743

U.S. Citizen                          61.3%             55.2%               0.638             77.8%           64.0%           0.282

Observations                            31               29                  60                 27             25              52

                                                     C. Single Men                                      D. Non-Single Men
Age                                    27.5              27.7               0.471              28.4           28.9            0.350

Has Children                           0.0%             0.0%                  -               12.1%           17.2%           0.418

GMAT Score                             719               719                0.924              720             720            0.929

Years of Work Experience                5.3              5.2                0.876              5.4             5.5            0.824

U.S. Citizen                          58.3%             71.4%               0.165             65.7%           51.6%           0.103

Observations                             48               56                104                    67             64           131
Notes: The first and second columns of each panel contain the means of each demographic variable for the sample indicated by the panel
among those in the private and public treatments, respectively. The third column shows the p-value of the difference in the means from a
two-tailed t-test. Non-Single students are those who are in serious relationships, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                     33
                                     Table 4. Effect of Public Treatment on Reported Job Preferences and Skills
                                                                  Primary Experiment

                                  Kling-       Desired          Days per         Desired      Tendency    Professional   Writing       Comfort in
                                Liebman-     Compensation       Month of       Weekly Hours    to Lead     Ambition       Skills      Competitive
                                Katz Index                       Travel          of Work                                             Environments

                                                                                  A. Single Women
Public Treatment                 -0.56***       -18.12**        -6.93***          -3.89*       -0.39**     -0.75***        0.13           0.12
                                   (0.13)         (8.17)          (2.35)          (2.11)        (0.19)       (0.18)       (0.23)         (0.21)

Private Treatment Mean            -0.06          131.05           13.55           52.21          3.87         4.13         3.84          3.29
Observations                       59              60              60               59            60           60           60            60
R-Squared                         0.23            0.08            0.13             0.05          0.07         0.23         0.01          0.01

                                                                                B. Non-Single Women
Public Treatment                   -0.15          -1.22           0.65            -4.06**        -0.05        -0.14        -0.07          -0.09
                                  (0.14)          (7.77)         (3.14)            (1.87)       (0.18)       (0.19)       (0.17)         (0.24)

Private Treatment Mean             0.00          134.72           9.67            52.54          3.89         4.26         4.11          3.63
Observations                        51             52              52               52            52           52           52            51
R-Squared                          0.02           0.00            0.00             0.08          0.00         0.01         0.00          0.00

                                                                                    C. Single Men
Public Treatment                   0.04           -0.89           2.72             0.39           0.15        -0.07        0.03           -0.11
                                  (0.12)          (7.57)         (2.36)           (2.09)         (0.15)      (0.17)       (0.18)         (0.15)

Private Treatment Mean             0.15          146.88           15.38           52.25          3.69         4.23         3.90          4.02
Observations                       103            104              103             104           104          104          104           104
R-Squared                          0.00           0.00            0.01             0.00          0.01         0.00         0.00          0.01

                                                                                 D. Non-Single Men
Public Treatment                   0.09           -7.13           2.39            3.34*          0.11         -0.02        -0.12          0.00
                                  (0.10)          (6.08)         (1.94)           (1.78)        (0.13)       (0.12)       (0.17)         (0.14)

Private Treatment Mean            -0.05          140.86           9.94            51.14          3.75         4.15         3.82          3.67
Observations                       130            130             131              131           131          131          131           131
R-Squared                         0.01            0.01            0.01             0.03          0.01         0.00         0.00          0.00

                                                                 E. p-values: Difference in Effect of Public Treatment
Single vs. Non-Single Women        0.032          0.129             0.050           0.952          0.191         0.018       0.490        0.494
Single Women vs. Others            0.000          0.115             0.001           0.033          0.020         0.001       0.483        0.444
Notes: Each cell in Panels A through D presents the results of regressing the outcome indicated by the column on a dummy for being in the public
treatment. Regressions are limited to the sample indicated by the panel. No controls are included. The Kling-Liebman-Katz index is defined in the
text. The desired compensation and hours of work variables correspond to the midpoint of the range the respondent chose. Desired
compensation is in thousands of dollars. The travel variable is the number of days per month the respondent would be willing to travel; it is also
coded as the midpoint of the chosen range. The remaining outcomes are on a 1-to-5 scale. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Panel E
provides for each outcome the p-values for the tests that the effect of the public treatment is the same for (1) single and non-single women and (2)
single women and all other students. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                          34
                                      Table 5. Gender Differences in the Private and Public Treatments
                                                            Primary Experiment

                      Kling-         Desired           Days per       Desired    Tendency to Professional         Writing        Comfort in
                    Liebman-       Compensation        Month of     Weekly Hours    Lead      Ambition             Skills       Competitive
                    Katz Index                          Travel        of Work                                                  Environments

                                                                      A. Private Treatment
Female                 -0.07           -10.99*            -0.54          0.87          0.14           -0.01        0.11          -0.38***
                       (0.09)           (5.82)           (1.87)         (1.50)        (0.12)         (0.12)       (0.14)           (0.14)

Male Mean              0.04            143.75            12.28          51.49          3.74          4.20          3.85            3.83
Observations           174              176               175            176           175           176           175             176
R-squared              0.00             0.02             0.00           0.00           0.01          0.00          0.00            0.04

                                                                       B. Public Treatment
Female               -0.52***        -17.13***         -7.08***        -5.19***       -0.21*       -0.42***        0.16          -0.32***
                       (0.08)          (4.57)            (1.58)          (1.25)        (0.11)        (0.12)       (0.13)           (0.12)

Male Mean              0.12            139.45            15.17          53.75          3.85          4.15          3.82            3.79
Observations           176              178               179            178           179           179           179             178
R-squared              0.15             0.06             0.08           0.05           0.02          0.06          0.01            0.04

                                            C. p-values: Difference between Gender Gap in Public and Private Treatment
Public vs. Private       0.00             0.41               0.01          0.00         0.03           0.02         0.79             0.72
Notes: Each cell in Panels A and B presents the results of regressing the outcome indicated by the column on a female dummy. Regressions in
Panels A and B are limited to students in the private and public treatments, respectively. The Kling-Liebman-Katz index is defined in the text.
The desired compensation and hours of work variables correspond to the midpoint of the range the respondent chose. Desired
compensation is in thousands of dollars. The travel variable is the number of days per month the respondent would be willing to travel; it is
also coded as the midpoint of the chosen range. The remaining outcomes are on a 1-to-5 scale. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Panel C provides p-values for the tests that the Female coefficients are the same in Panels A and B. *, *** denote significance at the 10% and
1% levels, respectively.




                                                                            35
                              Table 6. Effect of Group Composition on Single Women's Reported Job Preferences
                                                         Supplementary Experiment

                                               Kling-Liebman-Katz      Prefers Higher Salary      Prefers Promotion     Prefers Social Impact
                                                      Index             over Fewer Hours           over Less Travel     over Interactions with
                                                                                                                              Coworkers

                                                                                          A. Peer Gender
Male Peers Indicator                                -0.77***                     -0.26*                -0.42**                   0.01
                                                      (0.23)                     (0.14)                  (0.16)                 (0.15)

Mean for Women in Female Groups                        0.00                      0.68                    0.79                    0.42
Observations                                            40                        40                      40                      40
R-Squared                                              0.29                      0.14                    0.26                    0.09

                                                                                B. Marital Status of Male Peers
Share of Male Peers who are Unmarried               -1.20***                 -1.23***                   0.08                     0.44
                                                      (0.34)                   (0.19)                  (0.27)                   (0.33)

Mean for Women in Male Groups                           -0.58                     0.43                    0.52                   0.38
Observations                                              21                       21                      21                     21
R-Squared                                                0.36                     0.61                    0.19                   0.22
Notes: Panel A shows the results of regressing either the King-Liebman-Katz index or an indicator for choosing a given job on a dummy for
being in a group with male peers, controlling for section fixed effects. Panel B shows the results of regressing the same dependent variables on
the share of male peers who are unmarried. Regressions are limited to single women in Panel A and to single women in groups with male peers
in Panel B. The choices presented and the Kling-Liebman-Katz index are described in the text. Standard errors clustered at the group level are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                            36
                                                Supplemental Appendix
                                Appendix Figure 1. Survey on Workplace Conduct

    This is a survey on workplace conduct to be used in a research project by [name and affiliation]. Your participation
    is voluntary and your answers are completely anonymous. Refusing to participate involves no penalty and will
    not affect your grade in the course.

    What is your age?         ____________

    What is your gender?                Male             Female              Other



    In the last two years, are there behaviors or activities at your work that could have helped you
    professionally that you didn’t undertake because you might have looked too ambitious, assertive, or pushy?

            Yes               No



    If yes, mark any of the behaviors you did not undertake for that reason:

    Speaking up at meetings                                                                  Yes               No

    Offering to make a presentation or sales pitch                                           Yes               No

    Asking for a leadership role in a team or task force                                     Yes               No

    Taking initiative in negotiating a wage raise or promotion                               Yes               No

    Other: ___________________________________________________________________________________
    _________________________________________________________________________________________



    What is your marital status?

                                    In a serious
             Single                                            Cohabitating              Engaged                Married
                                    relationship


    If not single, how long have you been in your current relationship?

            Less than a            Between one               More than two
                                                                                         Not applicable
            year                   and two years             years




    If you have any questions, comments or concerns about the research, you can talk to one of the researchers. Please contact [name and
    contact information]. If you have questions about your rights while taking part in this study, or you have concerns or suggestions and
    you want to talk to someone other than the researchers about the study, you may contact [IRB name and contact information].



Notes: Identifying information is redacted to protect the anonymity of the MBA program.



                                                                    37
                                        Appendix Figure 2A. Women's Grades




     100
               p-value = 0.013                  p-value = 0.550                   p-value = 0.291                   p-value = 0.062




     8060
   Grade
40   20




               77.64      71.93                  82.06      82.86                 68.22      66.38                  95.57      96.12
     0




                 Participation                   Midterm Exam                       Final Exam                       Problem Sets

                                                           Married                         Unmarried
            Notes: All grades are out of 100. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from a regression of the outcome on an
            indicator for being unmarried using robust standard errors.




                                           Appendix Figure 2B. Men's Grades
     100




               p-value = 0.488                  p-value = 0.895                   p-value = 0.140                   p-value = 0.994
     8060
   Grade
40   20




               76.10      76.94                  85.74      85.63                 72.31      70.97                  96.01      96.01
     0




                 Participation                   Midterm Exam                       Final Exam                       Problem Sets

                                                           Married                         Unmarried
            Notes: All grades are out of 100. Whiskers show the 95% confidence interval calculated from a regression of the outcome on an
            indicator for being unmarried using robust standard errors.




                                                                  38
                         Appendix Figure 3. Primary Experiment Questionnaire
The information on this survey will help the career office get to know you and help it find the right fit for
your first-year internship. This information will not be shared with employers, so please express your true
preferences, not just what you think employers want to hear. This information will be shared with your
career advisor and [your/anonymized] answers will be discussed during the [name of career class].

UID Number: ____________________________      Name: _____________________________________________________________
Gender Identity (Optional):         Male   Female     Other _______________________________ Age: _______________
Marital Status:     Single     In a serious relationship   Cohabiting     Engaged     Married
Do you have children, either biological or adopted?           Yes    No
What industries are you interested in working in? List these below.



Tell us about any geographic preferences.



For the questions below, please circle only one answer.

What is your desired compensation level in your first year after graduation? Include base pay,
performance pay, and equity, but not the signing bonus.
Under $75,000       $75,000-$100,000        $100,000-$125,000       $125,000-$150,000         $150,000-$175,000
$175,000-$200,000 $200,000-$225,000 $225,000-$250,000 Above $250,000
How often are you willing to travel for work?
Rather not travel               A few days a month           1-2 days a week
4-5 days a week              As much as necessary
How many hours per week are you willing to work on a regular basis?
Under 40 hours 40 hours 41-50 hours 51-60 hours 61-70 hours 71-80 hours Over 80 hours


Rate your agreement with the following statements:
   1. You tend to lead in your day-to-day interactions.
       Strongly disagree       Disagree    Neither agree nor disagree     Agree     Strongly agree
   2. You are more professionally ambitious than your most recent work colleagues.
       Strongly disagree       Disagree    Neither agree nor disagree     Agree     Strongly agree
   3. You feel very comfortable in competitive environments.
       Strongly disagree       Disagree    Neither agree nor disagree     Agree     Strongly agree
   4. You have above-average writing skills.
       Strongly disagree       Disagree    Neither agree nor disagree     Agree     Strongly agree


Notes: The name of the career class is redacted. Whether students saw the word “your” or the word
“anonymized” in the instructions was randomized.



                                                            39
                 Appendix Figure 4. Supplementary Experiment Questionnaire

Please fill out the following questionnaire. There are no right or wrong answers. Once you have finished
the questionnaire, continue onto the rest of the group work. If there is time at the end of class, the
instructor will circulate and discuss your answers with your small group. The forms will be collected at
the end of class.

Name ____________________________________________                 UID _________________________

In each of the following questions, circle the job you would prefer.

Question 1:

    Job A: A job with a high salary that requires 55-60 hours of work per week.

    Job B: A job with a lower salary that requires 45-50 hours of work per week.

Question 2:

    Job A. The work has a positive social impact, but you would not interact often with co-workers.

    Job B. The job has a collegial and collaborative work environment, but the work does not have a
    social impact.

Question 3:

    Job A. The job provides the opportunity of rapid promotion to partner, but requires constant travel.

    Job B. The job has no travel, but promotion to partner level is slower and less certain.




                                                       40
                                              Appendix Figure 5. Desired Compensation
                                            Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                                Single                                                                         Non-Single
          1




                                                                                                    1
                   .8




                                                                                                             .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                          Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                      .6
   .4




                                                                                             .4
          .2




                                                                                                    .2
          0




                                                                                                    0
                        0         50    100      150    200                250                                    0    50   100     150    200    250
                                  Compensation (in Thousands)                                                         Compensation (in Thousands)


                                                                      Private                                         Public
                        Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of desired compensation for the indicated group. Desired
                        compensation is coded as the midpoint of the chosen range, except for “under $75,000” (coded as $62,500) and “above $250,000”
                        (coded as $262,500). Some respondents chose two or more consecutive answers. Their responses are coded as the midpoint of the full
                        range chosen. Only women are included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                      Appendix Figure 6. Days per Month Willing to Travel
                                            Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                                Single                                                                         Non-Single
          1




                                                                                                    1
                   .8




                                                                                                             .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                          Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                      .6
   .4




                                                                                             .4
          .2




                                                                                                    .2
          0




                                                                                                    0




                        0                 10          20                      30                                  0         10         20          30
                                          Days Per Month                                                                    Days Per Month


                                                                      Private                                         Public
                        Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of the number of days per month the respondent was willing to
                        travel. Willingness to travel is coded as the midpoint of the chosen range, except for “rather not travel” (coded as 0) and “as
                        much as necessary” (coded as 30). Only women are included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or
                        married.




                                                                                   41
                                        Appendix Figure 7. Desired Weekly Hours of Work
                                             Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                                 Single                                                                          Non-Single
          1




                                                                                                      1
                   .8




                                                                                                               .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                            Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                        .6
   .4




                                                                                               .4
          .2




                                                                                                      .2
          0




                                                                                                      0
                        0            20         40       60                 80                                      0     20        40      60     80
                                           Hours Per Week                                                                      Hours Per Week


                                                                        Private                                         Public
                        Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of the number of hours per week respondents reported being willing
                        to work on a regular basis. Desired hours of work is coded as the midpoint of the chosen range, except for “over 80” (coded as
                        85.5, which would be the midpoint of an 81 to 90 hour range, since ranges are 41-50 hours, 51-60 hours, etc.). Some respondents
                        chose two or more consecutive answers. Their responses are coded as the midpoint of the full range chosen. Only women are
                        included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                   Appendix Figure 8. Tendency to Lead
                                             Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                                 Single                                                                          Non-Single
          1




                                                                                                      1
          .8




                                                                                                      .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                            Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                        .6
   .4




                                                                                               .4
          .2




                                                                                                      .2
          0




                                                                                                      0




                        1             2            3          4                  5                                  1      2         3         4        5
                                          Likert Scale Rating                                                               Likert Scale Rating


                                                                        Private                                         Public
                        Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of students' agreement with the statement "You tend to lead in your
                        day-to-day interactions." Responses were on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Only women are
                        included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                                     42
                                             Appendix Figure 9. Professional Ambition
                                          Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                              Single                                                                       Non-Single
        1




                                                                                                 1
        .8




                                                                                                 .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                         Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                     .6
   .4




                                                                                            .4
        .2




                                                                                                 .2
        0




                                                                                                 0
                     1             2            3          4                 5                                1      2         3         4       5
                                       Likert Scale Rating                                                            Likert Scale Rating


                                                                     Private                                      Public
                     Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of students' agreement with the statement "You are more
                     professionally ambitious than your most recent work colleagues." Responses were on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is Strongly Disagree
                     and 5 is Strongly Agree. Only women are included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                   Appendix Figure 10. Writing Ability
                                          Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                              Single                                                                       Non-Single
        1




                                                                                                 1
        .8




                                                                                                 .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                         Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                     .6
   .4




                                                                                            .4
        .2




                                                                                                 .2
        0




                                                                                                 0




                     1             2            3          4                 5                                1      2         3         4       5
                                       Likert Scale Rating                                                            Likert Scale Rating


                                                                     Private                                      Public
                     Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of students' agreement with the statement "You have above-average
                     writing skills." Responses were on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree. Only women are included.
                     Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                                                                 43
                                 Appendix Figure 11. Comfort in Competitive Environments
                                              Primary Experiment, Distribution of Women's Responses

                                                  Single                                                                           Non-Single
               1




                                                                                                      1
               .8




                                                                                                      .8
Cumulative Percent




                                                                                              Cumulative Percent
            .6




                                                                                                          .6
   .4




                                                                                                 .4
               .2




                                                                                                      .2
               0




                                                                                                      0
                       1               2            3          4                  5                                1         2         3         4       5
                                           Likert Scale Rating                                                                Likert Scale Rating


                                                                         Private                                          Public
                       Notes: Plotted lines show the cumulative distribution function of students' agreement with the statement "You feel very
                       comfortable in competitive environments." Responses were on a 1-to-5 scale, where 1 is Strongly Disagree and 5 is Strongly Agree.
                       Only women are included. Non-single women are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married.




                                           Appendix Figure 12. Job Preferences of Other Groups
                                                      Supplementary Experiment, Single Women Excluded
                 1
                 .8
Share of Respondents
                 .6
                 .4
                 .2




                               0.74        0.61        0.58                   0.48         0.83                    0.53               0.13      0.17   0.25
                 0




                                 Salary > Work Hours                          Promotion > Less Travel                               Social Impact > Coworkers

                                                                            Non-Single Women with Female Peers
                                                                            Single Men with Male Peers
                                                                            Non-Single Men with Male Peers

                           Notes: Each set of bars represents the fraction of the given group who reported a preference for (1) a job with a higher salary over
                           a job with shorter work hours, (2) a job with better promotion opportunities over a job with less travel, or (3) a job with social
                           impact over a job with more interactions with coworkers. Non-single students are in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or
                           married.




                                                                                      44
                                                      Appendix Figure 13A. Effect of Share of Unmarried Men
                                                             Supplementary Experiment, High Salary vs. Long Work Hours



                                      1
Fraction Preferring High Salary Job
                                      .8
                                      .6
                                      .4
                                      .2
                                      0




                                           0                       .2           .4           .6            .8                                                         1
                                                                    Share of Men In Group Who Are Unmarried
                                           Notes: The size of each marker indicates the number of observations in the bin. Only single women in groups with men are
                                           included. The choices are described in the text and presented in Appendix Figure 4.




                                                       Appendix Figure 13B. Effect of Share of Unmarried Men
                                                              Supplementary Experiment, Quick Promotion vs. Less Travel
                                      1
with Better Promotion Opportunities
                                .8
        Fraction Preferring Job

     .2        .4      .6             0




                                             0                      .2           .4           .6           .8                                                         1
                                                                     Share of Men In Group Who Are Unmarried
                                            Notes: The size of each marker indicates the number of observations in the bin. Only single women in groups with men are
                                            included. The choices are described in the text and presented in Appendix Figure 4.




                                                                                                45
                                                         Appendix Table 1. Descriptive Statistics by Gender and Relationship Status
                                                                           Grades and Primary Experiment Data

                                                             A. Grades Data                                                               B. Primary Experiment Data
                                             Men                                    Women                                          Men                                 Women
                             Unmarried      Married     p-value of     Unmarried    Married        p-value of         Single     Non-      p-value of      Single      Non-   p-value of
                                                        Difference                                 Difference                    Single    Difference                  Single Difference

Age                             27.6          30.0         0.00           27.0        29.0           0.00             27.6        28.6        0.00          27.3       27.5         0.61

Has Children                    0.1%         26.7%         0.00           0.0%       18.1%           0.00             0.0%       14.6%        0.00          1.7%       0.0%         0.35

Years of Work Experience         4.9          6.3          0.00            4.6         5.8           0.00              5.2        5.5         0.36          4.9         5.0         0.77

GMAT Score                      712           711          0.52           702          707           0.21              719        720         0.88          707        701          0.31

Citizenship
  United States                70.3%         48.0%         0.00          68.9%       51.4%           0.00            65.4%       58.8%        0.30         58.3%       71.2%        0.16

  North America (without
  U.S.)                         5.3%         4.0%          0.00           2.2%        6.9%           0.03             1.9%       5.3%         0.61          3.3%       5.8%         0.08

  Asia                         16.6%         34.1%         0.00          22.9%       33.3%           0.05            21.2%       23.7%        0.65         35.0%       19.2%        0.06

  Europe                        5.0%         4.8%          0.89           3.1%        2.8%           0.89             3.8%       0.8%         0.10          1.7%       1.9%         0.92

  Central or South America      2.2%         9.2%          0.00           1.8%        5.6%           0.05             4.8%       11.5%        0.07          1.7%       1.9%         0.92

  Africa                        0.4%         0.0%          0.29           0.6%        0.0%           0.51             1.9%       0.0%         0.11          0.0%       0.0%          -

  Oceania                       0.3%         0.0%          0.36           0.4%        0.0%           0.59             0.0%       0.0%           -           0.0%       0.0%          -

Fraction of Gender Group        77.9%         22.1%                        87.2%        12.8%                           44.3%      55.7%                     53.6%     46.4%
Notes: In Panel B, Non-Single refers to individuals who report being in a serious relationship, cohabiting, engaged, or married. The grades data include the 2010-2015 entering cohorts. The
primary experiment data is from the 2016 entering cohort.




                                                                                              46
                             Appendix Table 2. Relationship Status and Class Participation
                                                     Grades Data

                                 Participation      Exams and       Midterm Exam        Final Exam      Problem Sets
                                                   Problem Sets

                                                                A. Women, No Controls
Unmarried                           -5.72**            -0.44            0.81               -1.84            0.55*
                                     (2.30)           (1.02)           (1.35)             (1.74)            (0.30)

Dependent Variable Mean              77.64            79.66             82.06             68.22             95.57
Observations                          561              561               561               561               561
R-squared                            0.01             0.00              0.00              0.00              0.01

                                                             B. Women, With Controls
Unmarried                          -5.59***            -0.81         -1.21            -1.10                  0.05
                                     (2.15)           (0.95)        (1.38)           (1.62)                 (0.25)

Dependent Variable Mean              77.64              80                82                  68              96
Observations                          544              544               544                 544             544
R-squared                            0.27              0.27              0.17                0.33            0.45

                                                                  C. Men, No Controls
Unmarried                            0.84              -0.62             -0.11             -1.34             0.00
                                    (1.21)            (0.55)            (0.80)            (0.91)            (0.15)

Dependent Variable Mean              76.10            82.62             85.74             72.31             96.01
Observations                         1,238            1,238             1,238             1,238             1,238
R-squared                            0.00             0.00              0.00              0.00              0.00

                                                                D. Men, With Controls
Unmarried                            -0.39           -1.27**            -0.92         -2.32***               0.07
                                    (1.24)            (0.54)           (0.82)           (0.88)              (0.13)

Dependent Variable Mean              76.10            82.62             85.74             72.31             96.01
Observations                         1,219            1,219             1,219             1,219             1,219
R-squared                            0.14             0.27              0.18              0.29              0.46
Notes: Each column in each panel shows the results of regressing the grade indicated by the column (out of 100) on a
dummy for being not married or in a domestic partnership. Regressions in Panels A and B are limited to women, while
regressions in Panels C and D are limited to men. Regressions in Panels B and D include controls for age, GMAT score,
years of work experience, U.S. citizenship, and section fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                           47
                      Appendix Table 3. Randomization Assessment
                                 Primary Experiment

                                        Private           Public            p-Value of
                                      Treatment         Treatment           Difference
Male                                    67.0%             68.7%               0.737

Age                                      27.8                28.0             0.635

Has Children                             5.2%                6.2%             0.684

GMAT Score                                713                716              0.408

Years of Work Experience                  5.2                 5.2             0.721

U.S. Citizen                            64.8%                60.3%            0.389

Relationship Status (Self-Reported)
 Single                                 44.9%                47.5%            0.624

 In a Serious Relationship              21.6%                22.3%            0.864

 Cohabitating                            4.0%                3.4%             0.755

 Engaged                                 6.8%                5.0%             0.476

 Married                                21.0%                19.0%            0.634

 No Response                             1.7%                2.8%             0.491

Observations                               176              179                  355
Notes: The first and second columns of data contain the means of each demographic
variable for those in the private and public treatments, respectively. The third column of
data shows the p-value of the difference in the means from a two-tailed t-test.




                                                        48
                                  Appendix Table 4. Effect of Public Treatment on Reported Job Preferences and Skills
                                                          Primary Experiment, With Controls

                                   Kling-        Desired         Days per     Desired Weekly     Tendency    Professional     Writing       Comfort in
                                 Liebman-      Compensation      Month of     Hours of Work       to Lead     Ambition         Skills      Competitive
                                 Katz Index                       Travel                                                                  Environments

                                                                                    A. Single Women
Public Treatment                  -0.55***        -18.43*         -5.74**          -3.35         -0.45**       -0.72***         0.11           0.09
                                    (0.14)         (9.65)          (2.43)          (2.12)         (0.21)         (0.20)        (0.23)         (0.22)

Private Treatment Mean              -0.06         131.05           13.55           52.21            3.87          4.13         3.84            3.29
Observations                         51             52              52              51               52            52           52              52
R-Squared                           0.29           0.20            0.22            0.14             0.12          0.27         0.24            0.07

                                                                                 B. Non-Single Women
Public Treatment                    -0.18          -0.85           -0.65          -3.82*         -0.13           -0.14          -0.16         -0.09
                                   (0.16)          (8.49)          (3.24)          (2.00)        (0.20)          (0.21)        (0.18)         (0.27)

Private Treatment Mean              0.00          134.72           9.67            52.54            3.89          4.26         4.11            3.63
Observations                         47             48              48               48              48            48           48              47
R-Squared                           0.18           0.19            0.14             0.14            0.10          0.11         0.14            0.10

                                                                                      C. Single Men
Public Treatment                    -0.01          -3.56            2.95            0.68            0.12         -0.17          -0.09         -0.18
                                   (0.12)          (7.94)          (2.43)          (2.07)          (0.15)        (0.16)        (0.17)         (0.16)

Private Treatment Mean              0.15          146.88           15.38           52.25            3.69          4.23         3.90            4.02
Observations                        100            101              100             101             101           101          101             101
R-Squared                           0.06           0.08             0.11            0.05            0.05          0.05         0.09            0.06

                                                                                   D. Non-Single Men
Public Treatment                    0.14           -0.82            3.11           3.27*           0.10           0.00          0.05           0.09
                                   (0.10)          (5.99)          (1.95)          (1.91)         (0.13)         (0.13)        (0.16)         (0.15)

Private Treatment Mean              -0.05         140.86           9.94            51.14            3.75          4.15         3.82            3.67
Observations                         122           122             123              123             123           123          123             123
R-Squared                           0.04           0.09            0.04             0.05            0.04          0.04         0.25            0.07

                                                                  E. p-values: Difference in Effect of Public Treatment
Single vs. Non-Single Women         0.063          0.147           0.182            0.863            0.235         0.036      0.339            0.598
Single Women vs. Others             0.000          0.093           0.002            0.053            0.018         0.002      0.539            0.561
Notes: The table replicates Table 4, where controls for age, GMAT score, years of work experience, and U.S. citizenship are included in all regressions.
*, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                            49
                                        Appendix Table 5. Effect of the Public Treatment by Student Characteristics
                                                            Primary Experiment, Women Only

                                     Kling-        Desired          Days per        Desired Weekly   Tendency Professional       Writing       Comfort in
                                   Liebman-      Compensation       Month of        Hours of Work     to Lead  Ambition           Skills      Competitive
                                   Katz Index                        Travel                                                                  Environments

Single x Public                      -0.47**         -20.86           -5.77             -0.60          -0.33       -0.73**         0.23           0.08
                                      (0.22)         (12.84)          (4.32)            (3.23)         (0.30)       (0.30)        (0.30)         (0.34)

Single                                -0.04           0.18             1.80              0.54           0.02          -0.11       -0.27          -0.32
                                      (0.17)         (10.92)          (3.22)            (2.85)         (0.21)         (0.23)      (0.22)         (0.28)

U.S. Citizen x Public                  0.04           5.78             2.43              0.22           0.13           0.01        0.06          -0.27
                                      (0.23)         (13.80)          (4.75)            (3.66)         (0.30)         (0.33)      (0.35)         (0.38)

U.S. Citizen                           0.01           6.54            -5.56              1.36          -0.07          -0.06      0.63**           0.37
                                      (0.20)         (11.92)          (3.80)            (3.33)         (0.21)         (0.27)     (0.28)          (0.32)

Years of Work Experience               0.04            5.68           -2.18*            -0.77           0.09           0.06       -0.08           0.12
  x Public                            (0.06)          (4.33)          (1.23)            (1.03)         (0.11)         (0.14)      (0.10)         (0.14)

Years of Work Experience              -0.02           -2.98           2.37**             0.69          -0.09          -0.03        0.01          -0.12
                                      (0.04)          (3.51)          (0.95)            (0.84)         (0.09)         (0.09)      (0.06)         (0.10)

GMAT Score/10 x Public                0.05*            -0.09           0.20              0.57           0.00        0.09**        -0.02          0.07*
                                      (0.02)          (1.89)          (0.59)            (0.50)         (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.04)

GMAT Score/10                         -0.02            0.88           -0.48             -0.29           0.01          -0.02        0.02          -0.02
                                      (0.02)          (1.68)          (0.51)            (0.47)         (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.04)

Age x Public                          -0.10           -7.61*          -0.55              0.10          -0.06          -0.09        0.01          -0.13
                                      (0.07)          (4.31)          (1.37)            (1.03)         (0.10)         (0.11)      (0.08)         (0.11)

Age                                   0.10*          7.97**           -0.07              0.47           0.10           0.03       -0.02           0.09
                                      (0.05)         (3.63)           (0.85)            (0.89)         (0.08)         (0.07)      (0.05)         (0.07)

Public                                -0.99           184.56          10.02            -42.74           0.89          -4.30        1.12          -2.02
                                      (2.33)         (172.23)        (56.43)           (40.94)         (4.17)         (3.89)      (3.59)         (3.83)

Dependent Variable Mean                -0.18          128.38            10.50             50.82         3.79          3.99          3.96           3.45
Observations                             98              100             100               99            100          100           100             99
R-squared                               0.27             0.20           0.20              0.13          0.10          0.24          0.21           0.11
Notes: Each column presents the results of a regression of the dependent variable indicated by the column on student covariates, these covariates
interacted with being in the public treatment, and an indicator for being in the public treatment. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *,** denote
significance at the 10% and the 5% levels, respectively.




                                                                               50
                       Appendix Table 6. Participation in Supplementary Experiment
                                           Single Women Only

                                                 Participated in   Did not Participate     p-Value of
                                                 Supplementary     in Supplementary        Difference
                                                   Experiment          Experiment
Age                                                   27.1                27.7                0.301

Has Children                                          0.0%                5.3%                0.154

GMAT Score                                            706                  709                0.794

Years of Work Experience                               4.8                 5.1                0.465

U.S. Citizen                                         60.0%                55.0%               0.717

Observations                                            40                   20                     60
Notes: The first and second columns of data contain the means of each demographic variable among those
who did and did not participate in the supplementary experiment, respectively. The third column of data
shows the p-value of the difference in the means from a two-tailed t-test. The table is limited to single
women.




                                                      51
                          Appendix Table 7. Randomization Assessment
                         Supplementary Experiment, Single Women Only

                                                         Coefficient          Characteristic Mean

                                                                    A. Any Male Peers
Age                                                         0.77                        27.1
                                                           (0.83)

GMAT Score/10                                               0.96                        70.6
                                                           (1.01)

Years of Work Experience                                    0.35                        4.8
                                                           (0.71)

U.S. Citizen                                                0.02                        0.60
                                                           (0.19)

Observations                                                  40                        40

                                                             B. Share of Unmarried Men
Age                                                        -0.54                   26.9
                                                           (1.38)

GMAT Score/10                                               2.45                        69.9
                                                           (1.47)

Years of Work Experience                                   -0.75                        4.6
                                                           (1.21)

U.S. Citizen                                                0.01                        0.6
                                                           (0.29)

Observations                                                 21                        21
Notes: Each row in Panel A presents the results of a separate regression of the variable indicated
by the row on an indicator for being in a group with male peers, controlling for section fixed
effects. Regressions in Panel A are limited to single women. Each row in Panel B presents the
results of a separate regression of the variable indicated by the row on the share of unmarried
men in the group, controlling for section fixed effects. Regressions in Panel B are limited to single
women in groups with male peers. Standard errors clustered at the group level are in
parentheses.




                                                         52
                           Appendix Table 8. Effect of Group Composition on Single Women's Reported Job Preferences
                                                    Supplementary Experiment, With Controls

                                                   Kling-Liebman-Katz      Prefers Higher Salary     Prefers Promotion       Prefers Social Impact
                                                          Index             over Fewer Hours          over Less Travel       over Interactions with
                                                                                                                                   Coworkers

                                                                                            A. Peer Gender
Male Peers Indicator                                     -0.81***                  -0.28                 -0.43***                     0.05
                                                           (0.25)                  (0.17)                  (0.15)                    (0.14)

Mean for Women in Female Groups                            0.00                    0.68                      0.79                     0.42
Observations                                                34                      34                        34                       34
R-Squared                                                  0.52                    0.23                      0.52                     0.50

                                                                                       B. Marital Status of Peers
Share of Male Peers who are Unmarried                    -1.22***                -1.42***                     0.22                    0.48
                                                           (0.41)                  (0.24)                    (0.25)                  (0.35)

Mean for Women in Male Groups                                -0.58                     0.43                  0.52                     0.38
Observations                                                   18                       18                    18                       18
R-Squared                                                     0.65                     0.76                  0.59                     0.62
Notes: The table replicates Table 6, where in addition to section fixed effects, controls for age, GMAT score, years of work experience, and U.S.
citizenship are included in all regressions. *** denotes significance at the 1% level.




                                                                           53
