NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXIT, TWEETS AND LOYALTY
Joshua S. Gans
Avi Goldfarb
Mara Lederman
Working Paper 23046
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23046

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We gratefully acknowledge financial support from SSHRC (grant # 493140). The paper benefited
from helpful comments from Severin Borenstein, Judy Chevalier, Isaac Dinner, Francine
Lafontaine, Dina Mayzlin, Amalia Miller and seminar participants at the University of Toronto,
UC-Berkeley, the University of Minnesota, the University of North Carolina, Ebay, Facebook,
the 2016 ASSA meetings, ZEW at Mannheim, the Searle Annual Antitrust Conference, the
University of British Columbia, Harvard University, the NBER Summer Institute, the NBER
Organizational Economics Working Group, Stanford University and Carnegie Mellon University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Joshua S. Gans, Avi Goldfarb, and Mara Lederman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Exit, Tweets and Loyalty
Joshua S. Gans, Avi Goldfarb, and Mara Lederman
NBER Working Paper No. 23046
January 2017
JEL No. L13,L14,L93
ABSTRACT
Hirschman’s Exit, Voice, and Loyalty highlights the role of “voice” in disciplining firms for low
quality. We develop a formal model of voice as a relational contact between firms and consumers
and show that voice is more likely to emerge in concentrated markets. We test this model using
data on tweets to major U.S. airlines. We find that tweet volume increases when quality –
measured by on-time performance – deteriorates, especially when the airline operates a large
share of the flights in a market. We also find that airlines are more likely to respond to tweets
from consumers in such markets.
Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
Avi Goldfarb
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
agoldfarb@rotman.utoronto.ca

Mara Lederman
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6 Canada
Mara.Lederman@Rotman.Utoronto.Ca

1

1

Introduction
At the heart of economics is the belief that markets act to discipline firms for poor

performance. While the role of markets in influencing firm behavior has been extensively studied,
an alternative mechanism has received considerably less attention from economists. In his famous
work, Exit, Voice and Loyalty, Albert Hirschman distinguishes two actions consumers might take
when they perceive quality to have deteriorated: exit (withdrawing demand from a firm) and voice
(supplying information to the firm). Hirschman defines voice as “Any attempt at all to change,
rather than escape from, an objectionable state of affairs whether through individual or collective
petition to the management directly in charge, through appeal to a higher authority with the
intention of forcing a change in management or through various types of actions and protests,
including those that are meant to mobilize public opinion.” (p. 30) Hirschman offers many
examples of the choice between exit and voice, including the case of school quality: parents who
are unhappy with their child’s school can either switch schools (exit) or complain to the principal
and school board (voice). Exit may be particularly costly in this situation as it could involve
moving, and so, Hirschman argues, many people may choose voice. While there is evidence that
consumers exercise voice via complaints,1 there has been little empirical work on the fundamental
idea proposed by Hirschman: that exit and voice are, in fact, alternative ways to achieve the same
thing, with each emerging under different market conditions.
In this paper, we begin to fill this void. We theoretically model and empirically study the
relationship between voice and market structure. Hirschman himself points out that this
relationship is not straightforward. On the one hand, the use of voice might grow as market
concentration increases because the opportunities for exit decrease. On the other hand, since voice
is more likely to be effective if backed by the threat of exit, the use of voice might decrease as
market concentration increases because of the threat of exit becomes less credible. In the extreme
case of monopoly, he argues that voice is the only available option but also unlikely to have much

Richins (1983) examines why people complain and emphasizes what she calls “vigilantism.” Gatignon and
Robertson (1986) examine positive and negative word of mouth, with an emphasis on cognitive dissonance for
negative and altruism and reciprocity for positive. Forbes (2008) shows that complaints are impacted by customer
expectations. Beard, Macher, and Mayo (2015) explore exit and voice more directly in the context of complaints to
the FCC about local telephone exchanges, and we discuss their work in further detail below.
1

2

impact. Thus, the equilibrium relationship between market structure and the use of voice is
ambiguous.
To resolve this ambiguity, we model the interactions between consumers and a firm as a
relational contract in which consumers use voice to alert the firm to quality deteriorations in
exchange for a “concession.” A key insight of our model is that, as competition decreases, the
value to the firm of retaining a customer increases because the margins earned from the customer
are higher. We show that there are conditions under which a relational contract with voice is an
equilibrium of a repeated game and that, as competition in a market becomes stronger, those
conditions become less likely to hold. Thus, our model predicts that voice is more likely to be
observed when firms have a dominant position in a market.
We then turn to measuring the relationship between quality, market structure, and voice.
Empirically studying this relationship is challenging. First, voice has historically been difficult to
observe in a systematic way. As Beard, Macher, and Mayo (2015, p. 719) note in their study of
voice in telecommunications, “[f]irms are simply not inclined to publicize their shortcomings.
Consequently, the ability of researchers to directly observe and study data on complaints is
limited.” Second, voice is influenced by both quality and market structure but quality itself may
be a function of market structure. As a result, unless quality is carefully controlled for, it may
confound the estimated relationship between market structure and voice. For example, if market
power incentivizes firms to degrade quality, then an analysis of the relationship between market
structure and complaints might find more voice in concentrated markets even if there is little direct
impact of market structure on voice.
We develop an empirical strategy that allows us to overcome both of these challenges. Our
setting is the U.S. airline industry and we measure voice using the millions of comments,
complaints, and compliments that consumers make to or about airlines via the social network
Twitter. Whereas most traditional channels for complaints are private and observed only by firms,
Twitter’s public nature (the unit of communication – the ‘tweet’ – is public by default) provides
us with a way of collecting systematic data on voice, albeit only voice exercised via this particular
medium. While Twitter serves this role in many industries, several features of the airline industry
(and the data available for this industry) allow us to develop an empirical strategy that overcomes
the endogeneity issue described above. Specifically, the airline industry is comprised of a large
number of local markets each with its own market structure. While market structure may influence

3

quality in this industry, one of the most important dimensions of quality – on-time performance –
varies within markets and can be precisely measured. We exploit daily variation in an airline’s ontime performance within a given market to estimate the relationship between quality and voice (as
measured by daily tweet volume), while controlling for the underlying relationship between market
structure and quality. We then exploit variation in market structure across cities to estimate how
the relationship between quality and voice varies with market structure. Thus, rather than estimate
the relationship between market structure and voice across markets, we estimate the relationship
between quality deterioration and voice within a market and then how this relationship varies
across markets with different market structures.
Our analysis combines three types of data. The first – and most novel – is a dataset that
includes all tweets made between August 1, 2012 and July 31, 2014 that mention or are directed
to one of the seven major U.S. airlines. This dataset includes several million tweets. For many of
these tweets, we can identify the geographic location of the tweeter at the time of posting the tweet
as well as the tweeter’s home city, thus allowing us to link tweets to both a specific airline and a
specific market. We use the tweet-level data to create a measure of the amount of voice directed
at a given airline on a given day from consumers in a given market. We then combine this with
data from the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) on the on-time performance of every
domestic flight and data on airlines’ flight schedules which allow us to construct measures of
airport or city market structure.
Our empirical analysis delivers several interesting findings and supports the predictions of
our model. First, we find that consumers do indeed respond to quality reductions via voice. In both
simple descriptive analyses and across a variety of regression specifications, we find that the
number of tweets that an airline receives on a given day from individuals in a given market
increases as its on-time performance in that market deteriorates. This result is robust to alternative
ways of matching tweets to locations and alternative ways of measuring on-time performance. In
addition, when we consider the content of the tweets, we find that this relationship is strongest for
tweets with a negative sentiment and tweets that include words related to on-time performance.
We believe that our analysis is the first to provide systematic and large-scale evidence that
consumers do respond to quality deterioration via voice.
Second, we find that the relationship between quality deterioration and tweet volume is
stronger when the offending airline dominates an airport. It is well established that airport

4

dominance translates into route-level market power and higher fares (Borenstein, 1989 and 1991).
Our finding that the relationship between quality deterioration and voice is stronger for dominant
airlines is therefore consistent with the main prediction of our relational contracting model – that
voice is more likely to emerge in concentrated markets where margins are higher and customers
more valuable. Thus, our model and empirical findings serve to resolve the ambiguity in
Hirschman about the relationship between market structure and voice.
Finally, the results of our analysis of airline responses are also consistent with the relational
contracting model we propose. When we examine data on a sample of airline responses to tweets,
we find that airlines are most likely to respond to tweets from their most valuable customers,
defined as customers who are from a market where the airline is dominant or customers who
mention the airline’s frequent flier program in their tweet. This result is more speculative because
we only have data on public responses by the airline through Twitter and hence do not observe all
ways in which airlines can respond to complaints (for example, direct messaging, quality
improvements, and email). Nevertheless, over 20% of tweets receive responses and these
responses display a pattern that is consistent with a key prediction of our model – that airlines’
incentives to respond to voice are higher when customers are more valuable to them. Furthermore,
we find that twitter users are more likely to tweet again to an airline if the airline has responded to
their first tweet (that we observe).
Hirschman’s Exit, Voice, and Loyalty received a great deal of attention after its release,
with glowing reviews in top journals in political science and economics (Adelman 2013) and a
debate about the breadth of its applicability in the 1976 American Economic Review Papers &
Proceedings (Hirschman 1976; Nelson 1976; Williamson 1976; Freeman 1976; Young 1976).
Despite this attention, formal modeling and modern empirical work have been limited. Fornell and
Wernerfelt (1987, 1988) develop formal models of the ideas in Exit, Voice, and Loyalty and
emphasize that – when product or service failures are difficult for a firm to observe – firms will
want to facilitate complaints in order to learn about their own quality. Abrahams et al (2012) shows
that firms can discover product deterioration via voice, by studying evidence of vehicle defects
that arises through social media. Other work has explored incentives to contribute to social media
platforms (Trusov, Bucklin, and Pauwels 2009; Berger and Schwartz 2011; Miller and Tucker
2013; Wei and Xiao 2015) and the motivations to provide, and the consequences of, online reviews
(e.g. Mayzlin (2006), Godes and Mayzlin (2004, 2006), Chevalier and Mayzlin (2006), Mayzlin,

5

Dover, and Chevalier (2014)). Nosko and Tadelis (2015) are able to link data on seller quality and
transactions at the buyer level and show that buyers who have a more negative experience on eBay
are more likely to exit (i.e.: less likely to transact again on the platform).
The most closely related research to our work is Beard, Macher, and Mayo (2015). They
also study customer complaints using the lens of Exit, Voice and Loyalty. They examine
complaints to the U.S. Federal Communications Commission about telecommunications
companies. They estimate the relationship between complaints and market structure, while
controlling for consumer perceptions of quality, and find that markets that are more competitive
were associated with fewer complaints. Our empirical strategy is different in that we estimate the
relationship between quality deterioration and voice within a market, and how this relationship
varies with market structure. More importantly for exploring Hirschman’s predictions, our data
come from consumer complaints aimed at firms rather than from consumer complaints to a
government regulator.
Overall, we believe this paper makes several contributions. First, we provide the first
systematic evidence that consumers do indeed exercise voice in response to quality deterioration
and that Twitter serves as a platform for such voice. Second, we present a formal model of the
relationship between quality, voice, and market structure that offers a way to resolve the ambiguity
in this relationship as presented by Hirschman. While Hirschman focused on how consumers’
incentives to exercise voice vary with market structure, we also consider how firms’ incentives to
respond to voice vary with market structure. Accounting for the firm’s incentives is what allows
us to develop an equilibrium model of voice and comparative statics with the number of firms in
the market. This relational contracting framework offers a conceptualization of voice as a
mechanism for preserving valuable long-term relationships between customers and firms. We
believe that this can be a useful way to model the role of voice in many markets. Third, we show
that, in our setting, the responsiveness of voice to quality deterioration is greater in concentrated
markets, consistent with the relational contracting model. Finally, the empirical strategy we
develop, which exploits high-frequency within-market changes in quality, may offer a fruitful way
of exploring these relationships in other settings.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we lay out the
theoretical considerations. In Section 3, we highlight how Twitter serves as an instrument for

6

voice. Section 4 describes our sources of data and sample construction, and Section 5 discusses
our empirical approach. Section 6 presents our results. A final section concludes.

2

Theoretical Considerations
In his treatise, Hirschman saw exit and voice as two actions that consumers might take to

discipline a firm after they had noted a decline in quality. As the introduction of voice was, at that
time, novel in economics, Hirschman argued that it was unclear whether voice was an alternative
to exit or something that might be used in conjunction with it. Specifically, when he considered
what consumers might do if their supplier was a pure monopoly, he saw voice as the only option
and (extrapolating somewhat) as a residual that is exercised whenever opportunities for exit are
removed. Nonetheless, Hirschman noted that, from the perspective of the firm, voice can
complement exit in signalling issues within the firm that should be addressed. Moreover, to the
extent that voice can prevent exit, voice gives the firm the opportunity to improve performance
without suffering irreparable harm. However, Hirschman then questioned whether consumers
would go to the trouble of exercising voice in the absence of a credible exit option to back them
up. Thus, Hirschman realized that the use of voice might occur more often when exit opportunities
(i.e., competition) were readily available.2 As Hirschman wrote, “[t]he relationship between voice
and exit has now become more complex. So far it has been shown how easy availability of the exit
option makes the recourse to voice less likely. Now it appears that the effectiveness of the voice
mechanism is strengthened by the possibility of exit. The willingness to develop and use the voice
mechanism is reduced by exit, but the ability to use it with effect is increased by it.” (p.83)
While Hirschman made numerous conjectures and arguments about the relationship
between a consumer’s choices between exit and voice and competition, to date there exists no
formal model of that relationship; specifically, for variation in concentration among oligopolists.
Here, we blend the third important aspect of Hirschman’s work – loyalty – to provide that model.
In an analogous way to a principal using an incentive contract to ensure that the quality of an
agent’s work is high, we consider a contract between the consumer (akin to the principal) and the
2

Hirschman appears to reach no precise statement regarding the relationship between voice and competition but
eventually becomes more interested in the notion that a monopoly, because it could possibly receive more voice than
a competitive firm, might end up performing better than competitive firms. We note that this conjecture hinges on the
proposition that voice is more likely to arise, and to generate a response, in a market with a monopolist rather than a
market with competition.

7

firm (here the agent) to ensure that if the latter supplies lower than expected product quality, they
will compensate the former. The special difficulty is that product quality is non-contractible (i.e.,
it is observable to both firm and consumer but is not verifiable by a third party). Thus, having
already consumed a product and paid for it, a consumer must rely upon a firm fulfilling a promise
for recompense that is not contained in a formal contract. The consideration of loyalty comes into
play because we assume that what allows that promise to be credible is the expectation of repeated
transactions between the consumer and the firm. This is an often-used game-theoretic notion of
loyalty – in this case, the consumer’s loyalty to the firm. In the absence of such loyalty, for
instance, if consumers more randomly chose firms each period, there is no scope for a firm’s
promise to be made credible and, as we will show, no reason for the consumer to exercise voice.
Here we provide a simple model based on a relational contract between a firm and each of its
customers. While this model is straightforward, we believe it highlights the first order trade-offs
involved and provides the sharp statement missing from the prior informal literature.
2.1

Formal Model
There is a continuum of consumers and 𝑛 ≥ 2 symmetric firms in a market with constant

marginal supply costs of c per unit. Consider a consumer and their current supplier. The consumer
demands one unit at each unit of time and the firms’ products are perfect substitutes except that a
consumer has an infinitesimal preference to stay with the firm it chose in the previous period. The
firm and consumer have a common discount factor of .
The stage game of our model is as follows:
1. (Pricing) Firms announce prices to the consumer and the consumer selects a firm to
purchase from.
2. (Quality Shock) With probability s, the consumer receives an unexpected quality drop on
a product they have already purchased. This results in an immediate loss in consumer
surplus of which is the same for any consumer suffering the loss.
3. (Voice) The consumer can, at a one-time cost of C, communicate their dissatisfaction to
the firm.
4. (Mitigation) If the consumer has complained, the firm can offer the consumer a concession
of B (where B is a choice variable on the real line).

8

5. (Exit) The consumer chooses whether to stay with the firm or exit. Exit means committing
to a different supplier next period.
Based on the stage game alone, the firm will offer the consumer no concession (B = 0) and the
consumer will not exercise voice. This is because a concession will not alter the exit decision of
the consumer and hence, cannot be credibly promised. Thus, the possibility of a concession and
an observation of voice depends on the impact on future sales to the consumer - i.e., a consumer’s
expected loyalty.
Suppose that both the firm and consumer play a repeated game. Following Levin (2002)
we consider the consumer as forming a relational contract with the firm where the firm promises
the consumer a concession of B if the consumer alerts the firm to a quality drop. We assume that
the quality drop is ex post verifiable by the firm.3 Formally:
Definition. A (symmetric) relational contracting equilibrium with voice exists if (i) a consumer
exercises voice if and only if they observe a quality shock; (ii) all firms offer a concession, B, if
the consumer has exercised voice; and (iii) a consumer exits their firm in the period following the
exercise of voice if no concession is given.
Clearly, the final element of the consumer’s strategy in this definition involves a threat to exit
which is not exercised on the equilibrium path.
What level of concession (B) will allow this relational contract to be an equilibrium of the
proposed repeated game? First, consider the cost to a firm of losing a consumer. As each consumer
prefers to stay, marginally, with its current firm, if a firm loses a consumer, it cannot attract
another. Thus, it loses:
𝛿
1−𝛿

(𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) − 𝑐 − 𝑠𝐵).

Equilibrium price, 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵), is written as a function of both the number of firms, n, and the
symmetric concession offered by firms, B. As is common, p is assumed to be decreasing in n. Note
that 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) is increasing in B. To see this, observe that, if 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) = 𝑚(𝑛, 𝐵)(𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵) (where m
is a firm’s mark-up and 𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵 is a firm’s full marginal cost), each component is increasing in B.
Importantly, the cost to the firm of a consumer choosing exit is increasing in market
concentration (i.e., with a fall in n). The intuition is that, when market concentration is high, the
firm earns high margins from each consumer and faces larger costs should the consumer exit. Thus,

3

This eliminates the notion of a false complaint by the consumer. However, it is not observable by third parties ruling
out a formal contractual commitment. This is an interesting issue that we leave for future research.

9

absent other considerations, firms with greater degrees of market power face incentives to find
ways to convince consumers to exercise voice and credibly promise recompense rather than lose
those consumers in the face of a quality shock.
Second, a necessary condition for a consumer to exercise voice is that 𝐵 ≥ 𝐶. If this
condition did not hold, then even if the consumer expects a concession, they would not file a
complaint as the costs of voice would outweigh the benefit they would receive.
Third, what happens if a consumer exits? As there is a continuum of consumers, there will
be no impact on the price in the market.4 Similarly, if a relational contracting equilibrium with
voice otherwise exists, the consumer can expect to receive additional utility of 𝑠(𝐵 − 𝐶) by
switching to another firm for which the relational contract is expected to hold. The consumer will
lose the infinitesimal advantage to their present supplier, however, as this arises for whomever the
consumer’s supplier is in the next period, that shortfall will be temporary. Moreover, for this
reason, the firm will not be able to replace, in the subgame following exit, the consumer with
another.
Given the above discussion, we can now consider whether a relational contracting
equilibrium with voice exists. Specifically, is there a B that the firm will offer to prevent exit and
the consumer will accept to keep from exiting? That B must satisfy:
𝛿
1−𝛿

𝛿

(𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) − 𝑐 − 𝑠𝐵) ≥ 𝐵 ⟹ 1−𝛿(1−𝑠) (𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) − 𝑐) ≥ 𝐵
𝐵≥𝐶

The first incentive constraint is for the firm and says that the expected future value of a consumer
is greater than the cost of providing a concession today. The second incentive constraint is for the
consumer and says that the concession must induce the consumer to incur the costs of voice and
not exit the firm.
Putting the two constraints together, we can see that a sufficient condition for a relational
contracting equilibrium to exist is that:5
4

One can imagine situations where there will be an impact on the price a consumer faces if they exit and commit not
to consider their current supplier in the future. We explore this situation in the online appendix. For instance, price
may be determined in a search model in which case the consumer may end up facing higher prices when removing a
firm from its consideration list. Nonetheless, ultimately, we demonstrate that, accounting for potentially higher prices
or other costs of exit, does not change the qualitative prediction of our model as the first order effects we identify here
can still dominate.
5
Here we substitute C for B in the pricing function as price is non-decreasing in B; making this a sufficient condition.
A necessary condition would be there exists B > C such that (*) for B in the pricing function.

10
𝛿
1−𝛿(1−𝑠)

(𝑝(𝑛, 𝐶) − 𝑐) ≥ 𝐶 (*)

The following proposition summarizes the properties of this equilibrium:
Proposition 1. A relational contracting equilibrium with voice exists for sufficiently high  and
low C. A relational contracting equilibrium does not exist for n sufficiently large.
The first part of the proposition follows from the usual assumptions for the folk theorem in repeated
games. The second part follows because the LHS of (*) is decreasing in n and converges to 0
whereas the RHS does not change in n and is positive.
The model confirms Hirschman’s intuition that market power plays an important role in
the efficacy of voice. However, it shows also that the future value of a customer to the firm plays
a critical role in determining whether a consumer believes that exercising voice will be
consequential. Hence, the higher is  the more the firm values its future margins from the customer
and the more likely we are to observe voice in equilibrium.
The model highlights why Hirschman’s informal intuition caused confusion as the impact
of market concentration on voice does not operate in the same way at the extremes of pure
monopoly and perfect competition. On the monopoly side, what happens if n = 1? In that case,
should a consumer exit, the consumer has no other option and so loses all of the consumer surplus
associated with the relationship. Importantly, this may render a relational contract with voice nonexistent because exit is never credible as a consumer who complains but does not obtain a response
comes ‘crawling back.’ When there is some competition, a consumer’s threat to exit the firm
forever can become credible as, in the relational contracting equilibrium, the consumer believes
(a) that its current firm will not honor future promises and (b) that it only faces an infinitesimal
cost for a single period if it exits the firm and chooses another. In other words, it will not come
‘crawling back.’ While (a) is also true for a pure monopoly situation, (b) is not and the consumer
faces large costs if it does not return to the firm. Thus, for a monopoly situation, the firm may not
offer a sufficient recompense to induce the consumer to exercise the costs associated with voice.
In the case of perfect competition (as n goes to infinity), then 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐶) → 𝑐 + 𝑠𝐶.
Importantly, the firm no longer earns a positive margin from a consumer. In this situation, as
demonstrated in Proposition 1, there will be no level of B that it would pay to retain a consumer
regardless of other parameters. Thus, in this case, voice would not be exercised because the
consumer would not expect the firm to respond to it. The key idea here is that an equilibrium with

11

voice is more likely as concentration falls; however, this result is potentially undermined at the
extremes of pure monopoly and perfect competition but for distinct reasons.6
Our model presents the relational contract between a consumer and a firm as a grim trigger
strategy whereby exit occurs if the consumer receives a quality decline without a concession.
While this concession could encompass an actual payment or gift to the consumer, our model is
consistent with a more general interpretation. For instance, a consumer who lodges a complaint
may not expect an actual response but instead expect an improvement in the future (for instance,
a reduced rate of quality decline). If the issues continued, then the consumer could engage in exit
in the future without exercising additional voice. For this reason, the model is a predictor of
consumer exercise of voice more than it is a predictor of the cause of the voice or the nature of the
response. Thus, a consumer might complain for issues outside of the firm’s control (say, a weather
interruption) but not expect an explicit response unless other issues arose (such as the inability of
the firm to reallocate resources in response to the adverse event). The key factor in predicting voice
is that the consumer considers the likelihood that a firm will care to retain them rather than let
them exit and this is what drives the decision to delay exit in favour of voice.
Of course, voice might arise for other reasons as well. Some people may gain utility from
exercising voice (i.e., C < 0 for them) or, alternatively, exercise voice for pro-social reasons to
signal issues with the firm to others. The relationship implied by Proposition 1, however, requires
that there exist consumers for whom C > 0 and who receive no significant benefits from voice
other than a firm response. Finally, while our model has focussed on the industrial organization
drivers of voice, it is also possible that firms will encourage voice to learn about and respond to
quality reductions. For instance, firms may want to use consumers to monitor employee
performance and therefore encourage complaints or ratings of employees or agents. Of course,
monitoring can also be achieved by exit and so it is possible to imagine that the firm’s incentives
to invest in organizational structures that are more responsive to voice may be related to the same
considerations that drive the relational contract examined here (see Fornell and Wernerfelt (1987,
1988) for a formal analysis of complaints as monitoring).

6

We explored variants of the model presented here. For instance, in the online appendix, we consider the full
equilibrium outcome in a Cournot model that endogenized p(n, B) in order to determine whether symmetric firms
would choose to adhere to the proposed relational contract when others did so; confirming this is a full equilibrium
outcome.

12

2.2

Implications for Empirical Analysis
Our model predicts that voice is more likely to be an equilibrium when market

concentration is higher. Estimating the relationship between voice, quality deterioration, and
market concentration is therefore the primary focus of our empirical analysis. Furthermore, in our
model, the reason voice is more likely to emerge in concentrated markets is because firms are more
likely to respond if they risk losing a valuable consumer. This suggests several other relationships
that we can explore empirically. First, using data on airline responses to tweets, we can investigate
whether airlines disproportionately respond to tweets from customers who are more valuable.
Second, since our model predicts that the goal of voice is to elicit a response or concession from
the firm, we will explore how quality deterioration impacts tweets to an airline relative to tweets
that are simply about the airline. Third, since our model suggests that voice and a concession serve
to maintain a future relationship between the customer and firm, we will investigate whether
customers who receive a response to their tweet are more likely to tweet again.

3

Twitter as a Mechanism for Voice
Twitter provides a technology for observing and measuring voice. We are not the first to

make the connection between tweets and voice. For example, Ma, Sun, and Kekre (2015) examine
the reasons for voice by 700 Twitter users who tweet to a telecommunications company. They
model optimal responses by the company and emphasize the service interventions improve the
relationship with the customer. Bakshy et al (2011) show how ideas flow through Twitter. They
emphasize that the idea of a small number of “influencers” does not hold in the data and that
messages can be amplified through the network.
As a type of social media, Twitter also lowers the cost of exercising voice. It is lower cost
than writing a letter to an airline or the FAA. Hirschman (p. 43) emphasizes that the use of voice
will depend on “the invention of such institutions and mechanisms as can communicate complaints
cheaply and effectively.” Twitter and other social media also make voice, and the response to
voice, visible to others. This should increase the effectiveness of voice and its expected payoff. In
this paper, we do not emphasize how Twitter has changed voice. We treat Twitter as a platform
for exercising and measuring voice and use the data to understand the interaction between voice
and market power.

13

Many companies appear to have recognized that customers are “talking” about them on
Twitter. They have invested considerable resources in managing social media in general and social
media complaints in marketing. For example, Wells Fargo invested in a social media “command
center” to manage and respond to complaints on Twitter (Delo 2014). In addition, there are
companies that offer enterprises social media dashboards and management tools (such as
Conversocial and Hootsuite). Indeed, many airlines have employees dedicated to responding to
customers through social media.7 Twitter itself has recognized that it plays this role and has
published studies regarding their role in customer service (Huang, 2016) and their intention to
make this a core product in their service (Cairns, 2016).

4
4.1

Empirical Setting and Data
Empirical Setting
Our empirical setting is the U.S. airline industry. While it is likely that Twitter has

facilitated voice in many industries, we chose the airline industry as our setting because it has
several features that make it particularly well suited for a study of the relationship between voice
and market structure. First, a key measure of quality in this industry – on-time performance – is
easily measured and data on flight-level on-time performance is readily available. This allows us
to link the volume of voice to variation in an objective measure of vertical product quality.
Importantly, on-time performance is determined at the flight level and therefore varies within
markets not just across markets. Second, all the major U.S. airlines had established Twitter handles
by 2012. Thus, it was technologically feasible for consumers to exercise voice to airlines via
Twitter. Third, the airline industry is comprised of many distinct local markets. Each airport (or
city) has its own market structure and configuration of airlines. This means that the opportunities
for exit and the margins earned from consumers will vary across markets. Finally, since many
consumers fly on a regular or even frequent basis, this setting is one in which the potential for
future transactions to impact current behavior (i.e.: the scope for a relational contract) is quite real.

7

See, for example, http://www.cnbc.com/2016/09/27/frustrated-flyers-listen-up-airlines-hear-your-rant-ontwitter.html and http://airrating.com/ (accessed by authors on October 30, 2106).

14

4.2

Data
Our analysis combines three types of data. The first is data on tweets made to or about one

of the major seven U.S. airlines. We purchased this data from Gnip, a division of Twitter. We
combine this with data on airline on-time performance, from the Department of Transportation
(DOT), and with data on airline flight schedules, purchased from the Official Airlines Guide
(OAG).
i. Twitter Data
The raw data purchased from Gnip contains all tweets made between August 1, 2012
12:00AM and August 1 2014 12:00 AM that include any of the following strings: “@alaskaair",
"#alaskaair",

"alaska

airlines",

"alaskaairlines",

"@americanair",

"#americanair",

"americanairlines", "american airlines", "@delta", "#delta", "delta airlines", "deltaairlines",
"@jetblue",

"#jetblue",

"jetblue",

"jet

blue",

"@southwestair",

"#southwestair",

"southwestairlines", "southwest airlines", "@united", "#united", "unitedairlines", "united airlines",
"@usairways", "#usairways", "us airways", "usairways". These strings include the Twitter handles
of the seven largest U.S. airlines (Alaska Airlines, American Airlines, Delta Airlines, JetBlue,
Southwest Airlines, United Airlines, and US Airways) as well as the names of these airlines, on
their own and with a hashtag.8 Together, these seven airlines accounted for over 80% of passenger
enplanements at the start of our sample period.9 The level of observation in this data is the “tweet”.
The raw tweet-level dataset contains 11,367,462 observations.
This data contains all initial communications from consumers to the airlines on Twitter.
While the structure of Twitter now allows for private communication (or direct messages) between
Twitter members who do not follow one another, during our sample period this was not possible.
Specifically, if a consumer followed an airline but the airline did not follow a consumer, the
consumer could not send a private message to the airline. By contrast, it is possible, and probable,

A Twitter “handle” is the unique identifier, starting with the “@” symbol, for each participant on Twitter. While
each tweet is public in the sense that anyone can see it, Twitter users let users know about a message by tagging them
using their handle. A tweet that mentions an airline’s handle is therefore directed at the airline and meant for the airline
to see it. 58% of the tweets in our data mention the airline’s handle. A Twitter “hashtag” is a way for Twitter users to
highlight a phrase that other Twitter users may search for or find interesting, starting with the “#” symbol. A tweet
that mentions an airline hashtag tells the users’ followers that the airline is a key part of the tweet.
9
This number is based on the enplanement data in the Air Travel Consumer Report for August 2012. It likely is an
understatement as it does not include passengers travelling on these airlines’ regional partners.
8

15

that some airline responses to consumers are done privately (even if via Twitter) and will not
appear in our data.
Many tweets that met our initial filter criteria but were not about airlines. To identify these
tweets, we looked at all hashtags and handles that started with the same characters as our tweets
but did not end with these characters. The most common of these were mentions of arenas and
stadiums named after airlines such as American Airlines Arena, mentions of the soccer team
Manchester United, mentions of the United States or United Kingdom, and some hashtags such as
@deltaforce. After eliminating the tweets that were clearly not about airlines, 5,900,691 tweets
remained.
The Twitter data includes many variables including the date and time of the tweet, the
content of the tweet, some information about the profile of the Twitter user (including where they
are from and their number of followers) and, for a fraction of the tweets, the location from which
the tweet was made. From the content of the tweet, it is possible to determine which tweets are
“retweets”, indicating that someone was passing on a tweet originally written by someone else. It
is also possible to distinguish tweets to the airline from tweets about the airline based on whether
the tweet includes the airline’s Twitter handle. We are also able to determine which tweets were
made by the airlines themselves. We focus on tweets to or about an airline and therefore exclude
the 14,382 tweets in the data which were made by the airlines themselves. This yields 5,886,309
total tweets. 32% of these tweets were “retweets.” We drop the retweets from our analysis and
focus on the 4,003,326 unique tweets made by Twitter users to or about the major U.S. airlines.
Finally, we exclude all observations from two specific time periods: (1) the days around Super
Storm Sandy (Oct. 27 to Nov. 1 2012), when delays and cancellations were widespread but few
people were likely to be tweeting about airlines; (2) April 13 to 15, 2014, when twitter use related
to airlines was unusually high because of a fake bomb threat made on twitter against American
Airlines and a US Airlines customer service tweet containing a pornographic image. This leaves
3,860,528 tweets to or about the seven U.S. airlines.
To collect data on airline responses to tweets, we created a program that called up each of
the 3,860,528 tweets in our data on the twitter website (through the Application Program
Interface). The program examined all responses to the tweet to see if any of the responses were
from the airline’s handle. If so, then we code the airline as having responded. By May 2016, US
Airways had discontinued its twitter handle after its 2015 merger with American Airlines.

16

Therefore, because we collected the response data in 2016, we do not observe any responses to
tweets by US Airways and we drop the US Airways data from the response analysis. 10
ii. On-Time Performance Data
We combine the Twitter data with data on the on-time performance of each of the airlines.
Since September 1987, all airlines that account for at least one percent of domestic U.S. passenger
revenues have been required to submit information about the on-time performance of their
domestic flights to the DOT. These data are collected at the flight level and include information
on the scheduled and actual departure and arrival times of each flight, allowing for the calculation
of the precise departure and arrival delay experienced on each flight.11 The data also contains
information on canceled and diverted flights.
We use these data to construct daily measures of an airline’s on-time performance in a
given market (as well as a measure of the airline’s total number of flights from a market, to use as
a control variable). There are multiple ways to measure on-time performance – for example, the
number or share of the airline’s flights that are delayed, the average delay in minutes, or the number
or share of flights delayed more than a certain amount of time. Cancellations can either be included
with delays or considered on their own. In general, different measures of on-time performance are
highly correlated with each other.
As our main measure of on-time performance, we calculate the number of an airline’s
flights from a given airport on a given day that depart more than 15 minutes late or are canceled.
For multi-airport cities, we calculate the number of an airline’s flights from any of the airports in
the city that depart more than 15 minutes late or are canceled. We use the 15-minute threshold
because the DOT has adopted the convention of considering a flight to be “on-time” if it arrives
within 15 minutes of its scheduled arrival time. We focus on departure delays but could use arrival

10

We encountered one other issue in collecting the response data. Tweets from accounts that had been closed or were
private would not appear on the twitter when we searched for responses. We coded these tweets as not having received
a response though it is possible that they did. A random sample of 200 of our tweets found nine such closed and private
accounts. This will result in some noise in our response variable.
11
Airlines’ regional partners report the on-time performance of the flights they operate on behalf of a major under their
own code, not the major’s code. Since customers likely associate these flights with the major given that they are flown
under the major’s brand, we include flights operate by a major’s regionals partners in our measures of the major
airlines’ on-time performance. To do this, we use information from the Official Airlines Guide (OAG) data to match
regional flights in the BTS data to their affiliated major airline.

17

delays instead as – within an airline-airport-day – departure and arrival days are highly correlated
with each other. Our results are robust to alternative measures of on-time performance.
iii. Flight Schedule Data
We use data from the Official Airlines Guide (OAG) to construct measures of airline’s size
and share of operations in a given market. The OAG data provide detailed flight schedule
information for each airline operating in the U.S. Each observation in this data is a particular flight
and contains information on the flight number, airline, origin airport, arrival airport, departure
time, and arrival time. Our sample of OAG data includes the complete flight schedule for each
airline for a representative week for each month (specifically, the third week of each month).
From the OAG data, we calculate each airline’s total number of domestic flights from each
airport during the representative week as well as the total number of domestic flights from the
airport by any of the seven airlines. We then use this to construct each airline’s share of flights
from the airport. This gives us a measure of each airline’s dominance at an airport each month.
For our analysis, we want a time-invariant measure of an airline’s dominance at an airport. We
calculate each airline’s average share of flights at each airport over our two-year sample period
and, from these shares, we construct four categories of airport dominance: less than 15% of the
flights from the airport, between 15% and 30% of flights from the airport, between 30% and 50%
of the flights from the airport, 50% or more of the flights from the airport.12 We construct
analogous measures of dominance at the city level for multi-airport cities.
An airline’s share of flights from a given airport (or city) captures how easy or difficult it
would be for a consumer to avoid (i.e.: exit from) that airline on subsequent flights. As discussed
earlier, however, the ease of exit makes voice less necessary but more effective since backed by a
credible threat of exit. As our model highlights, the likelihood that a firm responds to voice and,
in turn, the incentive for consumers to exercise voice depends on the future value of the consumer
to the firm. Airlines with a dominant position at an airport charge higher fares and are particularly
attractive to high willingness-to-pay travelers because their large network means they offer the

There are several different ways to capture an airline’s dominance at an airport. Previous work (for example,
Lederman 2007) has also used an airline’s share of departing flights. Borenstein (1989) uses an airline’s share of
originating passengers at an airport but reports that his results are robust to using an airlines’ share of departing flights,
departing seats, or departing seat miles. Some studies simply identify the airports that an airline uses as its hubs. These
different measures are typically highly correlated with each other.
12

18

most attractive frequent-flier program to consumers in that market (see Borenstein (1989) and
Lederman (2008)). As a result, the costs of losing a customer may be greater for dominant airlines.
4.3

Construction of the Estimation Samples
The central goal of our analysis is to explore the relationship between quality (measured

by on-time performance) and voice (measured by the volume of tweets) and investigate how this
relationship varies with market structure. Thus, our empirical strategy requires us to link tweets to
the on-time performance of the tweeted-about airline and the market structure faced by the
individual who made the tweet. While we are not able to match individual tweets to particular
flights, we can match tweets to airports (or cities) and, in turn, to an airline’s on-time performance
in that airport (or city) on the day the tweet was made. Since market structure varies at the airport
(or city) level, once we have matched tweets to airports, we can also integrate information on the
market structure at the airport (or city).
We use three different methods for matching tweets to airports. First, many Twitter users
identify a location in their Twitter profile. This location does not change from tweet to tweet and
can be interpreted as “home”, as identified by the Twitter user. Because we are focusing on how
the relationship between quality deterioration and voice varies with market structure, we use the
location given in the profile of the Twitter user as our primary measure of the tweeter’s home
market. Many Twitter users in our data leave this location blank, identify an international location,
a non-specific location (such as “united states”, “california”), or identify a humorous location (such
as “Hogwarts” or “in a cookie jar”). We, of course, cannot identify a location in profile for these
tweets. However, for 36% of the tweets in our data, the location is specific enough that we can
match it to a U.S. city with a major airport. In our tables, we describe this source of location
information as “Location given in profile”. For cities with multiple airports, we create a code to
capture the city rather than a specific airport. For example, we use the code “NYC” for a tweet
from a profile that identifies New York City as home. Because of the multi-airport cities, when we
use this location measure, we construct our airline on-time measures and market structure
measures at the city – rather than airport – level.
Second, for some of the tweets in the data (approximately 7%), the Twitter user chose to
use a feature of Twitter that identifies, through GPS, the location from which the tweet was posted.
Specifically, the data indicates the latitude and longitude coordinates of the location from which
the tweet was made. We combine this with data on the latitude and longitude of each U.S. airport

19

and identify the nearest airport. We refer to tweets with this location information as “geocode
stamp on tweet”.
The third way that we link tweets to airports is by exploiting information in the content of
the tweet. Some tweets contain the code of a specific airport. For each tweet in the data, we
determine whether the tweet contains the airport codes of any of the 193 largest airports in the U.S.
We do this by determining whether the tweet includes the airport code in capital letters with a
space on either side. For example, we code a tweet with “ORD” as having Chicago’s O’Hare
airport in the tweet. 4% of tweets have an airport mentioned in the tweet under this definition. We
refer to these tweets as the “Airport mentioned in tweet” observations.
Overall, we have airport-level information for 427,536 tweets (based on the latter two
measures of location) and city-level information for 1,394,070 tweets (based on all three measures
of location).13 As a check on the reliability of the different location measures, we examine the
195,945 tweets for which we have both city information (from the user’s profile) and airport
information (from either a geocode stamp or an airport mentioned in the tweet) information. For
these 195,945 tweets, the city and airport locations match 47.0% of the time. As a benchmark, if
the measures perfectly captured the correct city and airport, we might expect them to match slightly
less than 50% of the time because of return trips and stopovers. We view this as suggesting validity
to both the airport and city measures.
Having matched tweets to cities and/or airports, we are able to construct the airline-airportday and airline-city-day datasets that we use for our regression analysis. We restrict the sample to
airports/cities with at least 140 flights per week in the OAG data (i.e.: at least 20 flights per day).
This produces 100 airports in the airline-airport-day sample and 82 cities in the airline-city-day
sample. For each airline operating at each airport on each day (or in each city each day), we
combine measures of the airline’s on-time performance at the airport (or in the city) on the day
with the total number of tweets to or about the airline that day from individuals associated with
the airport (or city). Finally, we merge in the measures of the airline’s dominance at the airport (or
in the city). Our final airline-airport-day dataset contains 382,141 observations while the final
airline-city-day dataset contains 318,077 observations.

13

We exclude 63,090 tweets (4.4% of the tweets with city information) that mention more than one airline because
we are not able to associate these tweets with one particular airline.

20

4.4

Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics at the tweet-level. Panel A shows the share of tweets

for which we have different types of location information. Panel B compares the distribution of
tweets across airlines for the three sets of observations we use (all tweets, tweets with geocodes,
and tweets with any location information). American Airlines is the most common airline
mentioned in tweets, with 26% of all tweets relating to American Airlines. Alaska Airlines is the
least common, with less than 3% of all tweets. As the table suggests, the composition of the three
samples, in terms of the fraction of tweets to or about each airline, is very similar.
Figure 1a shows the average number of daily tweets by month over time for the subsample
of our data with city information.14 The figure shows that the average number of tweets about
airlines increases from around 1,500 per day at the beginning of the sample to over 2,500 per day
toward the end of the sample. Figure 1b shows that all airlines experienced an increase in tweet
volume over time.
Table 2 contains descriptive statistics for the airline-city-day (in the top panel) and airlineairport-day datasets (in the bottom panel). Because cities with multiple airports are aggregated
across airports, the city-airline-day data has fewer observations. Also, both because of aggregation
and because we have many more tweets with city-level information than airport-level information,
the number of tweets per day is much higher at the city level (on average, 4.26 tweets per airlinecity-day compared to 0.59 tweets per airline-airport-day). In addition to the number of tweets, the
table presents summary statistics for the on-time performance and airline dominance measures.
The table indicates that, for 48% of airline-city combinations, the airline operates less than 15%
of flights from the city. For about 35% of the combinations, the airline operates between 15% and
30% of flights at the city, for about 12%, the airline operates 30%-50% of the flights from the city,
and for about 5% of observations, the airline operates more than 50% of the domestic flights from
the city. The numbers for the airline-airport level dataset are similar though not identical.15 In both

14

We focus on this subset of our data because we use it for most of the analysis that follows. The patterns look similar
when we use all tweets, but the numbers are larger as Figure 1 uses only 36% of all tweets.
15
In both datasets, the observations in which an airline operates more than 50% of domestic flights are primarily
airlines at large hubs (for example, Delta Air Lines in Atlanta, United Airlines in Cleveland, American Airlines in
Dallas-Fort Worth, and Southwest Airlines in Las Vegas). There is a larger number of observations in which an airline
operates between 30% and 50% of domestic flights. These include both airlines at their own (less dominated) hubs

21

datasets, about 20% of an airline’s flights at an airport or in a city are delayed more than 15 minutes
or canceled on a given day.16
For the majority of our empirical analysis, we define an airline’s level of dominance using
the city-level measures, even when we match tweets at the airport level. We do this because there
is likely substitution across the different airports in a given city and therefore we want our measure
of a consumer’s ability to exit from an airline to include alternatives at other airports. Brueckner,
Lee, and Singer (2014), for example, argue and provide evidence that city-pairs rather than airportpairs should be the relevant unit of analysis in studies of airline markets.
We also construct a number of variables to capture the content and sentiment of the tweets
received. From these tweet-level characteristics, we construct airline-city-day level counts of the
number of tweets with these characteristics. These variables serve as more nuanced and detailed
measures of voice. First, we construct a variable (“# of tweets to handle”) that measures the number
of tweets to the airline’s handle. Tweets to the airline’s handle are directed through Twitter to the
airline whereas tweets about the airline are not. On average, an airline receives 2.96 tweets to its
handle, on a given day from consumers associated with a given city. Second, we measure the
number of tweets that mention on-time performance, which has a mean of 0.77.17 Third, we
construct a variable that captures whether the content of the tweet is positive or negative. This
measure of “sentiment” is a standard measure from computer science and provides a probability
that a particular tweet is negative. The idea of the algorithm is to look for the symbols “:)” for
positive sentiment and “:(” for negative sentiment.18 The algorithm then identifies the probability

and, mostly, airlines at smaller airports where they have a significant share of flights but the airport is not a hub to
them or to any carrier.
16
For a subset of the flights, we have a measure (reported by the airline) of whether the airline is at fault in the delay.
The average number at fault is close to the average number delayed because we disproportionately observe larger
airports for this data.
17
We define a tweet being about on-time performance if it contains one of seven strings related to on-time
performance: “wait”, “delay”, “cancel”, “time”, “late”, “miss”, or “tarmac”. We define a tweet being about frequent
flier programs if it contains one of the following strings: “aadvantage”, “mileage” (includes “mileageplus”), “miles”
(includes “dividend miles”), “trueblue”, “skymile”, “lounge”, “rewards” (includes “rapidrewards”), “admiral”, “club”
(includes “united club”), “gold”, “diamond”, “silver”, “elite”, “frequent”, “status”, “premier”, “100k”, “50k”, or
“25k”. While these words may appear in our contexts, in our sample of airline tweets they almost always refer to
frequent flier programs.
18
Read (2005) developed the idea of using emoticons to measure sentiment. It appears in reviews on sentiment analysis
such as Pang and Lee (2008) and has been shown to be particularly useful for Twitter data (e.g. Agarwal et al 2011,
Pak and Paroubek 2010). The algorithm we use builds on code from a June 16, 2010 post at

22

the :) or :( symbol appears, given the appearance of the various word pairs (“bi-grams”). For
example, the word pair (“again”, “cancel”) appears disproportionately often with “:(” and the word
pair (“great”, “service”) appears more often with “:)”. Then, for the full tweet-level data set, we
predict the probability that a particular tweet has negative sentiment based on the word pairs
contained in the tweet. Table 3 provides sample tweets for different levels of sentiment.
It is difficult to algorithmically assess sentiment with the 140 characters in a tweet, and so
this measure is noisy, with little obvious difference between a tweet given a score of 0.4 and a
tweet given a core of 0.6. Furthermore, the average score variable is missing for airline-locationdays without tweets. The algorithm does a better job with tweets that score very positive (below
0.1) or very negative (above 0.9).19 Therefore, we identify very positive and very negative tweets,
in addition to the average score. On average, across airline-city-days, airlines receive 1.90 very
positive tweets and 0.98 very negative tweets.

5

Empirical Approach
We proceed with our analysis in four stages. After some motivating descriptive analysis,

we first investigate the relationship between the volume of tweets received and on-time
performance to determine whether, in this setting, consumers use voice to respond to quality
deterioration. Second, we examine whether market dominance increases or decreases the strength
of this relationship, the core empirical question underlying Hirschman’s Exit, Voice, and Loyalty.
Third, we carry out some analyses that exploit the content and sentiment of tweets to provide
evidence that our main results are consistent with voice being a response to quality deterioration.
Fourth, we carry out a number of supplementary analyses that specifically explore aspects of the
relational contracting model that we propose.
In most of the analysis that follows, our empirical approach focuses on the relationship
between tweets and on-time performance. We view this correlation as measuring a response
http://streamhacker.com/2010/06/16/text-classification-sentiment-analysis-eliminate-low-information-features/
(accessed May 14, 2015). The code is modified to remove user names and add “stemming” of words (so that “cancel”,
“cancels”, and “canceled” are all coded as the same word). For a training data set, we combine all the tweets in our
data with happy or sad emoticons
with the tweet training data set available at
http://cs.stanford.edu/people/alecmgo/trainingandtestdata.zip.
19
The algorithm, however, does not do a very good job of recognizing sarcasm in tweets, as exemplified by the first
tweet with probability negative of 0.10 in Table 3. As a result, sarcastic tweets, intended to be negative, are sometimes
mistakenly classified as positive.

23

elasticity to service failures. Fundamental to Hirschman’s framework, and to our formalization, is
that voice is a response to quality deterioration. A key advantage to our setting is that airline delays
and cancellations provide a measure of quality deterioration that changes frequently, even for a
given airline in a given market. This enables us to measure how the elasticity of voice to quality
deterioration changes with market structure while controlling for the average relationship between
market structure and quality. While our model does not explicitly distinguish between quality
deterioration that the consumer believes is or is not the airline’s fault, we present some analysis in
the results section that attempts to separate these two types of reductions in quality.
Our main empirical specification regresses the number of tweets about an airline on a given
day by consumers associated with a given location on the on-time performance of that airline at
that location on that day. To analyze whether and how this relationship varies with an airline’s
dominance of a market, we interact an airline’s on-time performance with a measure of its
dominance of the airport or city. Our models control for airline-location, which will control for
factors that influence the average amount of voice that an airline receives from consumers in a
particular market. Importantly, these controls will capture the overall scale of an airline’s
operations at an airport or in a city, which likely impacts the amount of voice received as larger
operations imply more passengers carried. These controls will also capture any impact that an
airline’s level of dominance in a market has on the amount of voice it receives. Note that an
airline’s scale of operations and level of dominance are not necessarily related. Airlines will have
both many flights and a large share of flights at their hub airports. However, airlines may also
dominate small airports at which they do not operate very many flight, in absolute terms. In
addition, at large airports that are not a hub to any carrier (such as Boston’s Logan Airport and
New York’s La Guardia Airport), several airlines operate a significant number of flights but none
dominates the airport. Our specifications also include location-day fixed effects, which capture
both location-level causes of delay (such as weather) and the diffusion of Twitter during our
sample period in a very flexible way, allowing the diffusion rate to differ across locations.
One challenge we encounter is setting up our empirical analysis is choosing the appropriate
functional form for our dependent variable as well as our measure of on-time performance. Both
the number of tweets an airline receives on a given day in a given market as well as the number of
its flights that are delayed or canceled have a large mass at zero and a very long right tail. In
particular, at locations in which airlines have a larger scale of operations, they can receive more

24

tweets and have a greater number of delayed or canceled flights. As a result, for these variables,
both the mean and standard deviations vary substantially across airline-locations. For example, in
our data, we observe Delta, at its hub in Atlanta, have an average of 157.6 delayed or canceled
flights per day, with a standard deviation of 113.8. On the other hand, US Airways in Atlanta has
1.9 flights delayed or canceled, on average, per day, with a standard deviation of 2.1. For US
Airlines, at its hub in Charlotte, the mean and standard deviation are 49.5 and 33.6, while Delta’s
values are 3.5 and 3.4. A similar comparison holds for the number of tweets received per day.
To create a measure of on-time performance deterioration that is comparable across airlinelocations, we standardize the number of flights delayed more than 15 minutes or canceled variable
by subtracting the airline-location mean and dividing by its standard deviation and we use this as
our main measure of on-time performance.20 Because the mean and variance of the number of
tweets variables are similarly impacted by an airline’s scale of operations at an airport, we
standardize them in a similar fashion. For robustness, in the online appendix, we carry out all of
the analyses using the logarithm of each of these variables (plus one).
Using this standardized data, our core regression specification for airline a in location l on
day t is:
StdTweetsalt=StdDelaysalt+StdDelaysalt×AirlineDominanceal+StdFlightsalt+lt+alt
Because of the standardization, airline-location fixed effects are not appropriate. Instead, they are,
in effect, already differenced out. Because of this, the main effect of AirlineDominanceal is not
included. In the robustness analysis that uses a non-standardized logged specification, the airlinelocation fixed effects are included. Standard errors are clustered at the location level.

6
a.

Results
Motivating Analysis
Before turning to the regression analysis, in Table 4 we illustrate the variation in our data

that we exploit in our regression analysis. Using the location provided in a consumer’s twitter
profile as the location definition, each cell shows the correlation coefficient between poor on-time
performance and the average number of tweets by airline-location-day, both normalized by

20

This approach has been used in other settings to adjust outcome measures that have different means and variances.
See, for example, Chetty, Friedman and Rockoff (2014) and Bloom, Liang, Roberts and Ying (2014).

25

location-airline mean and standard deviation, using the method described above. The table shows
a positive correlation between delays and tweets, which gets larger as an airline’s market
dominance increases.
b.

Tweets and On-Time Performance
Table 5 estimates the relationship between tweets and on-time performance without

interactions with market structure. The first row contains the coefficient of interest: the
(normalized) number of the airline’s flights in a location delayed at least 15 minutes or canceled.
If, as hypothesized, tweets are a response to quality deterioration, we would expect the coefficient
to be positive. In most of our analysis, our main dependent variable is the normalized number of
tweets to or about an airline on a day by individuals associated with a given city, based on the
location information in the individual’s Twitter profile. We focus on this measure because it
captures the Twitter users’ home city and is therefore most likely to capture the market structure
they typically face. In Tables 5 and 6, we also show robustness to the alternative ways of matching
tweets to locations.
Table 5 shows a robust statistical relationship between on-time performance and tweet
volume. Across four different specifications, the point estimate is always positive, statistically
significant, and large in magnitude. Column 1 includes controls for the number of flights that the
airline has at that airport, and location-city fixed effects. As expected, having more flights from a
location increases the number of tweets received from consumers in that city. This serves as our
main empirical specification for the remainder of the paper. Note that the variable capturing the
(standardized) number of flights the airline operates is only identified off of differences in the scale
of an airline’s operations across days and the coefficient on this variable is, not surprisingly,
insignificant and small in magnitude.
The coefficient estimate in column 1 suggests that an increase in the share of delayed or
canceled flights of one standard deviation is associated with 0.078 standard deviations more
tweets. Column 2 shows robustness to associating tweets to locations using any of the three sources
of location information. Column 3 changes the dependent variable to log(tweets with location
given in profile+1), demonstrating that the sign of the correlation is robust though the coefficient
should not be interpreted as an elasticity. The R-squared here is much larger than in the other
columns, suggesting that the standardization differences out much of the explainable variation. In
Column 4, tweets are matched to the airport (rather than the city) closest to the user at the time the

26

tweet was made and then aggregated to the airline-airport-day level. The airport-level analysis also
shows a positive and statistically significant relationship between delays and tweet volume.
Overall, we view Table 5 as clearly revealing that there is a robust statistical relationship between
tweets and quality deterioration, which emerges across various location measures, fixed effect
specifications, and functional forms.
c.

Tweets, On-Time Performance, and Market Structure
To assess how market dominance affects the relationship between tweets and on-time

performance, we add interactions between our measures of on-time performance and an airline’s
level of dominance in a city or at an airport. The first column in Table 6 re-estimates column 1 of
Table 5 with the added interactions as specified in the regression equation above. The first row
shows the main effect of delays and cancellations, which captures the relationship between tweets
and on-time performance when an airline operates less than 15% of the flights in a market. The
following rows show the interactions with the three higher categories of airport dominance.
Column 1 shows that the relationship between on-time performance deterioration and
tweets is stronger when an airline has a dominant position at an airport. In particular, a one standard
deviation deterioration in on-time performance generates about 85% more voice when an airline
operates between 30% and 50% of flights in the market and more than double the amount of voice
when an airline has more than 50% of the flights in the market. When an airline operates between
15% and 30% of flights in a city, the impact of a deterioration in on-time performance is only
marginally statistically (and economically) different from the impact when an airline has less than
15% of flights. Therefore, for the remainder of specifications, we combine the two lower categories
and use that as the excluded category. We show this in column 2. In columns 3 to 5, we show that
the pattern of interaction effects is robust to using any of the three sources of location information,
to using log(tweets with location given in profile+1) as the dependent variable, and to using the
airport (rather than the city) closest to the user at the time the tweet was made.
Across all specifications, the coefficients on the interactions between quality and airline
dominance (measured by 30-50% share of flights or over 50% of flights from the city) are positive
and statistically significant. Furthermore, the coefficient when airlines have over 50% of flights is
larger than the coefficient when airlines have 30-50% of flights. Thus, our results indicate that when airlines are dominant in a market - the relationship between on-time performance and tweets
is stronger. Interpreted through the lens of Exit, Voice, and Loyalty, and as predicted by our

27

relational contracting model, we find that voice is more likely to emerge as a response to quality
deterioration when an airline is the dominant firm in a market
d.

Evidence that the Results are driven by Comments about Quality Deterioration
In this section, we include additional analyses that investigate whether the increase in voice

that we measure is likely to be a response to an unexpected deterioration in quality.21 In particular,
we show that tweets specifically about on-time performance rise when on-time performance
deteriorates and that tweets become more negative in sentiment when on-time performance
deteriorates. We also show delays that are the airline’s fault generate a larger increase in tweets
(in general and specifically for dominant airlines) than delays that are not the airline’s fault.
Together, we view these results as suggesting that the increase in tweets that we are capturing is
indeed a response to unexpected quality deterioration and not the result of some other factor (such
as, a mechanical increase in tweeting because people have time to use Twitter while waiting at the
airport or simple complaining about factors outside the airline’s control, such as adverse weather).
Table 7 re-estimates the main specification from Tables 5 and 6 using two alternative
dependent variables: the number of tweets that mention on-time performance and the number of
tweets that do not. The results in the first two columns show that, when delays and cancellations
increase, tweets that mention on-time performance increase twice as much as tweets that do not
mention on-timer performance. Columns 3 and 4 show that, as dominance grows, the increase in
the number of tweets about on-time performance is larger than the increase in the number of tweets
not about on-time performance.
Table 8 explores tweet sentiment. Recall that for each tweet, the algorithm predicts the
likelihood that the sentiment of the tweet is negative. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2
is the average predicted sentiment of the tweets received by an airline in market on a day. The
value is missing when there are no tweets on a day. These columns investigate whether on-time
performance impacts the average sentiment of tweets received. We find that the average negative
sentiment of the tweets received is higher when delays and cancellations increase and that the same
deterioration in on-time performance generates more negative sentiment when an airline is

21

From this point on, we only present standardized results at the city level. However, in the online appendix, we
present all of these specifications estimated with non-standardized logged variables and estimated with standardized
variables at the airport level.

28

dominant. In columns 3 and 4, we explore whether a deterioration in on-time performance impacts
the number of very negative or very positive tweets received. We find that both very negative and
very positive tweets increase when on-time performance is worse, but the impact on very negative
tweets is much larger.22 Columns 5 and 6 include the interactions with market share and, again,
show that the increase in very negative tweets is much larger than the increase in very positive
tweets and that the impact of market dominance on the relationship between on-time performance
and tweets is larger for very negative tweets.
A feature of our setting is that quality may deteriorate for reasons outside the airline’s
control, such as bad weather. Consumers know that this is possible when they purchase their tickets
and therefore may not voice in response to this type of quality deterioration. If this were the case,
we would expect our results to be strongest for deteriorations in quality that are – or are perceived
to be – within the airline’s control. We investigate this in Table 9, first by explicitly including
variables measuring daily weather and then by distinguishing between delays that are and are not
the airline’s fault. Before turning to these results, it is worth pointing out that all of our
specifications include city-day (or airport-day) fixed effects. Thus, we are already controlling for
the weather in a city (or at an airport) on a day and cannot directly include measures of the weather
experienced on that day. Moreover, this implies that the coefficients on the delay variables in our
regressions are only identified off differences in on-time performance across airlines at an airport
on a day, after accounting for the average impact of that day’s weather on delays and cancellations.
However, because it is possible that adverse weather may impact dominant airlines differently than
non-dominant airlines (and this could, in turn, confound the interaction terms in our regressions),
we estimate specifications where we interact weather variables with the dominance variables.23
The results are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9. The first column includes a single weather

22

The finding that very positive tweets increase when on-time performance deteriorates may seem surprising but can
be explaining by two factors. First, a deterioration in on-time performance gives airlines an opportunity to remedy
problems and a successful remedy can lead to a very positive tweet. Second, as mentioned above, the algorithm often
misclassifies sarcastic tweets, which are intended to be negative but sound positive. These types of tweets are likely
to increase when on-time performance gets worse.
23
The weather data are from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Quality Controlled Local
Climatological Data. These data provide daily information on a large number of weather variables captured by
weather stations. Stations exist at every airport. We collected the data for every airport in our dataset. For our citylevel analysis, when a city had multiple airports, we randomly chose one of the airports in the city and used that
airport’s readings for all airports in the city. The weather data can be found at
https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/qclcd/QCLCD?prior=N (last accessed December 20, 2016).

29

variable that equals one if there was rain, snow, or fog in the departure city on a given day. The
second column instead uses a continuous measure of the total amount of precipitation (rain and
snow) in the city on the day. Both specifications show that inclusion of the additional interaction
terms has little impact on the coefficients on the on-time performance variables and their
interactions. The coefficients on the weather interactions are statistically not significant.
In the third column of Table 9, we directly investigate whether the response to quality
deterioration via voice is greater when the quality deterioration is likely to be the airline’s fault.
To do this, we take advantage of the fact that the DOT on-time performance data also contain
information on the (self-reported) causes of delay for each flight that is more than 15 minutes
late.24 We then construct a variable measuring the number of flights delayed more than 15 minutes
that are the airline’s fault and the number delayed more than 15 minutes that are not the airline’s
fault. We include both of these and their interactions with the dominance variables, in the
regression. The results appear are shown in column 3 of Table 9. While correlation between fault
and not-at-fault delays reduces power, we find that the interaction effects are larger in magnitude
for delays that are the airline’s fault.
Overall, we view the results in this section as indicating that the relationships we have
uncovered are indeed evidence of consumers using voice when they experience unexpectedly poor
quality.
e.

Support for the Relational Contracting Model
In this section, we carry out a number of analyses that investigate specific predictions of the

relational contracting conceptualization of voice proposed above.
i. The model emphasizes the value of customers
The model emphasizes that firms have a larger incentive to respond to voice exercised by
more valuable (or profitable) customers. We therefore examine whether the airlines are more likely
to respond to tweets from customers that are more valuable. We capture the expected profitability

24

This information is part of the on-time performance data collected by the DOT. For each delayed flight, airlines are
required to indicate the cause(s) of the delay: air carrier delay, weather delay, National Aviation System delay, security
delay and late arriving aircraft delay. Airlines can attribute delay the multiple categories, indicating the number of
minutes by each cause. We consider delays categorized as carrier delays or late aircraft delays to be the airline’s fault.
Because this variable is self-reported by airlines, it is reasonable to see it as a lower bound on the fraction of delays
that are the fault of the airline.

30

of consumers in two ways. First, as in the analysis above, by whether the customer lives in a city
where the airline has a large share of flights. Second, by whether the tweet mentions that the
customer is in a frequent flier program. Customers who are entrenched in an airline’s frequent flier
program (FFP) are more valuable for several reasons. First, they are more likely to be business
travelers. Business travelers have a higher willingness-to-pay, which airlines exploit through price
discrimination. Second, if they are already invested in the airline’s FFP, the marginal value of
additional frequent flier points will be higher for them (due to the non-linearity of most FFP reward
structures). This, in turn, will further raise their willingness-to-pay (Lederman 2007, 2008). Third,
they are more likely to fly frequently which increases the value of preserving a long-term
relationship with them.
As mentioned above, we collected data on whether each tweet received a response for the
airline (excluding US Airways). Overall, 21.4% of tweets receive responses. Of tweets that
mention the airline’s handle, 34.7% receive responses. Figure 2a shows that the fraction of tweets
that receive responses grew rapidly until June 2013, and then leveled off. Figure 2b shows that
there is considerable variation in response rates by airline, with American being most responsive
during this period and Southwest being the least responsive.
Before proceeding with the airline response analysis, it is important to recognize that there
are other ways airlines could respond to tweets, including email, direct messages, and future
quality improvements. We are unable to observe these, yet they would be consistent with the
“concession” we describe in our model. Nevertheless, we view the relatively high response rate as
consistent with our theoretical framework and indicative that Twitter is an important channel of
communication with customers in this industry.
In Table 10, we estimate whether airlines are more likely to respond to tweets from
customers who are more valuable. For this analysis, the level of observation is the tweet and the
dependent variable is an indicator variable for whether the tweet received a response from the
airline. We estimate a logit model. We control for other factors that might elicit an airline response
including whether the tweet contains the airline’s handle, whether the tweet contains a customer
service keyword,25 and whether the tweet contains an on-time performance keyword. We also

We define customer service strings as “food”, “water”, “desk”, “agent”, “attendant”, “attendent”, “counter”,
“queue”, “manning”, “crew”, “rude”, “nasty”, “service”, “staff”, “awful”, “drink”, “svc”, and “handling”.
25

31

control for the airline, the tweeter’s number of followers, the tweet sentiment, and a linear time
trend.
The estimate in the first row of Column 1 shows that airlines are more likely to respond to
tweets from customers associated with markets in which the airline operates more than a 30% of
flights. The remaining rows show the impact of the other variables: airlines respond more often to
tweets with a negative sentiment, to tweets to their handle, to tweets with customer service
keywords, and to tweets with on-time performance keywords. We see no consistent correlation
between the number of followers and response rates, a result we revisit below.26
Column 2 switches the definition of most valuable customers from location to whether the
tweet contains a word that suggests that the tweet comes from a frequent flier. In many ways, we
believe that this is a better measure because airline social media managers will have easy access
to the tweet content while the location information may be harder to find. The result suggests that
airlines respond more to tweets with frequent flier keywords. Column 3 includes both frequent
flier keyword and location information and shows that the positive coefficients are robust. Overall,
we interpret Table 10 as suggesting that airlines are more likely to respond to tweets from their
more profitable customers.
ii. The model emphasizes direct communication
In our relational contracting model, customers use voice to complain directly to the firm,
rather than to “vent” or punish the firm by telling others about their bad experiences. Of course,
one difference between Twitter and other channels for voice is its public nature. This raises the
possibility that venting or inflicting demand losses on the airline in other markets may be part of
the reason people tweet in response to delays and cancellations. Here, we provide evidence that
suggests venting is unlikely to be the primary motivation for the relationships we observe.
If a tweet is directed to an airline’s handle, it suggests that the customer wants the airline
to see that tweet (rather than simply complain about the airline to friends and followers). In
particular, tweets to a handle will show up in the airline’s notification center automatically. Thus,
a tweet to an airline’s handle is a (public) message directed to the airline rather than a public

26

The relationship between number of followers and responses is non-linear. To communicate the non-linearity, we
split the data into 0-25th percentile, 25th to 50th percentile, 50th to 75th percentile, 75th to 99th percentile, and (to account
for the few twitter users with a very large number of followers) over 99th percentile.

32

message about the airline directed to the sender’s Twitter followers. Table 11 compares the impact
of on-time performance deterioration on tweets made to an airline’s handle and tweets not directed
at the handle. Columns 1 and 2 show that when delays and cancellation increase both tweets to the
handle and tweets not to the handle rise, though tweets to the handle increase slightly more. Thus,
while there seems to be some public complaining in response quality deterioration, much of the
additional voice is directed at the airlines. Furthermore, columns 3 and 4 show that dominance has
a larger impact on the responsiveness of tweets to the handle to poor on-time performance than
tweets not to the handle. In addition, returning to Table 10, which estimated the airline response
models, we find there that airlines are more likely to respond to tweets to their handle than tweets
that simply mention them. Overall, we see this collection of results as suggesting that the
customers use Twitter to communicate with the airline rather than simply complain publicly about
the airline.
Table 11, however, does not address the fact that even a tweet to an airline’s handle is
public and that the public nature of the tweet might nevertheless be driving the consumer’s decision
to exercise voice. We explore this in two ways, each using the number of followers as a signal of
the important of the public nature of the tweet. First, we replace number of tweets with average
number of followers as the dependent variable. Table 12 displays the results. Column 1 shows that
the average number of followers for people who tweet on days with delays and cancellations is
very slightly higher—a one standard deviation increase in delays is correlated with a 0.005
standard deviation increase in average number of followers. Furthermore, and perhaps more
importantly, column 2 shows that this relationship is unrelated to market dominance. Thus, the
number of followers does not appear to be substantially different for tweets that are about delays
or cancellations in places where an airline is dominant.
Second, returning to Table 10, which estimated the airline response models, we find no
consistent relationship between a tweeter’s number of followers and the likelihood of receiving an
airline response though we do find that airlines are much more likely to respond to tweeters in the
99th percentile of the follower’s distribution. We interpret Table 11, Table 12, and the followers
results in Table 10 as together suggesting that tweets about airlines during periods of poor
performance are often communications to the airline.

33

iii. The model implies responses should lead to future tweets
Finally, in Table 13, we look at whether twitter users who receive a response from an airline
are more likely to tweet again to the same airline in the future. Many of the twitter users in our
data tweet multiple times to an airline. The 3,860,528 tweets in the data are made by 1,457,945
different users, Of these, 520,807 tweet more than once. The median number of tweets is 1, the
75th percentile is 2, the 99th percentile is 26 and the maximum is 6635. Excluding those whose first
tweet was to US Airways, we can analysis 1,375,416 different users.
Table 13 explores whether users are more likely to tweet again to an airline if their first tweet
received a response. In this way, the results explore whether responses (suggesting a successful
use of the relational contract) lead to repeated use of the relational contract. Columns (1) and (2)
look at the first tweet by each user. The dependent variable is whether the user tweeted again to
the same airline during our sample period. The main covariate is whether an airline responded to
the first tweet. Column (1) shows a logit regression of tweeting again on responses without
additional controls. There is a positive correlation between airlines responding to an individual’s
first tweet and that individual tweeting again in the following years. Column (2) adds controls for
sentiment, number of followers, whether the tweet was to the handle, customer service keywords
in the tweet, on time performance keywords in the tweet, whether the original tweet contained a
frequent flier keyword, the share of flights for the airline in the location of the tweeter, airline fixed
effects, and a linear time trend. The coefficient on airline response is still positive. The controls
generally suggest, unsurprisingly, that more active and experienced twitter users are more likely
to tweet again.
Two potential concerns with this analysis are that the later tweets are part of the same
conversation as the initial tweet and that tweeters who show up early in the sample have more
opportunities to tweet again. Therefore, columns (3) and (4) look only at users whose first tweet
in our data was in 2012. The dependent variable is whether we observe another tweet to an airline
by these users in the later part of the data set, in 2013 or 2014. Again, the results show that users
who received a response are more likely to tweet again.
Overall, we view our collection of results as consistent with a relational contracting model of
voice. While the evidence here does not reject the possibility that other motivations for voice may
also operate, it suggests that voice elicits an airline response when it comes from the highest value
customers, rather than by the customers that have the greatest ability to damage the airline’s

34

reputation by communicating a complaint to a large number of followers. Furthermore, when the
airline responds (as expected in the relational contracting model), the twitter users are more likely
to tweet again to an airline.
7

Conclusion
Based on the original ideas in Hirschman’s Exit, Voice and Loyalty, we have developed a

formal model of voice as the equilibrium of relational contract between a firm and its customer.
Our model resolves a key ambiguity in Hirschman’s formulation – namely, how market structure
influences the choice between exit and voice. Our model predicts that voice is more likely to
emerge in concentrated markets because the value to firms of retaining consumers is higher.
Empirically, we have developed a strategy for estimating the relationship between quality
deterioration, voice and market structure. Our analysis uses Twitter data, which provides us with
a systematic way of measuring voice. Our empirical strategy takes advantage of the fact that, in
the airline industry, a key dimension of quality – on-time performance – varies at very high
frequency and therefore we can exploit daily variation in the quality an airline provides in a given
market. This allows us to control for the underlying relationship between market structure and
quality while tracing out the relationship between market structure and voice.
Our empirical results show that consumers do indeed use voice to express disappointment
when quality deteriorates. We believe that this is the first large-scale study to document this fact.
With respect to the relationship with market structure, our results indicate that consumer are more
likely to use voice when the quality deterioration is by a firm that is dominant in the consumer’s
home market. These relationships are more pronounced for tweets that mention on-time
performance and tweets that are negative in sentiment. The relationships are also more pronounced
when delays are the airline’s own fault. Consistent with a relational contracting model, we find
that firms are more likely to respond to their most valuable customers and that users whose tweets
receive a response from the airline are more likely to tweet to that airline again in the future.
New communication technologies such as social media are both lowering the costs of voice
and making voice observable to researchers. These new technologies may increase the use of voice
in markets and generate renewed research interest on the topic of voice. We view this paper as a
first step in establishing such a research agenda. By exploiting the public nature of tweets and
taking advantage of detailed data on quality that is available in the airline industry, we have

35

investigated the relationship between quality, voice, and market structure. Going forward, there
are several interesting follow-up research questions worthy of future investigation. One such
question is how the advent of new communication technologies affects the volume and nature of
voice. This requires an empirical setting in which one could study complaints before-and-after the
introduction of a new communication channel for voice. A second promising line of research could
study the choice between voice and exit, at the customer level. Our setting does not allow us to
observe exit directly, rather we infer exit options based on market structure. However, other
settings, might allow researchers to observe this choice at the individual level. Finally, a
fundamental question in this literature is whether lowering the costs of voice impacts equilibrium
quality and welfare.

36

8

References

Abrahams, Alan, S., Jian Jiao, G. Alan Wang, and Weiguo Fan. 2012. Vehicle Defect Discovery
from Social Media. Decision Support Systems. 54, 87-97.
Adelman, Jeremy. 2013. Worldly Philosopher: The Odyssey of Albert O. Hirschman. Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ.
Agarwal, Apoorv and Xie, Boyi and Vovsha, Ilia and Rambow, Owen and Passonneau, Rebecca.
2011. Sentiment Analysis of Twitter Data. Proceedings of the Workshop on Languages in
Social Media. 30-38.
Bakshy, E., J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts 2011. Everyone's an influencer:
quantifying influence on Twitter. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference
on Web search and data mining, WSDM '11, New York, NY, USA, pp. 65-74.ACM.
Beard, T.R., J.T. Macher and J.M. Mayo. 2015. Can You Hear Me Now? Exit, Voice and Loyalty
Under Increasing Competition. Journal of Law and Economics 58(3), 717-745.
Berger, Jonah, Eric Schwartz. 2011. What drives immediate and ongoing word of mouth? Journal
of Marketing Research 48(5), 869-880.
Borenstein, Severin. 1989. Hubs and high fares: Dominance and market power in the U.S. airline
industry. RAND Journal of Economics 20(3), 344-365.
Borenstein, Severin. 1991. The Dominant-Firm Advantage in Multiproduct Industries: Evidence
from the U.S. Airlines. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4), 1237-1266.
Breuckner, Jan, Darin Lee, and Ethan Singer. 2014. City-Pairs vs Airport-Pairs: A MarketDefinition Methodology for the Airline Industry. Review of Industrial Organization 44, 125.
Cairns, Ian. 2016. Making customer service even better on Twitter. mimeo., Twitter.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2014. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates. American Economic Review, 104(9):
2593-2632.
Chevalier, Judith and Dina Mayzlin 2006. “The Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales: Online Book
Reviews,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (3), 345-354.
Delo, Cotton. 2014. Wells Fargo Opens Command Center to Handle Surge of Social Content.
Advertising Age, Published online April 8, 2014. http://adage.com/article/cmo-strategy/riskaverse-wells-fargo-opens-social-media-command-center/292476/ Accessed May 11, 2015.
Forbes, Silke 2008. The Effect of Service Quality and Expectations on Customer Complaints.
Journal of Industrial Economics 56(1), pp. 190-213.

37

Fornell, Claes, and Birger Wernerfelt. 1987. Defensive Marketing Strategy by Customer
Complaint Management: A Theoretical Analysis. Journal of Marketing Research 24(4),
337-346.
Fornell, Claes, and Birger Wernerfelt. 1988. A Model for Customer Complaint Management.
Marketing Science 7(3), 287-298.
Freeman, Richard B. 1976. Individual Mobility and Union Voice in the Labor Market. American
Economic Review 66(2), 361–68.
Godes, David and Dina Mayzlin. 2004. Using Online Conversations to Study Word of Mouth
Communication. Marketing Science, 23(4), 545-560
Gatignon, Hubert and Thomas S. Robertson. 1986. An Exchange Theory Model of Interpersonal
Communication. Advances in Consumer Research, 13, 534-38.
Godes, David and Dina Mayzlin. 2009. Firm-Created Word-of-Mouth Communication: Evidence
from a Field Study. Marketing Science, 28 (4), 721-739.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1976. Discussion. American Economic Review 66(2), 386–391.
Horrace, William C. and Ronald L. Oaxaca. 2006. Results on the bias and inconsistency of
ordinary least squares for the linear probability model. Economics Letters 90, 321-327.
Huang, Wayne 2016. New research: consumers willing to spend more after a positive customer
service interaction on Twitter. mimeo., Twitter.
King, Gary, and Langche Zeng. 2001. Logistic Regression in Rare Events Data. Political Analysis
9, 137–163.
Lederman, Mara. 2007. Do Enhancements to Loyalty Programs Affect Demand? The Impact of
Frequent Flyer Partnerships on Domestic Airline Demand. RAND Journal of Economics
38(4), 1134-1158.
Lederman, Mara. 2008. Are Frequent Flyer Programs a Cause of the Hub Premium? Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy 17(1), 35-66.
Levin, Jonathan. 2002. Multilateral Contracting and the Employment Relationship. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117(3), 1075-1103.
Ma, Liye, Baohong Sun, and Sunder Kekre. 2015. The Squeaky Wheel Gets the Grease—An
empirical analysis of customer voice and firm intervention on Twitter. Marketing Science
34(5), 627-645.
Mayzlin, Dina. 2006. Promotional Chat on the Internet. Marketing Science, 25 (2), 155-163

38

Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judy Chevalier. 2014. Promotional Reviews: An Empirical
Investigation of Online Review Manipulation. American Economic Review 104(8), 24212455.
Miller, Amalia, and Catherine Tucker. 2013. Active Social Media Management: The Case of
Health Care. Information Systems Research 24(1), 52-70
Nelson, Richard R. 1976. Discussion. American Economic Review 66(2), 386–391.
Nosko, Chirs and Steve Tadelis. 2015. The Limits of Reputation in Platform Markets: An
Empirical Analysis and Field Experiment. Working paper, University of California,
Berkeley.
Pak, Alexander, and Patrick Paroubek, 2010. Twitter as a Corpus for Sentiment Analysis and
Opinion Mining. Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, 1320-1326.
Pang, Bo, and Lillian Lee. 2008. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and trends
in information retrieval 2(1-2), 1-135.
Read, Jonathon. 2005. Using Emoticons to reduce Dependency in Machine Learning Techniques
of Sentiment Classification. Proceedings of the ACL student Research Workshop, p. 43-48.
Richins, Marsha L. 1983. Negative WOM by Dissatisfied Consumers: A Pilot Study. Journal of
Marketing, 47(1), 68-78.
Trusov, M., R.E. Bucklin, and K. Pauwels. 2009. Effects of word-of-mouth versus traditional
marketing: Findings from an internet social networking site. Journal of Marketing 73(5), 90102.
Wei, Zaiyan, and Mo Xiao. 2015. For Whom to Tweet? A Study of a Large-Scale Social Network.
Working paper, University of Arizona.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1976. The Economics of Internal Organization: Exit and Voice in Relation
to Markets and Hierarchies. American Economic Review 66 (2), 369–77.
Young, Dennis R. 1976. Consolidation or Diversity: Choices in the Structure of Urban
Governance. American Economic Review 66 (2), 378–85.

39

Table 1: Tweet-level Descriptive Statistics
Panel A: GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION IN FULL SAMPLE
Variable
Obs.
Mean
Std. Dev
Min
0.3611
0.4803 0
Location given in profile
3,860,528
0.0434
0.2037 0
Airport mentioned in tweet
3,860,528
Geocode stamp on tweet

3,860,528

0.0727

Any location information

3,860,528

Airport in tweet or geocode

3,860,528

Max
1
1
1

0.4199

0.2597 0
0.4935 0

0.1107

0.3138 0

1

Panel B: FRACTION OF TWEETS BY AIRLINE
SAMPLE WITH
FULL
AIRPORT
SAMPLE
INFORMATION
(GEOCODE OR IN
TWEET)
0.2560
0.2451
American Airlines

1

SAMPLE WITH CITY
INFORMATION
(GEOCODE, IN TWEET,
OR CITY IN PROFILE)
0.2584

Delta Air Lines

0.0292
0.1203
0.1291

0.0265
0.1269
0.1499

0.0343
0.1389
0.1349

United Airlines

0.2495

0.2380

0.2082

US Airways

0.0993

0.0999

0.0959

Southwest Airlines

0.1167

0.1136

0.1293

Alaska Airlines
JetBlue

40

Table 2: Location-Airline-Day Descriptive Statistics
CITY LEVEL DATA
Variable
# tweets (location given in profile)
# tweets (any location definition)
Airline-airport flights
Airline share of flights in city
Under 15%
15-30%
30-50%
Over 50%
Number delayed
Dep. delay > 15 min. or canceled
Delays that are airline’s fault
Delays that are not airline’s fault
Tweet content
(for location in profile tweets)
# tweets to handle
# tweets not to handle
Average sentiment
# tweets mention on time performance
# very positive tweets
# very negative tweets
Average # followers
AIRPORT LEVEL DATA
Variable
# tweets (geocode stamp )
Airline-airport flights/week
Airline share of flights at airport
Under 15%
15-30%
30-50%
Over 50%
Number delayed
Dep. delay > 15 min. or canceled

Obs.
318,077
318,077
318,077

Mean
4.2575
4.6184
33.7528

Std. Dev.
12.3134
13.0956
78.2108

Min
0
0
1

Max
1179
1212
948

318,077
318,077
318,077
318,077

0.4830
0.3477
0.1219
0.0474

0.4997
0.4762
0.3272
0.2125

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

318,077
221,957
221,957

7.1733
6.8400
2.7761

22.0518
17.8120
8.6877

0
0
0

813
466.8
622.3

318,077
318,077
177,703
318,077
318,077
318,077
177,703

2.9590
1.2986
0.3580
0.7735
1.8997
0.9768
3737.8

8.9405
4.4583
0.2915
2.8192
5.6670
3.5939
23844.7

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

768
492
1
450
457
587
2,917,676

382,141
382,141

0.5900
28.2882

1.8693
69.5922

0
1

97
948

382,141
382,141
382,141
382,141
382,141
382,141

0.5045
0.3230
0.1288
0.0413
0.5045
6.0115

0.5000
0.4676
0.3350
0.1990
0.5000
19.6152

0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
813

41

Table 3: Sample tweets by sentiment
Tweets with probability negative less than 0.01
thanks @united for the upgrade to an exit row seat; just arrived at dulles. #goodservice
@united @boeingairplanes incredible plane design! really like the gold streak across the front of the plane as well!
@americanair you're welcome american airlines. i love your planes, they are very bigs.
thanks @unitedairlines for another great flight to nyc!
Tweets with probability negative of 0.10
love the @united premieraccess telephone number. no waiting &amp; no change fee.
congrats @southwestair you are 5 for 5 in being late on flights. i'm at 300 hours of list time for the year!
@southwestair this is a nice aircraft with the slick blue over head lighting and better design air vents... #greatcompany
Tweets with probability negative of 0.30
@united will your b787 ever fly to @heathrowairport
is it just me or has @united gotten better... two upgrades in one travel.
@jetblue not much info. looks like they are taking us back to the gate now.
Tweets with probability negative of 0.50
knock knock @united anybody home ??
i can't. i am done. standing applause for southwest airlines, no encore, i can't do it
@united - i gave many of years to ual for which i'm grateful.
judge approves american airlines' bankruptcy plan - yahoo finance http://t.co/z701ojfrnv via @yahoofinance
Tweets with probability negative of 0.70
@united why in the world did you guys do away with infant preboarding?
@americanair about to but flight is oversold. thoughts?
crazy traffic, on my way to #jfk #delta
Tweets with probability negative of 0.90
@united embarrassing to fly with you tonight. multiple points of failure.
11 hours later i've arrived in austin, cheers @americanair #awful
@americanair classless, no help flt attendants. airline industry is just so sad.
Tweets with probability negative more than 0.99
@united you have terrible customer service. how do you run a business with such uneducated employees
delayed 12 hrs @united customer service packed with complaints #typical #embarrassingairline
@jetblue even more disappointing that you're making seem like she accidentally hung up on me #jetbluetakesnoblame
@americanair just ignore me if you want, but don't patronize me. your service sucks. if you cared you would do something.

42

Table 4: Correlation between On-Time Performance and Number of Tweets, by Dominance
Airline share of flights at
airports in the city
Under 15%
15-30%
30-50%
Over 50%

Correlation coefficient
0.112
0.125
0.181
0.204

Unit of observation is airline-location-day. Location identified as location
in profile. Correlation coefficients shown.

43

Table 5
Relationship between On-Time Performance and Tweet Volume

# airline flights departing
that location

(1)
Standardized
# Tweets
Location in
profile (city)
0.078***
(0.005)
0.001
(0.004)

(2)
Standardized
# Tweets
Any Location
Information (city)
0.081***
(0.005)
0.0004
(0.004)

(3)
Log(#
Tweets+1)
Location in
profile (city)
0.069***
(0.004)
0.001
(0.009)

(4)
Standardized
# Tweets
Geocoded
Tweets (airport)
0.052***
(0.004)
-0.0001
(0.003)

Fixed effects

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

318,077
0.005

328,692
0.005

Day-location,
Airline-location
338,754
0.451

Dependent Variable
Location Measure
# flights delayed>15 min or
canceled

N
R-sq

382,141
0.002

Dependent variable identified in column headers. In columns 1, 2, and 4, all variables are normalized using airline-location mean
and standard deviation (and so airline-location fixed effects are not included). In column 3, variables are logged. Unit of observation
is the location-airline-day. In columns 1-3, location is defined by city. In column 4, location is defined by airport. Robust standard
errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly in column 3. Day-location fixed
effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

44

Table 6
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet Volume and Market Dominance
(1)
Standardized
# Tweets

(2)
Standardized
# Tweets

(3)
Standardized
# Tweets

Location Measure

Location in
profile (city)

Location in
profile (city)

# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled
# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled × 15-30% share
# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled × >50% share
# airline flights departing that
airport
Fixed effects

0.063***
(0.006)
0.013+
(0.008)
0.054***
(0.012)
0.091***
(0.020)
-0.0001
(0.004)
Day-location

0.069***
(0.005)

Any Location
Information
(city)
0.071***
(0.005)

0.048***
(0.012)
0.087***
(0.020)
0.000008
(0.004)
Day-location

0.051***
(0.011)
0.094***
(0.021)
-0.0002
(0.004)
Day-location

318,077
0.005

318,077
0.005

328,692
0.006

Dependent Variable

N
R-sq

(4)
Log(#
Tweets+1)
Location in
profile (city)

(5)
Standardized
# Tweets
Geocoded
Tweets (airport)

0.063***
(0.005)

0.044***
(0.004)

0.023**
(0.007)
0.061***
(0.017)
0.001
(0.009)
Day-location,
Airline-location
338,754
0.451

0.040***
(0.009)
0.097***
(0.019)
-0.001
(0.003)
Day-location
382,141
0.003

Dependent variable identified in column headers. In columns 1, 2, 3, and 5, all variables are normalized using airline-location mean and standard
deviation. In column 4, variables are logged. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. In columns 1-4, location is defined by city. In column
5, location is defined by airport. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly
in column 4. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

45

Table 7
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet Volume and Market Dominance, by
On-Time Performance Mentioned in Tweet

Dependent Variable

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled

(1)
Standardized
# tweets about
on-time
performance
0.112***
(0.008)

(2)
Standardized
# tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.052***
(0.004)

0.005
(0.004)

(3)
Standardized
# tweets about
on-time
performance
0.103***
(0.007)
0.041**
(0.015)
0.119***
(0.025)
-0.013***
(0.003)

(4)
Standardized
# tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.045***
(0.004)
0.042***
(0.010)
0.066***
(0.016)
0.005
(0.004)

-0.012***
(0.003)
Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

318,077
0.009

318,077
0.002

318,077
0.010

318,077
0.003

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-location mean and standard
deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport
in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01,
***p<0.001

46

Table 8
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet Volume and Market Dominance, by
Tweet Sentiment

Dependent Variable

# flights delayed or canceled
# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or
canceled × >50% share
# airline flights departing that
airport
Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized
Average
Average
# very
# very
# very
# very
negative
negative
negative
positive
negative
positive
sentiment of sentiment of
tweets
tweets
tweets
tweets
tweets
tweets
0.080***
0.072***
0.097***
0.026***
0.088***
0.020***
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.003)
0.047**
0.044**
0.033***
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.009)
0.044*
0.106***
0.056***
(0.020)
(0.025)
(0.011)
-0.012*
-0.012*
-0.010*
0.011**
-0.010**
0.011**
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Daylocation
177,703
0.004

Daylocation
177,703
0.004

Daylocation
317,325
0.007

Daylocation
318,077
0.001

Daylocation
317,325
0.007

Daylocation
318,077
0.001

Dependent variable identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-location mean and standard
deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport
in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01,
***p<0.001

47

Table 9
Weather, Delay Cause, and the Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet
Volume and Market Dominance
Dependent Variable
# flights delayed or canceled
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× 30-50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× >50% share

(1)
Standardized
# tweets
0.070***
(0.006)
0.049***
(0.012)
0.075***
(0.020)
-0.0002
(0.006)
-0.011
(0.008)

Quantity of Precipitation
× 30-50% share

(2)
Standardized
# tweets
0.071***
(0.006)
0.049***
(0.012)
0.073***
(0.019)

-0.006
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.010)

Quantity of Precipitation
× >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are airline’s
fault

-0.001
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.004)

0.063***
(0.005)
0.032*
(0.012)
0.058**
(0.018)
0.038***
(0.004)
0.017
(0.010)
0.016
(0.024)
0.002
(0.005)

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

292,295
0.005

289,439
0.005

221,957
0.006

# flights delayed > 15 min that are airline’s
fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are airline’s
fault × >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are not
airline’s fault × >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(2)
Standardized
# tweets

Dependent variable is city-level tweets with the location in profile known. Airline fault is defined by
the airline in regulatory filings. All variables are normalized using airline-location mean and standard
deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard
errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s
xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

48

Table 10
Response Rates
(1)
30-50% share
>50% share

0.241***
(0.008)
0.176***
(0.013)

Frequent flier keyword
Probability sentiment is negative
# followers, 25th -50th percentile
# followers, 50th -75th percentile
# followers, 75th -99th percentile
# followers, over 99th percentile
Handle
Customer service keyword
On time performance keyword
American Airlines
Alaska Airlines
JetBlue
Delta Air Lines
United Airlines
Date
N
Log Likelihood

(2)

0.048**
(0.017)
0.042***
(0.009)
-0.054***
(0.011)
-0.119***
(0.013)
0.135***
(0.024)
3.125***
(0.034)
0.392***
(0.010)
0.482***
(0.010)
4.024***
(0.071)
2.630***
(0.077)
3.356***
(0.074)
1.397***
(0.071)
2.819***
(0.071)
0.001***
(0.0001)
3,477,105
-1,231,187

0.262***
(0.027)
0.060***
(0.017)
0.057***
(0.009)
-0.034**
(0.011)
-0.096***
(0.013)
0.153***
(0.024)
3.134***
(0.034)
0.399***
(0.010)
0.490***
(0.010)
3.998***
(0.071)
2.639***
(0.077)
3.339***
(0.074)
1.385***
(0.071)
2.818***
(0.071)
0.001***
(0.0001)
3,477,105
-1,230,723

(3)
0.238***
(0.008)
0.173***
(0.013)
0.258***
(0.027)
0.062***
(0.017)
0.043***
(0.009)
-0.052***
(0.011)
-0.118***
(0.013)
0.136***
(0.024)
3.120***
(0.034)
0.398***
(0.010)
0.486***
(0.010)
4.017***
(0.071)
2.628***
(0.077)
3.359***
(0.074)
1.382***
(0.071)
2.803***
(0.071)
0.001***
(0.0001)
3,477,105
-1,229,926

Logit regression. Dependent variable is whether the airline responded to the tweet. Unit of observation is the tweet. Southwest airlines is
the base for the airline dummy variables. No response data for US Airways. Regressions include 11 month-of-the-year dummy variables.
+p<.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

49

Table 11
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet Volume and Market Dominance,
Tweets to Handle and Not to Handle

Dependent Variable

# flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Standardized
# tweets to
handle
0.069***
(0.005)

(2)
Standardized
# tweets not
to handle
0.048***
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

(3)
Standardized
# tweets to
handle
0.059***
(0.005)
0.050***
(0.010)
0.092***
(0.021)
0.001
(0.004)

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

318,077
0.004

317,844
0.002

318,077
0.004

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(4)
Standardized
# tweets not
to handle
0.045***
(0.004)
0.015+
(0.009)
0.049**
(0.015)
0.001
(0.004)
Daylocation

317,844
0.002

Dependent variable is in column headers with city-level tweets with the location in profile known. All variables are
normalized using airline-location mean and standard deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day.
Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are
differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

50

Table 12
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Market Dominance, and Average Number of
Followers

Dependent Variable

# flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Standardized
Average # of
followers
0.0054+
(0.0032)

-0.0008
(0.0035)

(2)
Standardized
Average # of
followers
0.0056
(0.0034)
-0.0018
(0.0081)
0.0001
(0.0099)
-0.0008
(0.0035)

Day-location

Day-location

177,671
0.0001

177,671
0.0001

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable is in column headers with city-level tweets with the location in profile known. All variables are
normalized using airline-location mean and standard deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day.
Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are
differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

51

Table 13
Relationship between Receiving a Response to a Tweet and Tweeting Again
Dependent Variable

Airline responded to first tweet
Frequent flier keyword
30-50% share
>50% share
Probability sentiment is negative
# followers, 25th -50th percentile
# followers, 50th -75th percentile
# followers, 75th -99th percentile
# followers, over 99th percentile
Handle
Customer service keyword
On time performance keyword
American Airlines
Alaska Airlines
JetBlue
Delta Air Lines
United Airlines
Date
Constant
N
Log Likelihood

=1 if Tweet again,
after first tweet
(1)
(2)
0.897***
0.772***
(0.005)
(0.006)
0.221***
(0.009)
0.234***
(0.007)
0.435***
(0.011)
0.056***
(0.005)
0.044***
(0.005)
0.169***
(0.005)
0.446***
(0.006)
0.703***
(0.026)
0.490***
(0.004)
0.081***
(0.006)
0.123***
(0.006)
0.059***
(0.007)
-0.098***
(0.012)
0.103***
(0.007)
-0.195***
(0.007)
0.096***
(0.006)
-0.002***
(0.0001)
-1.035***
33.811***
(0.002)
(0.182)
1,375,416
1,375,416
-812,567
-780,934

=1 if Tweet in 2013 or 2014,
given first tweet in 2012
(3)
(4)
0.517***
0.341***
(0.015)
(0.017)
0.503***
(0.021)
0.401***
(0.015)
0.798***
(0.024)
-0.204***
(0.012)
0.292***
(0.012)
0.466***
(0.013)
0.804***
(0.014)
1.217***
(0.060)
0.503***
(0.010)
0.017
(0.015)
0.045***
(0.013)
-0.066***
(0.016)
-0.313***
(0.032)
-0.113***
(0.018)
-0.166***
(0.017)
0.130***
(0.016)
-0.002***
(0.0001)
-1.064***
44.824***
(0.005)
(1.908)
259,299
259,299
-149,639
-144,111

Dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is whether tweeted again to the same airline. Dependent variable in
columns 3 and 4 is whether tweeted again to the same airline in 2013 or 2014. Sample in columns 1 and 2 is
first tweet. Sample in columns 3 and 4 is first tweet by tweeter in 2012. Unit of observation is the tweeter.
Logit regression. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

1

Figure 1a: Average Daily Tweets by Month (Data with city information)

Figure 1b: Average Daily Tweets by Month by Airline (Data with city information)

Aug 12

American
JetBlue
United

date

Alaska
Delta
Southwest

July 14

June 14

May 14

Apr 14

Mar 14

Feb 14

Jan 14

Dec 13

Nov 13

Oct 13

Sept 13

Aug 13

July 13

June 13

May 13

Apr 13

Mar 13

Feb 13

Jan 13

Dec 12

Nov 12

Oct 12

Sept 12

0

.2

.4

.6

Aug 12
Sept 12
Oct 12
Nov 12
Dec 12
Jan 13
Feb 13
Mar 13
Apr 13
May 13
June 13
July 13
Aug 13
Sept 13
Oct 13
Nov 13
Dec 13
Jan 14
Feb 14
Mar 14
Apr 14
May 14
June 14
July 14

0

.05
.1

.15
.2

.25

2

Figure 2a: Response rates, over time

Figure 2b: Response rates by airline, over time

3

ONLINE APPENDIX to
Exit, Tweets, and Loyalty
By Joshua S. Gans, Avi Goldfarb, and Mara Lederman

Not for publication

Table of Contents
Appendix A: Tables
Table A1-A2: Descriptive statistics on tweet-level data
Table A3-A9: Robustness of airline-city-day regressions to logged specification
Table A10-A16: Robustness of airline-city-day regressions to airport-level (not city)

Appendix B: Extensions to Theory

4

APPENDIX A: TABLES
Table A1: Descriptive Statistics for Response Data
Variable
Airline replied
Airline replied if tweet to airline handle
Frequent flier keyword
Airline 30-50% share city
Airline >50% share city
Probability sentiment is negative
Number of followers, 25th -50th percentile
Number of followers, 50th -75th percentile
Number of followers, 75th -99th percentile
Number of followers, over 99th percentile
Handle
Customer service keyword
On time performance keyword
American Airlines
Alaska Airlines
JetBlue
Delta Air Lines
United Airlines

Obs.
3,477,105
2,040,504
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105
3,477,105

Mean
0.2143
0.3612
0.0539
0.0958
0.0367
0.3612
0.2521
0.2503
0.2379
0.0099
0.5868
0.1041
0.1588
0.2842
0.0324
0.1336
0.1433
0.2770

US Airways tweets are omitted as there is no response data to those tweets.

Std. Dev.
0.4103
0.3956
0.2258
0.2943
0.1880
0.3956
0.4342
0.4332
0.4258
0.0989
0.4924
0.3054
0.3655
0.4510
0.1770
0.3402
0.3504
0.4475

Min
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

5

Table A2: Descriptive Statistics for Repeat Tweeter Analysis
Variable

Obs.
Mean
All tweeters, first tweet about airline
1,457,945
0.3296
Tweeted again to same airline
1,457,945
0.1475
Airline replied
1,457,945
0.0436
Frequent flier keyword
1,457,945
0.0823
Airline 30-50% share city
1,457,945
0.0270
Airline >50% share city
1,457,945
0.3539
Probability sentiment is negative
1,457,945
0.2844
Number of followers, 25th -50th percentile
th
th
1,457,945
0.2379
Number of followers, 50 -75 percentile
1,457,945
0.1656
Number of followers, 75th -99th percentile
1,457,945
0.0050
Number of followers, over 99th percentile
1,457,945
0.5038
Handle
Customer service keyword
1,457,945
0.1011
On time performance keyword
1,457,945
0.1559
American Airlines
1,457,945
1,457,945
1,457,945
1,457,945
Alaska Airlines
1,457,945
1,457,945
JetBlue
Delta Air Lines
1,457,945
1,457,945
1,457,945
1,457,945
United Airlines
First tweet for 2012 tweets
259,299
0.3933
Tweeted to same airline in 2013 or 2014
259,299
0.0809
Airline replied
259,299
0.0409
Frequent flier keyword
259,299
0.0887
Airline 30-50% share city
259,299
0.0316
Airline >50% share city
259,299
0.3521
Probability sentiment is negative
th
th
259,299
0.2991
Number of followers, 25 -50 percentile
259,299
0.2360
Number of followers, 50th -75th percentile
259,299
0.1665
Number of followers, 75th -99th percentile
th
259,299
0.0046
Number of followers, over 99 percentile
259,299
0.3929
Handle
Customer service keyword
259,299
0.0935
On time performance keyword
259,299
0.1503
American Airlines
259,299
0.2580
259,299
0.0275
Alaska Airlines
259,299
0.1583
JetBlue
Delta Air Lines
259,299
0.1546
259,299
0.2781
United Airlines

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

0.4701
0.3547
0.2041
0.2748
0.1622
0.3932
0.4512
0.4258
0.3717
0.0703
0.5000
0.3015
0.3628
0.2369
0.0343
0.1343
0.1748
0.2650

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.4252
0.1821
0.3410
0.3798
0.4413

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0

0.4885
0.2728
0.1981
0.2843
0.1748
0.3919
0.4579
0.4246
0.3726
0.0679
0.4884
0.2912
0.3573
0.4376
0.1635
0.3651
0.3615
0.4481

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

6

ROBUSTNESS TO LOGGED SPECIFICATION
Table A3
Robustness of Table 5: Tweets and On-Time Performance

Flights delayed or
canceled
Airline flights departing
that location
Fixed effects

N
R-sq

(1)
City-level
location in
profile
only
0.069***
(0.004)
0.001
(0.009)

(2)
City-level
all three
location
measures
0.073***
(0.004)
0.001
(0.009)

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.451

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.468

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. Number of tweets and delays use log(variable+1). Airline flights is logged. Unit of observation is
the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly. Daylocation fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

7

Table A4
Robustness of Table 6: Tweets, On-Time Performance, and Market Dominance
(1)
City-level
location in
profile only
Flights delayed or canceled
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline 15-30% share city
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline 30-50% share city
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline >50% share city
Airline flights departing
that airport
Fixed effects

N
R-sq

0.061***
(0.005)
0.004
(0.007)
0.025**
(0.007)
0.062***
(0.017)
0.001
(0.009)
Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.451

(2)
City-level
location in
profile only
0.063***
(0.005)

(3)
City-level all
three location
measures
0.066***
(0.005)

0.023**
(0.007)
0.061***
(0.017)
0.001
(0.009)
Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.451

0.026***
(0.007)
0.068***
(0.017)
0.001
(0.009)
Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.468

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. Number of tweets and delays use log(variable+1). Airline flights is logged. Unit of
observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are
estimated directly. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

8

Table A5
Robustness of Table 7: On-Time Performance Mentioned in Tweet

Flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Number
tweets about
on-time
performance
0.071***
(0.007)

(2)
Number
tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.047***
(0.004)

0.007
(0.008)

(3)
Number
tweets about
on-time
performance
0.059***
(0.006)
0.044**
(0.014)
0.112**
(0.033)
-0.021***
(0.004)

(4)
Number
tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.042***
(0.004)
0.019**
(0.006)
0.053***
(0.013)
0.006
(0.008)

-0.020***
(0.004)
Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.357

Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.442

Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.359

Day-location,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.443

Flights delayed or canceled x Airline 30-50%
share city
Flights delayed or canceled x Airline >50%
share city
Airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects

N
R-sq

Dependent variable type identified in column headers. Number of tweets and delays use log(variable+1). Airline flights is
logged. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in
parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s
xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

9

Table A6
Robustness of Table 8: Sentiment

Flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Average
negative
sentiment

(2)
Average
negative
sentiment

0.026***
(0.002)

Airline flights departing that
airport

-0.010*
(0.005)

0.027***
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.007+
(0.004)
-0.010*
(0.005)

Fixed effects

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
178,908
0.079

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
178,908
0.079

Flights delayed or canceled x
Airline 30-50% share city
Flights delayed or canceled x
Airline >50% share city

N
R-sq

(3)
Number of
very
negative
tweets
0.070***
(0.007)

(4)
Number of
very
positive
tweets
0.024***
(0.002)

0.011
(0.007)

(5)
Number of
very
negative
tweets
0.060***
(0.006)
0.038**
(0.012)
0.100**
(0.030)
-0.018***
(0.005)

(6)
Number of
very
positive
tweets
0.019***
(0.003)
0.019**
(0.006)
0.054***
(0.011)
0.011
(0.007)

-0.017***
(0.005)
Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.371

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.419

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.372

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.420

Dependent variable type identified in column headers. Number of tweets and delays use log(variable+1). Airline flights is
logged. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport
in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s
xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

10

Table A7
Robustness of Table 9
Weather, Delay Cause, and the Relationship between On-Time Performance, Tweet
Volume and Market Dominance
Dependent Variable
# flights delayed or canceled
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× 30-50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× >50% share

(1)

(2)

(2)

# tweets
0.063***
(0.005)
0.020**
(0.008)
0.056**
(0.018)
0.013
(0.008)
0.004
(0.012)

# tweets
0.063***
(0.005)
0.022**
(0.008)
0.055**
(0.018)

# tweets

Quantity of Precipitation
× 30-50% share

-0.012
(0.007)
0.020
(0.019)

Quantity of Precipitation
× >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are airline’s
fault

0.0001
(0.009)

0.0001
(0.009)

0.058***
(0.004)
0.014
(0.009)
0.036*
(0.018)
0.047***
(0.005)
-0.005
(0.008)
0.001
(0.015)
0.010
(0.012)

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

312,011
0.435

308,715
0.435

229,984
0.429

# flights delayed > 15 min that are airline’s
fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are airline’s
fault × >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are not
airline’s fault × >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable is number of tweets with city-location known. Number of tweets and delays use
log(variable+1). Airline flights is logged. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined
by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated
directly. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05,
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001

11

Table A8
Robustness of Table 11: Handles
(1)
Number
tweets to
handle
0.065***
(0.005)

(2)
Number
tweets not
to handle
0.030***
(0.003)

Airline flights departing that airport

-0.004
(0.008)

Fixed effects

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.452

Flights delayed or canceled

0.002
(0.007)

(3)
Number
tweets to
handle
0.057***
(0.005)
0.028***
(0.007)
0.077***
(0.019)
-0.004
(0.008)

(4)
Number
tweets not
to handle
0.027***
(0.003)
0.006
(0.006)
0.038**
(0.014)
0.001
(0.007)

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.320

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.452

Daylocation,
Airlinelocation
338,754
0.320

Flights delayed or canceled x Airline 3050% share city
Flights delayed or canceled x Airline
>50% share city

N
R-sq

Dependent variable type identified in column headers. Number of tweets and delays use log(variable+1).
Airline flights is logged. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust
standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly. Daylocation fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01,
***p<0.001

12

Table A9
Robustness of Table 12
Relationship between On-Time Performance, Market Dominance, and Average Number of
Followers

Dependent Variable
# flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Average # of
followers
0.023*
(0.009)

-0.021
(0.038)

(2)
Average # of
followers
0.019*
(0.009)
0.022
(0.024)
0.029
(0.028)
-0.021
(0.039)

Day-location,
Airlinelocation
178,810
0.059

Day-location,
Airlinelocation
178,810
0.059

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects

N
R-sq

Dependent variable is in column headers with city-level tweets with the location in profile known. Number of delays
and average number of followers use log(variable+1). Airline flights is logged. Unit of observation is the locationairline-day. Location is defined by city. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Airline-location
fixed effects are estimated directly. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command.
+p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

13

ROBUSTNESS TO AIRPORT LEVEL SPECIFICATION
Table A10
Robustness of Table 5: Tweets and On-Time Performance

Dependent Variable
Location Measure

Flights delayed or
canceled
Airline flights departing
that location
Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(1)
Standardized
# Tweets
Closest
airport

(2)
Standardized
# Tweets
Airport in
tweet
0.066***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.003)

(3)
Standardized
# Tweets
Both Airportlevel location
measures
0.073***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.003)

(4)
Standardized
# Tweets
Within two
miles of
airport
0.046***
(0.004)
0.006+
(0.003)

0.052***
(0.004)
-0.0001
(0.003)
Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

382,141
0.002

382,141
0.003

382,141
0.004

371,883
0.002

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-airport mean and standard deviation. Location is defined
by airport. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05,
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001

14

Table A11
Robustness of Table 6: Tweets, On-Time Performance, and Market Dominance

Dependent Variable
Location Measure

Flights delayed or canceled
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline 15-30% share city
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline 30-50% share city
Flights delayed or canceled
x Airline >50% share city
Airline flights departing
that airport
Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(1)
Standardized
# Tweets
Closest airport

(2)
Standardized
# Tweets
Closest airport

(3)
Standardized
# Tweets
Airport in
tweet

0.039***
(0.004)
0.012+
(0.006)
0.045***
(0.009)
0.100***
(0.018)
-0.001
(0.003)
Day-location
382,141
0.003

0.044***
(0.004)

0.055***
(0.004)

0.040***
(0.009)
0.097***
(0.019)
-0.001
(0.003)
Day-location
382,141
0.003

0.049***
(0.011)
0.135***
(0.023)
0.001
(0.003)
Day-location
382,141
0.004

(4)
Standardized
# Tweets
Both Airportlevel location
measures
0.062***
(0.004)

(5)
Standardized
# Tweets
Within two
miles of
airport
0.039***
(0.003)

0.051***
(0.009)
0.136***
(0.023)
0.001
(0.003)
Day-location

0.030**
(0.010)
0.091***
(0.019)
0.005+
(0.003)
Day-location

382,141
0.005

371,883
0.002

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-airport mean and standard deviation. Location
is defined by airport. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command.
+p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

15

Table A12
Robustness of Table 7: On-Time Performance Mentioned in Tweet

Flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Standardized
Number
tweets about
on-time
performance
0.064***
(0.005)

(2)
Standardized
Number
tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.034***
(0.003)

0.001
(0.003)

(3)
Standardized
Number
tweets about
on-time
performance
0.056***
(0.004)
0.040***
(0.011)
0.108***
(0.020)
-0.005+
(0.002)

(4)
Standardized
Number
tweets not
about on-time
performance
0.028***
(0.003)
0.031***
(0.008)
0.077***
(0.018)
0.001
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.002)
Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

380,637
0.003

382,141
0.001

380,637
0.003

382,141
0.001

Flights delayed or canceled x Airline 30-50%
share city
Flights delayed or canceled x Airline >50%
share city
Airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-airport mean
and standard deviation. Location is defined by airport. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location
fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

16

Table A13
Robustness of Table 8: Sentiment

Flights delayed or canceled
Flights delayed or canceled x
Airline 30-50% share city
Flights delayed or canceled x
Airline >50% share city
Airline flights departing that
airport
Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized Standardized
Average
Average
Number of Number of Number of Number of
negative
negative
very
very
very
very
sentiment
sentiment
negative
positive
negative
positive
tweets
tweets
tweets
tweets
0.085***
0.079***
0.063***
0.014***
0.055***
0.009***
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.036*
0.037**
0.021**
(0.015)
(0.011)
(0.007)
0.005
0.104***
0.053***
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.015)
-0.027***
-0.028***
-0.008**
0.006*
-0.008***
0.006*
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
Daylocation
88,807
0.004

Daylocation
88,807
0.004

Daylocation
379,590
0.003

Daylocation
382,141
0.0001

Daylocation
379,590
0.003

Daylocation
382,141
0.0001

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using airline-airport mean
and standard deviation. Location is defined by airport. Robust standard errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location
fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

17

Table A14
Robustness of Table 9: Weather, Delay Cause, and the Relationship between On-Time
Performance, Tweet Volume and Market Dominance
Dependent Variable
# flights delayed or canceled
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× 30-50% share
Rain, Snow, or Fog Dummy
× >50% share

(1)
Standardized
# tweets
0.045***
(0.004)
0.041***
(0.009)
0.090***
(0.020)
0.0005
(0.005)
0.004
(0.009)

Quantity of Precipitation
× 30-50% share

(2)
Standardized
# tweets
0.044***
(0.004)
0.041***
(0.009)
0.094***
(0.020)

-0.005
(0.005)
-0.013
(0.009)

Quantity of Precipitation
× >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are
airline’s fault

-0.001
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.003)

0.040***
(0.004)
0.017*
(0.008)
0.069***
(0.016)
0.018***
(0.004)
0.017*
(0.008)
0.026*
(0.011)
0.001
(0.004)

Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

352,415
0.003

348,881
0.003

260,442
0.003

# flights delayed > 15 min that are
airline’s fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are
airline’s fault × >50% share
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault
# flights delayed > 15 min that are not
airline’s fault × 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min that are not
airline’s fault × >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

(2)
Standardized
# tweets

Dependent variable is airport-level tweets with goecode. Airline fault is defined by the airline in
regulatory filings. All variables are normalized using airline-location mean and standard deviation.
Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by airport. Robust standard errors
clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg,
fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

18

Table A15
Robustness of Table 11: Handles

Flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Standardized
Number
tweets to
handle
0.050***
(0.004)

(2)
Standardized
Number
tweets not to
handle
0.024***
(0.003)

0.005+
(0.003)

(3)
Standardized
Number
tweets to
handle
0.042***
(0.003)
0.043***
(0.009)
0.089***
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.002)

(4)
Standardized
Number
tweets not to
handle
0.020***
(0.003)
0.016+
(0.008)
0.068***
(0.016)
0.005+
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.002)
Day-location

Day-location

Day-location

382,141
0.002

382,141
0.0001

382,141
0.002

Daylocation
382,141
0.001

Flights delayed or canceled x Airline 3050% share city
Flights delayed or canceled x Airline
>50% share city
Airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable is number of tweets as identified in column headers. All variables are normalized using
airline-location mean and standard deviation. Location is defined by airport. Robust standard errors clustered
by airport in parentheses. Airline-location fixed effects are estimated directly. Day-location fixed effects are
differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

19

Table A6
Robustness of Table 12: Relationship between On-Time Performance, Market Dominance,
and Average Number of Followers

Dependent Variable

# flights delayed or canceled

(1)
Standardized
Average # of
followers
0.001
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.005)

(2)
Standardized
Average # of
followers
-0.001
(0.008)
0.011
(0.009)
0.007
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.005)

Day-location

Day-location

88,807
0.0001

88,807
0.0001

# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× 30-50% share
# flights delayed >15 min or canceled
× >50% share
# airline flights departing that airport

Fixed effects
N
R-sq

Dependent variable is airport-level tweets with goecode. All variables are normalized using airline-location mean and
standard deviation. Unit of observation is the location-airline-day. Location is defined by airport. Robust standard
errors clustered by airport in parentheses. Day-location fixed effects are differenced out using stata’s xtreg, fe
command. +p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

20

APPENDIX B: EXTENSIONS TO THE THEORY
The model in the paper is geared towards a mass market industry like airlines. When a consumer leaves a
firm, they do not expect the prices they face at other firms to change. In addition, the model does not fully
model equilibrium outcomes. Here we amend the baseline model on both of these dimensions to
demonstrate the robustness of the model’s conclusions.
When exit raises price
Here we consider a situation where, if a consumer exits, it has one less firm it can deal with. Suppose that
all firms understand this and so they can set prices to this consumer differently. Then, an exiting consumer
will face a higher price from other firms.
To illustrate this, consider a Salop circle model with per unit transportation cost of t. Suppose that if a
consumer exits a firm, they face a smaller circle with n – 1 firms evenly spaced. Thus, the price they face
𝑡
𝑛

changes from 𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵 + to 𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵 +

𝑡 27
.
𝑛−1

With this, should it exit, the total costs for the consumer if they stay with the firm (LHS of B1 below) is
that they face the same price (because the other consumers with that firm are presumably still under the
assumption that there is a relational contract) while if they exit (RHS of B1 below), the price goes up but
the consumer believes that if there is a complaint, they will get mitigation. The costs of staying are higher
than those of exit if:
𝑡

𝑡

𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵 + 𝑛 ≥ 𝑐 + 𝑠𝐵 + 𝑛−1 − 𝑠(𝐵 − 𝐶)
𝑡

⟹ 𝐵 ≥ 𝐶 + 𝑠𝑛(𝑛−1)

(B1)

(B2)

𝑡

As n gets large, B2 will hold. For n = 2, 𝐵 ≥ 𝐶 + 2𝑠. Notice that this constraint varies with n in the opposite
direction as the firm incentive constraint. This captures the other part of the Hirschman intuition.
Given this, the full condition (that is, (*) in the paper’s model) becomes:
𝛿 𝑡
1−𝛿 𝑛

≥𝐶+

𝑡
𝑠𝑛(𝑛 − 1)

or
𝛿𝑠𝑡(𝑛 − 1) − 𝑡(1 − 𝛿)
≥𝐶
𝑠𝑛(𝑛 − 1)(1 − 𝛿)

27

In a more realistic setting, the fact that a consumer is at a particular firm means that it will have a further distance
from other firms if it exits and, if other firms understood that, the pricing outcome may be different. This is an
interesting possibility but involves unnecessary complications for our purposes here, so we make the simplifying
‘shrinkage’ assumption instead

21
It can be shown that this constraint is more likely to hold as n falls so the comparative static we have
emphasized still holds. That is despite consumers facing increased prices if they exit, the relative costs of
exit rise faster for firms.
Full Equilibrium Model
We now provide a model based on our baseline model (without exit-associated price changes) that will give
us 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) as an equilibrium outcome. Suppose that the n firms compete a la Cournot with homogeneous
goods. Suppose that the relational contract is in place (where each firm agrees to pay B should a consumer
communicate a quality decline). Then 𝑝 = 𝑎 − 𝑠∆ + 𝑠(𝐵 − 𝐶) − 𝑏𝑄 where Q is industry output. In this
case, under a Cournot equilibrium it can be shown that:
𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) =

𝑎 + 𝑐𝑛 + 𝑠(𝐵(𝑛 + 1) − 𝐶 − ∆)
𝑛+1

Note that as B is a pure transfer, it does not impact on prices nor profits. Given (*) in the paper, this means
that a relational contract equilibrium will hold if:
𝑎 + 𝑐 − 𝑠∆
𝛿(
)≥𝐶
(𝑛 + 1)(1 − 𝛿) − 𝛿𝑠
As expected as n increases, the left hand side of this inequality falls.
Note that allowing voice strictly reduces welfare. Prices are higher but consumer surplus is lower as are
profits. The reason is that mitigation (B) is a transfer while communication cost (C) is a cost. For there to
be welfare improvements, the firm must actually be induced to do something of value.
Given this, what we need to check is whether the firm has a long-term incentive to keep to the relational
contract. That is, this analysis checks if the firm is willing to honor a relational contract with individual
customers but is it willing to honor it with all of them? Suppose that a firm decides to deviate and publicly
promise not to respond to complaints while the remaining n – 1 firms continue to uphold the relational
contract. In this case, the deviating firm ends up with an equilibrium price of:
𝑝̃ =

𝑎 + 𝑐𝑛 + 𝑠(𝐶(𝑛 − 1) − ∆)
𝑛+1

while the remaining firms end up with an equilibrium price of:
𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) =

𝑎 + 𝑐𝑛 + 𝑠(𝐵(1 + 𝑛) − 2𝐶 − ∆)
𝑛+1

Note that 𝑝̃ < 𝑝(𝑛, 𝐵) ⟹ 𝐶 < 𝐵. Let’s now compare the profits of the deviating firm to its profits in the
full relational contracting equilibrium. The profits from deviating will be lower if:
𝐵≥

𝑛
𝑛𝑠𝐶
𝐶 (2 −
)
𝑛+1
𝑎 − 𝑐 + 𝑠((𝑛 − 1)𝐶 − ∆)

For n large, this becomes 𝐶 ≤ 𝐵 while for 𝑛 = 2, this becomes:

22
4
𝑎 − 𝑐 − 𝑠∆
𝐵≥ (
)𝐶
3 𝑎 − 𝑐 + 𝑠(𝐶 − ∆)
If B = C, then this becomes:
𝑎 − 𝑐 − 𝑠∆ + 𝑠(𝑛 − 1)𝐶
𝑛
≥
2(𝑎 − 𝑐 − 𝑠∆) + 𝑠(𝑛 − 2)𝐶 𝑛 + 1
For n low, this holds but for n very large it does not hold.
In summary, for n low, it is not worthwhile for a firm to deviate and refuse to acknowledge voice.

