                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        LOCATION CHOICE, PORTFOLIO CHOICE

                                        Ioannis Branikas
                                         Harrison Hong
                                          Jiangmin Xu

                                      Working Paper 23040
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23040


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




We thank Ulrich Mueller, Mark Watson, Chris Sims, Bo Honore, Kirill Evdokimov, Motohiro
Yogo, Atif Mian, Jakub Kastl, and participants at Econometrics and Finance seminars at
Princeton University, University of Toronto, Johns Hopkins University, 2016 LACEA/LAMES
Conference, the 2016 China Five-Star Workshop in Finance, and the 2016 NYU Shanghai
Volatility Institute Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ioannis Branikas, Harrison Hong, and Jiangmin Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Location Choice, Portfolio Choice
Ioannis Branikas, Harrison Hong, and Jiangmin Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 23040
January 2017
JEL No. G02,G11,R2,R22

                                          ABSTRACT

Households hold nondiversified stock portfolios of firms headquartered near their city of
residence. Explanations assign a causal role for proximity, either in generating an informational
advantage or a familiarity bias. Empirical analyses assume households locate randomly, even
though they optimally select a city. This selection is important since latent location factors might
be correlated with latent demand for local stocks. Building on location choice models from urban
economics, we develop a Heckman (1977)-style model to account for the effect of location
choices on portfolio choices. Adjusting for selection significantly reduces local bias and the
performance of local stock picks.


Ioannis Branikas                                             Jiangmin Xu
Economics Department                                         Department of Finance
Princeton University Fisher Hall, Room 001                   Guanghua School of Management
Princeton, NJ 08544                                          Peking University
branikas@princeton.edu                                       jiangminxu@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu
1.        Introduction

A long-standing puzzle in financial economics is that households hold undiversified stock
portfolios tilted toward firms headquartered near where they reside. Contrary to a value-
weighted market portfolio prescription of the CAPM (Sharpe (1964)), households load on
local stocks regardless of their market value. In canonical regressions of household stock-
portfolio weights on demographic and stock characteristics, distance from household resi-
dence to firm headquarters emerges as a key explanatory variable. This local-bias appears
in many countries.1 This phenomenon is even more puzzling in some ways than its better-
known cousin, the international home-bias puzzle, where households in different countries tilt
toward stocks in their own country (French and Poterba (1991)). In the international setting,
portfolio costs or restrictions at least seem plausible impediments toward diversification.
       Given the potentially high costs of under-diversification for households, many theories
have been given for this local bias in the literature.2 There are two influential interpretations
for local bias, and both revolve around the causal role of proximity. The first is that prox-
imity confers an informational advantage to investors due to costly information acquisition.3
Households’ investments in local stocks should offer higher expected returns compared to
their non-local positions under this theory. The second is that proximity breeds familiarity
or cognitive bias, whereby local positions mostly lead to under-diversification without nec-
essarily being compensated with expected returns.4 There is evidence that the local stock
picks of households out-perform their distant stock picks but there are still debates as to
   1
     Prominent studies include the US (Zhu (2002)), Finland (Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001)), and China
(Feng and Seasholes (2008)) to name a few.
   2
     There is a sizeable literature examining the potential costs of under-diversification in stock portfolios
and financial mistakes or literacy more generally (see, e.g., Campbell (2006), Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz
(2009), Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, and Laibson (2009), Lusardi and Mitchell (2007)). Many households
around the world have concentrated local stock holdings and little diversification through other investment
vehicles (see, e.g., Keloharju, Knupfer, and Rantapuska (2012)). The costs of foregone diversification would
seem to be large unless their local stock picks can significantly outperform the market.
   3
     Coval and Moskowitz (2001) find such an informational advantage in the local trades of mutual funds
managers. The proximity as informational advantage story is often promoted to retail investors with the
phrase coined by Peter Lynch in the 80s, "invest in what you know".
   4
     For instance, Huberman (2001) argues that such a bias is present using the holdings of households in
their local electric utility companies.


                                                      1
whether households can earn high enough returns on their local stock picks to overcome the
costs of under-diversification (see, e.g., Odean (1999), Ivković and Weisbenner (2005)).
       We point out in this paper that extant empirical tests of these explanations subtly but
crucially assume that households locate randomly, which is likely to be counterfactual. No-
tably, in endogenous location choice models from the literature on urban and real estate
economics, agents optimally locate in cities that provide them with the highest utility (e.g.
Bajari and Kahn (2005) and Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2007)). This sorting or self-
selection depends on the congruence of city characteristics and household demographics as
well as on factors that are unobservable to the econometrician (i.e. latent factors). Such
optimal spatial sorting models are consistent with migration patterns that one sees in the
US (e.g. Bishop (2007), Kennan and Walker (2011), Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2012),
Diamond (2016)).
       Latent factors of this location selection might then naturally be correlated with unobserv-
able preferences for local stocks. For instance, given its demographics, a household optimally
chooses to live in an urban center like NYC or Silicon Valley. Yet, its actual decision to re-
side in NYC but not in Silicon Valley might be motivated by a job offer as an investment
banker instead of a job offer as a computer scientist, or by a fondness for investment bankers
over computer scientists as friends. Such preferences are very likely to be correlated with an
inclination towards finance stocks instead of technology stocks, independent of proximity.5
In other words, to what extent does proximity play a causal role in local bias and to what
extent does it simply reflect selection bias? As a thought experiment, if we were to randomly
locate households in different cities, would they still exhibit the same degree of local bias
and how would their local stock picks perform?
       In this paper we develop a methodology to account for the effect of endogenous location
decisions as a form of selection bias on household portfolio choice. In particular, we introduce
   5
    A more extreme version of local bias is the tendency of employees to invest in their own company’s stock
(see, e.g., Benartzi (2001)). This under-diversification might again be attributed to proximity, but could as
well be interpreted as an endogenous selection; employees work for the companies that they like, but these
preferences might be correlated with the purchase of company shares.


                                                     2
optimal location choice on top of investment decisions. We start by using a location choice
model from urban economics in which households choose their residence based on a match
between their own demographics (e.g., age and family status) and the demographics of the
location (e.g., urban vs. rural). We subsequently consider location decisions which could
potentially also depend on the aggregate financial characteristics of local stocks (e.g., related
to the presence of equity investment opportunities in the area). Our model eventually leads to
an extended Heckman (1977) correction for location selection in standard portfolio-weight
regressions, in which the adjustment takes into account both the over-weighting of local
stocks as well as the under-weighting of distant stocks.
       Our first and baseline model implicitly assumes that households first choose their location
for reasons other than stock investments. A priori, this model is reasonable, since most
households are unlikely to factor in current or prospective stock portfolio choices when they
decide where to reside.6 The second model allows for more sophisticated households that
might also take into account equity trading opportunities. Both models yield very similar
conclusions as we show below.
       The location selection bias is ultimately an omitted-variables problem, whereby unob-
servable location factors correlated with investment demand shocks are ignored, violating
the strict exogeneity assumption on distance in a standard portfolio weights regression. Our
optimal location choice model allows us to recover the expected location utility of a house-
hold in a city and hence the probability that it locates there. Similar to Heckman (1977),
these location probabilities can then be added in the portfolio weights regression as extra
covariates that capture unobserved locational shocks. To the extent that there is no location
selection bias, introducing these probabilities should not affect the estimate of the coefficient
on distance. On the other hand, any resulting correction in the distance coefficient might be
interpreted as a more conservative contribution of the cognitive or information cost argument
to the local bias, given a household’s residence choice.
   6
    On the other hand, investment funds and firms are expected to be more strategic in their headquarters
choice (e.g. Strauss-Kahn and Vives (2009)).


                                                   3
   Based on the above procedure, a household’s portfolio weight can potentially depend on
the location probabilities in all cities. Moreover, the exact form of this dependence is in
general nonlinear and subject to the assumptions about the joint distribution of households’
unobserved preferences for location and portfolio choice. To make the estimation feasible, we
consider a parsimonious, yet robust, non-parametric specification of the correction function,
along the lines of the recent econometrics literature that studies selection based on multino-
mial logit models (e.g. Dahl (2002) and Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2007)).
   To quantify the effect of our endogenous location decision adjustment on the local bias
of portfolio choices, we apply our model to a US brokerage database with roughly 11,000
households living in 58 MSAs with a population above 750K, during the period of 1991-1996.
This is a widely used sample (Odean (1999), Barber and Odean (2000)) in which high income
households have a significant fraction of their assets in stocks. As the investment universe,
we consider stocks that belong to the Russell 1000 Index, an index that includes the largest
1000 stocks in the stock market based on market capitalization. We first run the standard
censored regression of local bias: a Tobit regression of a household’s portfolio weight on a
stock on its demographics (e.g. income), the stock’s characteristics and, notably, the distance
between the household’s residence city and the city in which the stock is headquartered. We
find a large distance effect, in terms of both economic and statistical significance, consistent
with analyses in the literature.
   To correct for a potential bias of location selection, we estimate an optimal location choice
model for the same households using MSA demographics data. The results are similar to
what is found in the literature on optimal location decisions. Namely, the interaction of
MSA demographics with household characteristics plays a crucial role in explaining location
decisions and preferences. For instance, higher income, managerial, and white collar house-
holds are more likely to locate in high population centers. Older and blue collar households
are more likely to locate in MSAs with high unemployment.
   With the estimates of this locational choice model, we impute the probabilities with which


                                               4
each household locates in the various cities. We then plug these probabilities as additional
controls in our portfolio weights regression, in line with the robust identification assumptions
that we consider for our correction function. Across a wide variety of specifications, we find
a large drop of around 50% in the effect of distance on the portfolio weight on a stock.
This reduction is achieved with a fourth-order polynomial for the selection-bias correction
function and increasing to higher orders has negligible incremental effects.
       Our exclusion restriction is that these interaction terms involving MSA demographics
and household characteristics, which explain location choice, do not affect portfolio choice
other than through our selection/optimal location choice mechanism. We believe this exclu-
sion restriction is a plausible one. Portfolio choice weights, of course, naturally depend on
household characteristics. Typically, we do not think that portfolio choices even depend on
MSA demographics such as unemployment in the area. Most companies get the revenues
nationally, so the local economy of the firm headquarters has a small effect on overall rev-
enues. Nonetheless it might be plausible, perhaps for small firms that are highly dependent
on the local economy. But the interaction terms seem to us ought to be excluded.7
       Our baseline analysis of household stock portfolio weights uses a Tobit specification be-
cause households do not short and their portfolios are highly sparse. But we also consider the
deviation of household portfolio weights from the value-weighted market benchmark as an
alternative specification. We get very similar results either way in that there is a large local
bias in portfolio weights, regardless of the specification, and that using our methodology to
adjust for locational selection drastically reduces this estimate. We can calculate the local
bias of a hypothetical household who owns the value-weighted market portfolio. The answer
is close to zero local bias that is statistically insignificant. We also reconsider our analysis
by using a locational choice model that factors in each city’s local investment opportunity
   7
    The one story related to a distance-as-an-information-processing cost is that firms headquartered where
a household has a high probability of locating are just easier to be informationally accessed or understood
by that household. For instance, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) find such an effect in Finland, where some
companies report their financial information in different languages. But this language effect seems implausible
in the US. Moreover, we would also argue that a cost story that is highly dependent on demographic
characteristics is more naturally modeled through our location choice/selection framework.


                                                      5
sets and get similar results.
       We can also apply our selection adjustment to the returns of household local versus
non-local stock picks. Consistent with the literature, we find that a household’s local stock
picks out-perform their non-local stock picks. But once we apply our selection adjustment,
distance confers no difference in the expected returns of these picks. One way to interpret our
findings is that proximity does not matter much for portfolios or returns of these portfolios
after accounting for selection. That is, the imputed informational advantage of proximity
for portfolios is not causal but mostly driven by location selection. So, back to our thought
experiment, if we were to randomly locate households and then observe their stock portfolios,
their portfolios would be much less locally biased and the local stock picks would not differ
in performance from their distant picks. These results establish the importance of locational
preferences for stock preferences, which as far as we know is new to the literature. They
support the need for theory work on asset price movements which emphasizes the importance
of location.8
       Our paper proceeds as follows. We elaborate on our methodology in Section 2. We
describe the brokerage house and MSA demographic data in Section 3. We discuss our
identification assumptions regarding the choice of the instruments and the specification of
the correction function in Section 4. Our empirical findings are presented in Section 5.
In Section 6, we conduct additional analysis for robustness. In Section 7, we assess the
selection-corrected local bias. In Section 8, we present the results for the returns of local
versus non-local stocks in household portfolios. We conclude in Section 9 with a discussion
of the implications of our analysis for international home equity bias.
   8
    Such work include the implications of Keeping up with the Joneses’ preferences (Luttmer (2005), Charles,
Hurst, and Roussanov (2009)) on local home or stock prices and turnover (DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer
(2004), Gomez, Priestley, and Zapatero (2009), Hong, Jiang, Wang, and Zhao (2014)) and more explicit
models incorporating asset selection and location choices (Ortalo-Magné and Prat (2016), Hizmo (2015)).
For housing only, a dynamic demand model of home ownership in which households can move is offered by
Bayer, McMillan, Murphy, and Timmins (2016).




                                                     6
2.      Model

In this section, we present a simple framework that highlights the implications of a house-
hold’s location choice on its subsequent investment decisions. We index households with
i, stocks with j, and periods with t; overall, there are T periods in each of which live It
households that can potentially invest in J stocks. The total number of cities, throughout
the years, is C, and we denote with c the city in which household i resides, and with h the
city in which stock j is headquartered.


2.1.     Location Choice

Since in our data households do not move, we only model their location choice in the be-
ginning of their time series. In line with a standard discrete choice model, we decompose
the utility that household i derives from a city ` = 1, . . . , C into the sum of an observable
component, Vi,` , and an unobservable idiosyncratic shock, ei,` , and assume that household i
is a utility maximizer locating to a city c satisfying the following relationship:


                                   c = arg max {Vi,` + ei,` }                                 (1)
                                           `∈{1,...,C}


     Household i’s observable utility from city ` is a linear combination of the city’s character-
istics at the time at which the location decision is made, which we group into a K × 1 vector
z` . In our empirical analysis, this vector consists of the city’s population, unemployment
rate, income per capita and house price index. On the other hand, household i’s unobserv-
able utility from city ` refers to location factors that we, as econometricians, cannot observe.
For instance, such a factor could be whether household i receives a job offer in that city,
whether it has a relative living there or whether it likes to have residents of that city as
friends. Moreover, ei,` also refers to mistakes during the location decision process.
     Although households in a given period view the same city characteristics, they interpret
them differently, i.e.:


                                                  7
                                                    Vi,` = ρi z`                                (2)

where ρi is the vector of household i’s responses. In particular, we assume observed het-
erogeneity in preferences through a matching structure. That is, we decompose ρi into a
component that is common across all households, ρ, and a component that linearly depends
on household i’s M × 1 vector of demographics, Di , (through a K × M matrix of parameters
Π) i.e.:


                                                ρi = ρ + ΠDi                                    (3)

The vector of household i’s demographics, Di , that we use in our empirical analysis has
as elements its total income, age, job code, gender, marital status and number of kids. By
combining Equations (2) and (3), we eventually represent household i’s observed utility from
locating in city ` as:

                                         K
                                         X                K X
                                                          X M
                                Vi,` =        ρk z`,k +            πk,m Di,m z`,k               (4)
                                         k=1              k=1m=1
                                         |     {z    }    |          {z         }
                                               δ`                   µi,`

where δ` is the observed utility from the characteristics of city ` that is common for all
households, while µi,` is the observed utility from the characteristics of city ` which is different
across households. Equation (4) implies that once we estimate the location parameters
θ loc ≡ (ρ, Π) from the data, we will have also estimated the observed utilities of household
i from all the available locations, {Vi,` }`=1,...,C .
    Next, we define household i’s maximum order statistic with respect to a city c as:


                              vi,c =         max       {Vi,` − Vi,c + ei,` − ei,c }             (5)
                                       `∈{1,...,C}/c


so that household i’s location rule in Equation (1) can be rewritten as:



                                                          8
                                            ri,c = 1 [vi,c < 0]                                (6)

where ri,c denotes household i’s decision to reside in city c and 1 [·] is an indicator func-
tion. Assuming that, conditional on the observables, household i’s idiosyncratic shocks,
{ei,`,t }C
         `=1 , are independently and identically distributed according to the extreme value type

I distribution, we can calculate the probability with which it resides in city c as follows:


                                                                 exp (Vi,c )
                             pi,c ≡ P vi,c < 0 {Vi,` }C
                                                      `=1 =       C
                                                                                               (7)
                                                                  P
                                                                        exp (Vi,` )
                                                                  `=1


2.2.       Portfolio Choice

To model a household’s portfolio choice, we consider a simple static setting that is repeated
in every period. Since we will estimate portfolio parameters for every period separately (thus
allowing for time variation in households’ portfolio preferences and expectations), we omit
the period subscript t in the discussion that follows. Specifically, we assume that household
i, residing in city c, decides how much to invest in stock j, headquartered in city h, according
to the following criterion:


                          wi,c,h,j = (α + βxj + γDi + δdisti,c,h,j + i,c,h,j )+               (8)

where (·)+ ≡ max {·, 0} captures both household i’s extensive and intensive margin9 , xj is
the vector of stock j’s financial characteristics - in particular, its price, size, book-to-market
ratio, turnover, momentum, volatility and industry code, Di is the vector of household i’s
demographics exactly as in its location choice problem, while disti,c,h,j is the distance between
household i’s ZIP-code in city c and stock j’s headquarters ZIP-code in city h. Moreover,
i,c,h,j is household i’s idiosyncratic demand shock for stock j, when the former resides in city
c and the latter is headquartered in city h. For instance, it could refer to whether household
  9
      Households do not short.


                                                    9
i thinks highly of stock j due to the stock’s board of directors or due to the fact that the
stock belongs to a specific industry sector that household i really likes (e.g. technology).
       This Tobit specification, which is widely used in the literature, can be micro-founded in a
number of different ways (Brandt, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2009), Shumway, Szefler, and
Yuan (2011), Hjalmarsson and Manchev (2012), Garleanu and Pedersen (2013), Koijen and
Yogo (2016))10 . In line with a Tobit model, we assume that, conditional on all observables,
these errors are distributed according to the normal distribution. In the empirical analysis,
we cluster standard errors at the household level. Without correcting for location selection,
the conditional mean of i,c,h,j is assumed to be zero. Hence, the portfolio parameters to be
estimated from the data are θ port ≡ (α, β, γ, δ), with δ being the main parameter of interest
(i.e. the coefficient on the distance variable).


2.3.       Selection Correction

The distance between household i’s ZIP-code in city c and the ZIP-code of stock j in city h
where it is headquartered can always be expressed as a function of (i) the distance between
household i’s ZIP-code and the central ZIP-code of city c in which it resides, disti,c , (ii) the
distance between the central ZIP-code of city c in which it resides and the central ZIP-code
of city h in which stock j is headquartered, distc,h , and (iii) the distance between the central
ZIP-code of city h in which stock j is headquartered and stock j’s headquarters ZIP-code,
disth,j . In short, denoting S (·) this function, we can write that:


                                disti,c,h,j = S (disti,c , distc,h , disth,j )                       (9)

       The need to correct for selection arises from the fact that the distance between the central
ZIP-code of city c in which household i resides and the central ZIP-code of city h in which
stock j is headquartered is the outcome of household i’s location choice. That is, as long
  10
     Koijen and Yogo (2016) explicitly highlight the link between a heterogeneous mean-variance framework
(in terms of expectations or constraints) and an empirical factor model for the demand of stocks.



                                                     10
as household i is not randomly assigned to the city where it resides, the location rule in
Equation (6) implies that:

                                                            C
                                                            X
                                                distc,h =         dist`,h ri,`                                        (10)
                                                            `=1

where every distance between the central ZIP-code of a city ` and the central ZIP-code of
city h in which stock j is headquartered, dist`,h , is multiplied by household i’s respective
indicator function of its decision to live there, ri,` = 1[vi,` < 0]. Having that in mind, it is
very likely that i,c,h,j , i.e. household i’s idiosyncratic investment error when it lives in city c
and considers investing in stock j headquartered in city h, is correlated with the idiosyncratic
location errors, {ei,` }C
                        `=1 - especially ei,c and ei,h - as these are summarized by the maximum

order statistic of the city c where household i actually resides, vi,c . To show such a potential
correlation more clearly, we decompose i,c,h,j as follows:


                                                                                    
                           i,c,h,j = E i,c,h,j vi,c < 0, {Vi,` }C
                                                                  `=1 + ηi,c,h,j                                      (11)

where ηi,c,h,j is an idiosyncratic stock-city investment error which, by construction, is inde-
pendent of household i’s location decision to reside in city c. That is, ηi,c,h,j is mean-zero
given all observables. As for the conditional expectation of the original idiosyncratic invest-
ment error, i,c,h,j , given household i’s decision to live in city c and the observed location
utilities {Vi,` }C
                 `=1 , which are estimated from the location choice model in a first stage, it can

be calculated as follows:


                                                                                                   
                                                 +∞
                                                   Z Z0     i,c,h,j f i,c,h,j , vi,c {Vi,` }C
                                                                                              `=1
      E i,c,h,j vi,c < 0, {Vi,` }C
                                  `=1       =                                                         dvi,c di,j
                                                   −∞−∞
                                                                   P vi,c < 0 {Vi,` }C
                                                                                     `=1                              (12)
                                                                                           
                                            =                             ψc,h {Vi,` }C
                                                                                      `=1



where ψc,h (·) is an unknown correction function whose actual form depends on assumptions



                                                            11
regarding the joint distribution of i,c,h,j and vi,c . The value of the correction function
is in principle non-zero, unless i,c,h,j and vi,c are independent.11 Consequently, based on
Equations (9) to (12), the distance variable in the portfolio choice regression, disti,c,h,j , is
correlated with the original investment idiosyncratic error, i,c,h,j , through the correction
function ψc,h (·). Any estimation procedure that ignores this correlation is destined to yield
biased estimates on the respective coefficient, δ.
       To avoid a selection bias in the distance coefficient, one necessarily has to restrict the
structure through which the observed utilities, {Vi,` }C
                                                       `=1 , enter the function ψc,h . For instance,

one could impose assumptions about the joint distribution of i,c,h,j and vi,c as in Lee (1983)
or about the conditional expectation of i,c,h,j given the location idiosyncratic errors, {ei,` }C
                                                                                                 `=1 ,

(e.g. linearity) as in Dubin and McFadden (1984).12 Rather than following these parametric
approaches, we implement a more robust non-parametric method that is very similar to the
one that Dahl (2002) provides.
       To this end, we invoke the monotonic relationship between household i’s observed location
utilities, {Vi,` }C                                            C
                  `=1 , and its location probabilities, {pi,` }`=1 , which allows us to write:



                                                                                                                         
                                                         ψc,h {Vi,` }C                 C
                                                                     `=1 = Ψc,h {pi,` }`=1                                                                                                (13)

where now we have a new unknown correction function, namely Ψc,h (·), in terms of location
probabilities. The probabilities, {pi,` }C
                                         `=1 , in the correction function capture the impact of

unobservable location factors on subsequent investment decisions, given residence choice.13
  11
       In that case, in the numerator of Equation (12), we have that:
 +∞ 0
 Z Z                                                                        +∞
                                                                            Z                                                                    Z0
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                              C                                                                       C                                                      C
          i,c,h,j f       i,c, vi,c   Vi,`             dvi,c di,c,h, =        i,c,h,j f       i,c,h,j       Vi,`               di,c,h,j         f       vi,c       Vi,`             dvi,c
                                               `=1                                                                      `=1                                                     `=1
 −∞−∞                                                                       −∞                                                                   −∞
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        C                                      C
                                                                      = E i,c,h,j                Vi,`            P vi,c < 0              Vi,`
                                                                                                         `=1                                     `=1

                                                                      =0

 since the conditional mean of i,c,h,j , given the observables, is zero.
   12
      Bourguignon, Fournier, and Gurgand (2007) generalize the latter approach by linearly projecting i,c,h,j
                                           C
on monotonic transformations of {ei,` }`=1 .
   13
      For instance, Dubin and McFadden (1984) show that:


                                                                                      12
Hence, combining Equations (8), (11), (12) and (13) yields the portfolio choice regression
equation that corrects for selection based on location:


                                                                                         +
              wi,c,h,j = α + βxj + γDi + δdisti,c,h,j + Ψc,h {pi,` }C
                                                                    `=1 + ηi,c,h,j                       (14)

     As in Dahl (2002), since more than one probabilities enter the correction function, the
selection bias on the distance coefficient cannot be ex ante assessed. The censoring of the
portfolio weights regression and the ability of a household to invest in both local and distant
stocks further contribute to this. In principle, the selection correction will also affect the
coefficient estimates of household demographics due to the matching structure in location
choice.



3.        Data

3.1.      MSA Demographics

The data on the demographics (characteristics) of the Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs)
are gathered at a quarterly frequency from various sources. Specifically, information on the
MSAs’ population and unemployment rate is gathered from the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS), while information on their total income is collected from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA). The house price index (HPI) is taken from the Federal Housing Finance
Agency (FHFA). We focus on MSAs whose population at the end of 1996 was at least 750,000.
As Coval and Moskowitz (1999), we also drop Alaska, Hawaii and Puerto Rico. These filters
                                                           
                                                         C
                                 E ei,c vi,c < 0, {Vi,` }`=1 = γ − log (pi,c )

                               
                                                      C
                                                               pi,h log (pi,h )
                              E ei,h vi,c < 0, {Vi,` }`=1 = γ +
                                                                   1 − pi,h
where here γ ≈ 0.577 denotes the Euler-Mascheroni constant. This constant is the unconditional mean of
                                          C
the idiosyncratic location errors, {ei,` }`=1 , which are drawn from the extreme value type I distribution. Of
course, depending on the exact form of the correction function Ψc,h (·), the location probabilities express
also conditional variances, covariances as well as higher order moments of the unobservable location shocks.



                                                      13
leave us with 57 MSAs in total.
       The summary statistics of the MSA characteristics for all the quarters in the sample
are presented in Panel A of Table 1. The mean population is 2.5 million with a standard
deviation of 2.8 million. The mean unemployment rate is 5.8%. The mean income per capita
is 23.6 thousand dollars, while the mean HPI is 99.2.


3.2.       Household Demographics

Our household investment data are drawn from the database of a national discount brokerage
firm. See Barber and Odean (2000) for detailed descriptions. For our analysis, we start with
an unbalanced panel of roughly 14,200 complete observations, covering the period 1990-1996
at a monthly frequency.14 The beginning and end of these households’ time series in the
database is in general different. Most part of the households’ assets is invested in stocks
and only a small fraction is allocated to mutual funds. Specifically, for every household
in the database, we track the composition of its portfolio and construct its common stock
portfolio weights. Every stock is identified by the corresponding CUSIP label. Moreover,
every observation is accompanied by a rich list of demographic information. Specifically,
we observe every household’s total income, age, job code (e.g. professional, managerial,
sales-services, white collar, blue collar and farmer), gender, marital status and number of
kids. Since, by construction, the number of farmers who live in the selected 57 MSAs is
small, we drop them from the analysis. Importantly, every household is listed with its
address ZIP-code, allowing us to calculate the distances from the stocks’ headquarters, as
we describe below. Overall, we have 10,712 unique households with complete information
on demographics and stock portfolios. These households do not move across MSAs, but
stay in their original location either until the last date in the data or until they close their
  14
    The actual total number of households in the database is about 78,000. However, many of these obser-
vations have missing information. In addition, not all households hold common stocks and some of them
have multiple accounts which need to be aggregated.




                                                  14
accounts.15 Their first time-series observations comprise the sample of our location choice
model.
       The summary statistics of the households’ demographics are presented in Panel B of
Table 1. The income of households in our sample has a mean of 82.4 thousand dollars
and a median of 87.5 thousand dollars. This is to be expected since only households with
sufficient income would participate in the stock market to begin with. The mean age is
47.7 years. About 55% of the households are professionals and 28% are managerial. Sales
service, white collar and blue collar accounts comprise about 8%, 5% and 4% of the total
respectively. Approximately, 93% of the households are headed by a male and 79% of the
heads are married. On average, households have at most 1 kid.


3.3.       Geographical Distribution of Household Stock Holdings

The universe of stocks that we examine is the Russell 1000 Index. We focus only on stocks
located in the same 57 MSAs as above, with a complete list of financial characteristics
as described below. This filter leads us to a total number of 900 different stocks for the
whole period.16 Merging the financial characteristics data of these stocks with the household
investment data reduces our sample to 10,594 households.17 This sample comprises the data
based on which we estimate the portfolio choice model. Using the geographical coordinates
of the ZIP-code of every household and the ZIP-code of the headquarters of every stock, we
calculate their spherical distances, which are the key variable in our study.18
       The geographical distribution of the households in our sample and the stocks in Rus-
sell 1000 is presented in Figure 1 via a map of latitude and longitude coordinates of the
  15
     According to the US Census Bureau, the average percentage of movers during our sample period (1991-
1996) was on average about 17% (http://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2015/cb15-47.html).
This means that, roughly, a household would be expected to change residence every 6 (≈ 1/0.17) years.
Given that our own sample period is six years, we expect that few households in the data did move.
  16
     Pirinsky and Wang (2006) used Compact Disclosure to identify 118 firm relocations from 1992 to 1997.
However, most of these firms were small and did not belong to the Russell 1000 index.
  17
     Households which do not invest in any of these stocks are dropped.
  18
     We measure distance in degrees. Multiplying by 2πR/360 converts it to miles (kilometers), where
R ≈3,963 miles (6,378 kilometers).



                                                   15
households and the stocks’ headquarters. This figure depicts the geographical coordinates
of the 10,594 households and the 900 stocks in Russell 1000 Index. The address ZIP-codes
of households and the stocks’ headquarters are converted to geographical coordinates based
on the correspondence provided by the US Census Bureau. The horizontal axis is in longi-
tude coordinate, while the vertical axis is in latitude coordinate. The blue circles indicate
households, while the red squares indicate stocks. From this map of the geographical distri-
bution of households and stocks in our sample, we can see the high numbers of households
and stocks located in the New York area (latitude around 40, longitude around -75) and
California (latitude around 35, longitude around -120), which is what one would expect.
       The portfolio positions of households are summarized in Panel C of Table 1. The mean
value of a household’s portfolio in common stocks is about $40,000 (averaged across time
periods from 1991 to 1996), while the median value is about $15,000.19 The standard de-
viation of stock holdings across our sample is $152,000. In terms of trading, as Barber and
Odean (2000) document, these households are quite active on average, buying and selling
6-7% of their stock portfolio every month, and turning over 75% of it every year.
       Furthermore, on average, a household in our sample has a portfolio weight of 11.2 bps on
a Russell 1000 stock and holds 1.85 stocks. The standard deviation of the number of stocks is
1.55, indicating that most of the households in the sample are under-diversified, even as their
stock holdings comprise a substantial fraction of their assets. The median number of stocks
that a household holds is 1, while the standard deviation of a portfolio weight is 0.03. In the
same panel, we also report the mean distance of a household’s residence to a Russell 1000 firm
headquarters, which is 17.6. The standard deviation is 11.45. These figures can be compared
to the distance between California and New York, which is approximately 57 degrees. In
addition, we also construct dummies indicating whether a stock is headquartered more than
250 miles and 100 miles away from a household’s residence. The average percentage of
  19
    The report by the US Census Bureau on net worth and asset ownership of households in 1998 and
2000 shows that in 1998, the median value of holdings in stocks for a typical US household is $16,800
(https://www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/p70-88.pdf). This information indicates that our sample is similar
to the stock holding situation of US households in the ’90s.


                                                  16
households that are away from a stock’s headquarters according to these metrics is about
90%.20


3.4.       Stock Financial Characteristics

For each stock that belonged to the Russell 1000 Index during our sample period, we gather
financial characteristics from CRSP and Compustat. In particular, we generate quarterly
time series for their price, market value, book-to-market ratio, turnover, past twelve-month
momentum and volatility. We construct these characteristics as Gompers and Metrick (2001).
We also invoke the Fama-French industry classification of stocks into 17 categories based on
the four-digit SIC code, which is available from Kenneth R. French’s website.21
      We summarize all stock characteristics in Panel D of Table 1. The mean price of a
stock in the Russell 1000 index is about $34. The mean market capitalization is around 3.4
billion dollars. The mean book-to-market ratio is 0.43. The mean share turnover is 0.3.
The mean past 12-month return is 0.17 and the mean monthly return volatility is 0.18. The
industrial composition of the Russel 1000 Index is reflected by the 17 Fama-French industry
classification; 26% of the stocks belong to the "Other" industry category, 16% of them are in
"Finance" (referring to banks, insurance companies and other financials), while 12% belong
to the "Machines" category (for machinery and business equipment).


3.5.       Summary Statistics on Local Bias of Stock Portfolios

The summary statistics of the local bias (LB) in our household stock holdings data are given
in Table 2 and are constructed as in Coval and Moskowitz (1999). Column 2 (labeled "Avg.
Distance from Holdings") reports the average portfolio weighted distance of households from
                                       1
                                                    wji dij , where dij is the ZIP-code distance between a
                                           P P
their stock holdings, defined as       I    i   j

household i’s residential area and the headquarters area of a stock j, wji is the household i’s
 20
      The reasonable threshold of 250 miles is taken from the study of Ivković and Weisbenner (2005).
 21
      http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html



                                                        17
portfolio weight on stock j, and I is the total number of households. Column 3 (labeled "Avg.
Distance from Benchmark") reports the average portfolio weighted distance of households
                                                              1
                                                                            w̄j dij , where w̄j is the Russell
                                                                  P P
from the Russell 1000 benchmark portfolio, computed as        I    i    j

1000 benchmark portfolio weight on stock j. Row 1 has as benchmark the equally weighted
portfolio, while Row 2 refers to the value-weighted portfolio. Column 5 (labeled "Difference")
reports the average difference between Column 3 and Column 4, which is essentially the
average local bias of households in distance units. Column 6 (labeled "% Bias (LB)") reports
the local bias (LB) measure as a percentage. Column 7 reports the t-statistics for the LB
measure. Independent of which benchmark is used (the values are about the same), the
local bias is always high in terms of both magnitude and statistical significance. Specifically,
using the equally weighted portfolio, the local bias is 8.29 or 45.45%, while, using the value-
weighted portfolio, it is slightly decreased to 8.26 or 43.72%.22



4.     Identification

4.1.     Exclusion Restriction

As it is the case with any Heckman (1977) correction model (e.g. Puhani (2000)), to avoid
identification through functional forms, an exclusion restriction is required, according to
which at least one of the factors affecting location choice does not directly show up in the
portfolio choice regression. Based on our location choice model, a household decides in which
city to reside, taking into account the characteristics of all the available locations as well as
how it matches to them through its demographics. The instruments in our portfolio choice
regressions are derived through this matching process. That is, our identification assumption
is that the way through which a household’s demographics interact with the characteristics
of a city has no direct impact on its investment decisions.
  22
    The percentage LB is more than four times the local bias that Coval and Moskowitz (1999) report for
non-index fund managers in 1995.




                                                  18
    When household i residing in city c considers investing in stock j headquartered in city
h, the characteristics of cities c and h, as they are, may or may not be directly relevant. For
instance, the cost of living in city c may be related to household i’s liquidity needs, while the
cost of living in city h may be related to stock j’s profitability, if the operations of the latter
are local. But it could also be the case that household i decides to invest in stock j, solely
based on a factor model with financial characteristics and distance (proxies for the cognitive
or information costs it faces). The costs of living, in that case, would only be relevant for
the cognitive or information costs it will encounter through his location choice.23 However,
regardless of whether city characteristics are excluded from the portfolio choice regression or
not, the way through which a household matches to them when it makes its location choice
seems, a priori, to be irrelevant to the stock investments decisions that follow.


4.2.      Specification of the Correction Function

Based on Equation (14), we need to evaluate C 2 correction functions, Ψc,h (·), each of which
has C probabilities, {pi,` }C
                            `=1 , as arguments. This high dimensionality issue makes the es-

timation of the portfolio choice regression infeasible. As a first remedy, in line with Dahl
(2002), we adopt the following two identification assumptions:24

    Assumption 1 (Two Index Sufficiency): The correction function has only two argu-
ments, namely the probability with which household i resides in city c and the probability
with which it resides in city h:
   23
      Along these lines, one could have utilized an argument from the field of Industrial Organization, according
to which, even if the characteristics of some cities, such as zc and zh do affect portfolio choice directly, it is
unlikely that all the other cities’ characteristics, {z` }`∈{1,...,C}/{c,h} do. For example, even if house prices in
cities c and h have a direct impact on household i’s investment decision for stock j, the house prices in cities
other than c and h should not be that relevant. Of course, there are exceptions that come to mind such as
investments in stocks which operate in many cities.
   24
      The difference in our context is that the location choice - portfolio choice model is more complex than
the mobility-earnings model studied in Dahl (2002), since, in principle, a household can purchase stocks
headquartered in any city, regardless of where it resides. On the other hand, in a mobility-earnings model,
a household receives wage offers only from its own city. This extra element leads us to additionally impose
Assumption 3, in order to make the estimation feasible, as we discuss in text.




                                                        19
                                                     
                                 Ψc,h {pi,` }C
                                             `=1 = Ψc,h (pi,c , pi,h )                       (15)


   Assumption 2 (Residence City Independence): The form of the correction function
does not depend on the residence city c unless h = c, i.e.:

                                                                               
                                                          Ψc (pi,c ) if h = c
                                                  
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                               
                          Ψc,h (pi,c , pi,h ) =                                              (16)
                                                      Ψh (pi,c , pi,h ) if h 6= c 
                                                  
                                                                                 
                                                                                 


   According to Assumption 1, only two out of C probabilities are relevant for the location
correction, namely the probability that household i locates in the area in which it actually
resides, pi,c , and the probability that household i locates in the city that has the headquarters
of the stock in which it considers investing, pi,h . However, that assumption still leaves us
with C 2 correction functions. To this end, we impose Assumption 2, which reduces the total
number of correction functions to its square root. In particular, it assumes that a correction
function should not depend on the identity of the city in which household i resides. Of
course, if it happens that stock j is located in the same city as household i does, i.e. h = c,
then the identity of the residence city becomes relevant again.
   Lastly, because the total number of cities in our data is large, i.e. C = 58, we are still
left with a high number of correction functions to be estimated from the data. To this end,
we conveniently impose the following assumption:

   Assumption 3 (Homogeneity): The form of the correction function is not stock
headquartered city-specific, i.e.:


                                Ψc (pi,c )        =            Ψs (pi,c )
                                                                                             (17)
                                                          d
                             Ψh (pi,c , pi,h ) = Ψ (pi,c , pi,h ) ∀h 6= c

   Assumption 3 further reduces the correction functions to only two. In particular, the
first correction function applies to the case in which household i considers investing in a


                                                       20
stock that is headquartered in the same city in which it resides, while the second correction
function applies to the case in which the stock’s headquarters are located in a different city.25
The resulting two correction functions, Ψs (·) and Ψd (·), can be flexibly estimated through
a polynomial series expansion.



5.         Estimation

5.1.       Location Choice Results

Table 3 presents the maximum likelihood estimation results of our location choice model.
This table presents two conditional logit models for household location choices. Column
1 presents the full model of location choice derived above. The choice set of households
consists of the 57 MSAs. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one
if a household resides in a specific MSA. We use 10,712 unique households to estimate our
models, which gives us roughly 610 thousand observations.
       The main explanatory variables are MSA characteristics that include the log of the pop-
ulation number in an MSA (LogPop), the unemployment rate (Unemp), the income per
  25
     In short, as in Dahl (2002), Assumptions 1-3 can be thought of as exclusions restrictions on the con-
ditional joint distribution of household i’s idiosyncratic investment error, i,c,h,j , and its maximum order
                                                               C
statistic, vi,c , given its observed location utilities {Vi,` }`=1 (or equivalently, by the monotonicity, the loca-
                            C
tion probabilities {pi,` }`=1 ), so that:

                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                     f s (i,c,h,j , vi,c |pi,c ) if h = c      
                           C                                                    C
   f i,c,h,j , vi,c {Vi,` }`=1            =       f i,c,h,j , vi,c {pi,` }`=1               =
                                                                                                      f d (i,c,h,j , vi,c |pi,c , pih ) if h 6= c
                                                                                                                                                    

Then, combining the above equation with Equation (12) yields that:

                                                        +∞ 0
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                          R R                                         
                                                                i,c,h,j   fs   i,c,h,j , vi,c |pi,c di,c,h,j dvi,c
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                        −∞−∞                                                                                        
                                                                                                                        ≡ Ψs (pi,c ) if h = c
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                       pi,c
                                             
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                              C
  E i,c,h,j vi,c < 0, Vi,`                =
                               `=1             
                                                +∞
                                                  R R0                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                       i,c,h,j f d i,c,h,j , vi,c |pi,c , pih di,c,h,j dvi,c
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                −∞−∞
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                ≡ Ψd pi,c , pi,h if h 6= c
                                               
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                    pi,c




                                                                           21
capita (Incomepc), and the log of the housing price index (LogHPI). We also include all
pair-wise interaction terms between the MSA characteristics variables and the household de-
mographics, e.g. LogIncome, LogAge, Managerial, SalesServices, WhiteCollar, BlueCollar,
Male, Married, Kids (shown in Panel B of Table 1) in our main specification in Column 1.
   The coefficient estimates in Column 1 have the same predicted sign as in other location
choice models (e.g. Bishop (2007)). The t-statistics indicate that there is substantial ob-
served heterogeneity in location preferences, whereby households with certain demographics
(i.e. LogIncome, LogAge, etc.) are more likely to locate in MSAs with certain characteris-
tics (i.e. LogPop, Unemp, Incomepc, LogHPI, etc.). In other words, the pairwise interaction
terms involving household characteristics and MSA demographics are highly significant.
   Take first LogPop, a measure of population density or urban versus rural areas. The
coefficient on LogPop×LogIncome is 0.05 and is marginally statistically significant with a
t-statistic of 1.7. This means that higher income households are more likely to locate (i.e.
prefer to live) in urban centers. Highly populated cities are also more likely to attract old
households, households whose job industry is managerial instead of professional (which is
the base group in our regressions), and white collar households.
   Next consider MSA unemployment. The coefficient on Unemp×BlueCollar is 0.12 with
a t-statistic of 3. So blue collar workers are more likely to be matched with MSAs whose
unemployment rate is higher than average. The coefficient on Unemp×LogAge is also sta-
tistically significant probably because older households are about to or have already exited
the labor force.
   Our remaining two MSA characteristics are Incompc and LogHPI. Both proxy for costs of
living. The coefficient on Incomepc×LogIncome is 0.05 with a t-statistic of 7. Similarly, the
coefficient on LogHPI×LogIncome is 0.94 with a t-statistic of 4. The sensitivity with respect
to these costs is higher for households which have low income. The same also applies for
households which are older, have a family (i.e. are married or have kids) and for households
which perform manual labor.


                                             22
       For comparison reasons, we also estimate the location choice model without the inter-
action between the household demographics and the MSA characteristics. The results are
shown in Column 2 of Table 3. The fit of the model is reduced as indicated by the decreased
values of both the log likelihood and the pseudo R2 .26 In addition, the coefficients of income
per capita and house prices turn positive with a high statistical significance, loosing their
interpretation as costs of living. Population also turns positive and becomes highly statis-
tically significant. In short, it is important, as has been recognized in the location choice
literature, that these pairwise interaction terms play a critical role in explaining location
preferences.


5.2.       Portfolio Choice Results

We next estimate a portfolio choice model but without accounting for location choice. Table
4 presents the maximum likelihood estimation results of the portfolio choice model without
correcting for location selection. The portfolio regression is run separately for every month in
our sample, thus flexibly allowing for time variation in the coefficients. Standard errors are
clustered at the household level, taking into account part of the unobserved heterogeneity of
the decision makers. For compactness, in the table, we only present the monthly averages
of all the coefficients along with their monthly averaged t-statistics.
       Whether it stands alone in the portfolio regression or is together with household demo-
graphics, financial characteristics or characteristics of the MSAs, the distance coefficient is
always negative and highly statistically significant.27 In Column 1, the distance variable by
itself attracts a coefficient of −0.012 and is highly statistically significant with a t-statistic
of −20.3.
       In Column 2, even after adding household demographics, the coefficient is virtually un-
changed. Besides the expected negative effect of distance, the coefficients of household
  26
     The nested likelihood ratio test value is 328.22 (without clustering the standard errors at the household
level), i.e. higher than the χ2 (36) statistic at any reasonable level of statistical significance.
  27
     Without controlling for financial characteristics, its t-statistic is the highest and becomes the fourth
highest, when we include stock financial characteristics.


                                                     23
demographics also have the predicted sign in their estimates. In particular, investment in
a stock is more likely and is increased in magnitude if a household has a high income. The
coefficient on LogIncome is 0.03 with a t-statistic of 2.9. The same also occurs with age.
Moreover, households whose job industry code is either managerial, sales-services or blue col-
lar are less likely to invest relative to professionals (i.e. the base group). So are households
with kids under the age of eighteen.
   Column 3 shows that adding stock characteristics actually increase the magnitude of
the coefficient to −0.013. As for the estimated coefficients of the financial characteristics,
price enters negatively and size positively, with a high statistical significance, as anticipated.
Households are not momentum traders and this is indicated by the sign of the respective
coefficient. The estimated coefficient of volatility is not statistically significant. The book-
to-market coefficient is estimated to be positive, showing preferences for value stocks. A
high turnover ratio of a stock also makes it attractive to households.
   In Column 4, we additionally control for possible, relevant MSA demographics. In par-
ticular, we add the demographics of the MSA in which household resides (which we denote
with subscript c) and the demographics of the MSA of the firm headquarters (which we
denote with the subscript h). The estimation results show that households are less likely
to own stocks located in urban areas. Importantly, we find that adding MSA demographics
increases the negative value of the distance coefficient to −0.014. Most of the coefficients on
the previous household demographics and stock financial characteristics also do not change
much.
   Based on our estimates in every month, we compute the average marginal effect of our
main explanatory variable, Distance, on the portfolio weight. Since the Tobit model is
non-linear, we first calculate the marginal effect by anchoring all of the covariates at their
mean values in the sample, for each month. Then, we take the monthly average of all these
marginal effects.
   For our model in Column 1 of Table 4 (i.e. without any controls besides Distance), the


                                               24
marginal effect of Distance on the portfolio weight is −0.33 basis points (bps). Thus, if
the Distance increases by one standard deviation (11.45 from our summary statistics Table
1), the portfolio weight of a household on a Russell 1000 stock would go down by 0.33
bps×11.45=3.8 bps. When we add in all other control variables as in Column 4 of Table 4,
the marginal effect of Distance becomes −0.16 bps, so that the economic significance of a
one standard deviation increase in Distance is a 1.9 bps drop in the portfolio weight. These
effects are sizable given that the average portfolio weight of a household on a Russell 1000
stock is 11.2 bps.
       The complete time series evolution of the distance coefficient estimates and their t-
statistics are depicted in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. Figure 2 documents that as years
went by, the absolute value of the distance coefficient is decreased. Our sample is short, so
it is difficult to make anything out of this trend.28 In any case, Figure 3 illustrates that the
statistical significance of the distance coefficient is always very high during the period.
       In Tables 5 and 6, we present the maximum likelihood estimation results after correcting
for location selection. For exposition purposes, we first start with the simplest specification
according to which portfolio weights are solely (nonlinearly) regressed on distance and the
constant, α. Such a specification allows us to clearly highlight the decreases in the absolute
value of the distance coefficient as one attempts to increase the order of the polynomials
approximating the correction functions. Indeed, Table 5 shows that, even with two linear
correction functions in Column 1, we achieve a roughly 20% reduction. Recall that the
distance coefficient was originally −0.012 with a t-statistic of −20.3. The coefficient is now
−0.010 with a t-statistic of −17.8.29 Notice that this reduction corresponds to the fact that
  28
      It might possibly be driven by the technological improvements in the transmission of information across
cities through the Internet (e.g. Barber and Odean (2002)), which naturally mitigates the cognitive and
information costs that distance captures. Alternatively, it might be temporarily reflecting the stock-market
mania of the mid-nineties. In particular, the rise of Internet stocks during this period may also be affecting
the time series variation of this coefficient.
   29
      The standard errors of the portfolio choice parameters might not be exact due to the imputation of
the location probabilities from the first-stage estimation of the location choice model. This is true in any
two-step estimation procedure. Of course, the estimated probabilities are consistent and the sample size in
the conditional logit is quite large (10,712 households × 57 MSAs). Moreover, we run the investment model
separately for every month, having different households in every period. The spirit of this exercise resembles


                                                     25
the imputed location probabilities as captured by the correction function both predict a
positive portfolio weight. In other words, the higher the probability of a household locating
to a given MSA, the higher are the chances of that household owning stocks which are
headquartered in that MSA.
    This reduction is furthered increased in Column 2, once we increase the order of the
polynomial approximation. The coefficient becomes −0.008 with a t-statistic of −14.7. As
Column 3 of the table shows, with a 4th order polynomial the reduction is almost 50%. The
coefficient is now −0.006 with a t-statistic of −11.1.
    In Table 6, the same percentage decreases in the distance coefficient also apply, when
we control for household demographics, financial characteristics and characteristics of the
MSAs. Take the first three columns. The baseline portfolio weight regression now includes,
in addition to distance, the household demographics. As we move from Column 1 to Column
3, we increase the order of the polynomial function as we did in the previous table. We see
that the distance coefficient in Column 3 with the 4th order polynomial is −0.006, similar
to before.
    In Columns 4 to 6, we include both household demographics and stock characteristics
in the portfolio weight regression. Again, in Column 6 with the 4th order polynomial, the
coefficient is −0.007, which is similar to the previous −0.006 coefficient. In Columns 7-9, we
additionally include the MSA characteristics in the portfolio weights regression. In Column 9
with the 4th order polynomial, the coefficient is −0.007. Thus, in all cases, with a 4th order
polynomial approximation of the correction function, we estimate a roughly 50% reduction
on the distance coefficient.
    To see the changes in economic effects when we correct for location selection biases, we
again compute the marginal effects of the distance variable for the specifications in Column 3
of Table 5 and Column 9 of Table 6 (once again with a 4th order polynomial approximation
of the correction function). In Column 3 of Table 5 with Distance as the only explanatory
the one of a bootstrap. In any case, bootstrapped standard errors for specific cross-sections are available
upon request.


                                                    26
variable, the marginal effect is −0.15 bps. Compared to the same specification without the
location selection correction (Column 1 of Table 4), the marginal effect has decreased by close
to 55%, and the economic effect of a one standard deviation rise in Distance on portfolio
weights has dropped to −1.8 bps (was −3.8 bps in Column 1 of Table 4 before). Similarly,
when we include all the other control variables as in Column 9 of Table 6, the marginal effect
is −0.08 bps and the associated economic effect of Distance is −0.9 bps, i.e. both go down
by around 50% from the specification without the location selection correction (Column 4
of Table 4). All the aforementioned economic effects are compactly depicted in Table 7.



6.      Robustness

6.1.     Income and Age Sub-samples

For robustness, we repeat the estimation procedure, with and without the correction for
location selection, in four sub-samples that we define based on quantiles of income and age
in every month of our data. That is, we assign households to four groups, namely "Poor and
Young", "Rich and Young", "Poor and Old" and "Rich and Old", depending on whether their
income and age is below or above the corresponding median values. The results are shown
in Table 8 and Figure 4.
     Before employing our correction functions, we estimate that distance matters more for
Poor and Young households (the coefficient estimate is −0.016), while it matters less for
households which are Rich and Old (the coefficient estimate is −0.011). Households which
are either Rich and Young or Poor and Old are in the middle of the ranking, with a coefficient
estimate of −0.013. After the selection correction, the overall ranking is preserved, with the
pattern of the approximate 50% reduction in the distance coefficient being consistent across
all groups. The estimate for the Rich and Old households still has the lowest value, which
now is −0.006. This is not surprising, since one would expect that with higher income and
experience, information and cognitive costs for stock investments are decreased.


                                              27
   The above estimation results confirm our conjecture that information and cognitive costs
are reflected in a household’s active location choice, irrespective of the household hetero-
geneity. Averaging the distance coefficient estimates across the sub-samples, before and after
selection correction, yields values that approximate the estimates from the whole sample (i.e.
−0.013 and −0.007 respectively).


6.2.    Higher Order Polynomials

The above 50% reduction in the distance coefficient is achieved by approximating the two
correction functions with a fourth order polynomial. In Table 9, we present additional
estimation results for the distance coefficient, when the approximation order of the correction
functions is furthered increased to the 5th and 6th order. Not much more reduction is
achieved from higher order polynomials.


6.3.    Alternative Distance Measures

In Appendix Table 1, we repeat the estimation of the portfolio choice model, replacing
the continuous distance variable measured in degrees with dummies indicating whether the
headquarters of a stock are more than a certain threshold of miles away from a household’s
residence. In particular, using the conservative threshold of 250 miles, the reduction in the
Away coefficient is about 44%, which is similar to the one in our baseline specification (50%).
Naturally, most firms have their headquarters away from a household’s residence, so that
the coefficient of Away is strengthened once the threshold decreases to 100 miles. Indeed,
according to Panel C of Table 1, dropping the threshold from 250 miles to 100 miles results
in a 5% increase (decrease) of distant (local) stocks. Nevertheless, even in the case of 100
miles, correcting for selection still drops the coefficient of Away by 32%.




                                              28
6.4.      No Income, No Job Code in the Location Model

According to our location choice model, when households locate, they match to the char-
acteristics of a city taking into account their income and job code. That is, we allow both
income and job codes to contribute to households’ observed heterogeneity in locational pref-
erences. This assumption precludes these variables from being an outcome of the location
decision; we assume perfect foresight regarding a household’s ability to earn money in any
city it decides to locate and treat these variables as proxies for that ability. Yet, to allevi-
ate any concerns regarding the plausible endogeneity of income or job codes, we repeat the
whole estimation exercise excluding either income or both income and job codes from the
location model. The estimation results of these two alternative location models are shown in
Column 1 and 2 of Appendix Table 2. The estimation results of the corresponding portfolio
choice models, which are presented in Appendix Table 3, in terms of the distance coefficient
estimate and the reduction due to selection correction are virtually the same.30


6.5.      Stock Characteristics in the Location Model

We also estimate households’ location choice by controlling for the financial characteristics
of the stocks with headquarters in each city. In particular, given city ` and the set of stocks
headquartered there J` , we define city `’s financial characteristics to be the value-weighted
averages of the characteristics of every stock j ∈ J` .31 To construct city `’s industry code,
we use the mode of the industry codes of its stocks as well as a separate code if the mode is
not defined.
  30
     In more detail, with a fourth order polynomial approximation of the correction functions, the distance
coefficient when the location choice model does not include income is -0.00714, while it is -0.00702 when
the location choice model does not include either income or job codes. Both are slightly lower in magnitude
than the distance coefficient obtained from the baseline location choice model, which is -0.00731.
  31
     Equation (2) is replaced by:

                                                Vi,` = ρi zl + bf`
where f` is city `’s vector of financial characteristics and b is the vector of the additional location parameters.
Unlike the matching between household and city demographics, interactions of household demographics with
financial variables have no particular meaning for a location decision. That is why we do not include them.



                                                        29
       The stock characteristics of a city comprise an additional signal for the prospects of
the local economy (besides the city’s demographics). In the housing equilibrium models
of Ortalo-Magné and Prat (2016) and Hizmo (2015), where a household discounts future
investment in its location decision, these variables could indicate the local risk to which a
household will be exposed once it resides. More practically, the characterization of the type
of local stocks can provide a better proxy for the employment opportunities and job offers
in the area.
       The estimation results of this new location choice model are presented in Column 3 of
Appendix Table 2.32 The estimated coefficients of city demographics and their interactions
with household demographics are similar to the ones in the baseline model. As for the esti-
mated coefficients of the cities’ financial characteristics, all of them are statistical significant
and increase the pseudo R2 by about 14%. However, as Appendix Table 4 illustrates, re-
garding the distance coefficient estimate in portfolio choice after the selection adjustment,
the new predicted location probabilities yield again the same 50% reduction.



7.        Assessing the Selection-Corrected Local Bias

7.1.       Using Value-Weighted Portfolios as a Benchmark

Up to this point, we have documented, under various specifications, an approximate 50%
reduction in the distance coefficient (δ) of the Tobit portfolio choice model due to location
selection. In particular, in the “full controls” specification, the selection corrected estimate
of distance is on average -0.007, implying an average economic effect of -0.9 bps on port-
folio weight every time distance increases by one standard deviation. To assess how much
of this effect is due to local bias, we consider a null hypothesis according to which house-
holds would hold value-weighted portfolios on stocks in the Russell 1000 Index. Under the
  32
  Since cities are required to have stock headquarters, the choice set in this specification decreases by four
MSAs.




                                                     30
assumption that Russell 1000 is the market, such a hypothesis is in line with the CAPM
prescription. We then proceed to estimate the portfolio parameters under this null, namely
θ o ≡ (αo , β o , γ o , δ o ), by running the following linear regression for every month in the sample
period:


                         wjV W = αo + β o xj + γ o Di + δ o disti,c,h,j + Ψoc,h + ζi,c,h,j        (18)

where the variation in the RHS of the equation is only across stocks, with wjV W being the
Russell 1000 value-weighted portfolio on stock j. In the regression, we correct for location
selection through the correction functions Ψoc,h .
       The estimation results of this regression (as well as of alternative specifications with fewer
controls) are presented in Table 10. In Columns 1 and 2, we see that the average estimate of
the distance coefficient (which here is also the average marginal effect) is −0.018 or −0.017
bps with an average t-statistic of −12.4. That is, even under a CAPM null, there exist
specifications in which the distance coefficient is statistically significant, since households
do live near the headquarters of some stocks. Still, for these cases, the associated economic
effect of a one standard deviation increase in distance is quite low (i.e. about −0.2 bps33 ).
Moreover, once we control for the financial characteristics of stocks and the city demographics
in Columns 3 and 4, the distance coefficient is statistically insignificant and practically zero.
Therefore, the −0.9 bps estimate of the economic effect in our Tobit specification with full
controls does indeed constitute an estimate of households’ portfolio local bias versus the
CAPM benchmark.


7.2.        Value-Weighted Portfolio Deviations

Motivated by Brandt, Santa-Clara, and Valkanov (2009), we also explore the implica-
tions of selection correction in an alternative investment model in which households de-
viate from value-weighted portfolios according to a linear factor model with the same vari-
  33
       Recall that the respective Tobit economic effect for these specifications is -3.8 bps.


                                                         31
ables as our baseline Tobit specification. We denote the parameters of this new model
                                            
θ dev ≡       αdev , β dev , γ dev , δ dev       and estimate them by running the following regression for
every month in the sample period:


               wi,c,h,j − wjV W = αdev + β dev xj + γ dev Di + δ dev disti,c,h,j + Ψc,h + i,c,h,j    (19)

where the dependent variable in the LHS of the equation is the deviation of household
i’s portfolio weight on stock j from the value-weighted portfolio on that stock, while Ψc,h
denotes the corresponding correction function. The advantage of this specification over the
Tobit model is that the estimate of the distance coefficient can be directly interpreted as the
estimated local bias under the same null hypothesis. On the other hand, the caveat is that
the many zero portfolio weights on stocks, that motivated the use of our Tobit model in the
first place, are translated to many negative deviations from the market.
   The estimation results of this portfolio choice model, before and after the selection ad-
justment, are presented in Columns 5-8 of Table 10. Specifically, in Column 5, without
correcting for selection, the distance coefficient is about -0.43 bps. As in our baseline speci-
fication, accounting for location selection drops the estimate up to 50%, when the correction
functions are approximated by a fourth order polynomial. The selection-corrected estimate
of the local bias coefficient (δ dev ) is about -0.22 bps, so that the economic effect of a one
standard deviation increase in distance is about -2.5 bps (≈ −0.22 × 11.45). That is, the
local bias estimate of the above portfolio choice model is about three times higher than the
local bias estimate of the Tobit.




                                                             32
8.        Performance of Local versus Non-Local Stocks Ad-

          justed for Location Selection

In the same spirit, we can consider the effect of correcting for location selection biases on
the investment returns of households. To this end, we run various forms of the following
regression:
                          Ri,j,t+1 = α + βdisti,j,t + γ 0 Xi,j,t + Ψt + i,j,t+1                    (20)

where the dependent variable is Ri,j,t+1 = wi,j,t rj,t+1 , and wi,j,t is household i’s portfolio
weight on stock j in month t and rj,t+1 is stock j’s excess return over the market return
in month t + 1.34 The key explanatory variable is disti,j,t , the distance between household
i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters (in month t).
Furthermore, Xi,j,t is the vector of the same household demographics, stock characteristics,
zip code area attributes and industry controls in month t that are used in the portfolio
choice estimations, and Ψt is the correction function for location selection biases that is
approximated by polynomials and the same as before in the portfolio choice estimations.
       We follow the Fama and MacBeth (1973) approach and the return regressions of (20) are
performed in each month. Then we use the time-series averages of the monthly coefficient
estimates, and the associated t-statistics for the monthly estimates are based on Newey-West
HAC standard errors with a lag order of 3 for all of the regressions. The estimation results
are shown in Table 11.
       In Columns 1, we estimate the performance regression with distance as the only indepen-
dent variable. The coefficient on distance is −0.0011 with a t-statistic of −1.65. This finding
is consistent with those in the literature that household’s local stock picks out-perform their
distant stock picks. In Columns 2-5, we add in our location selection control functions as
we did above for the portfolio holdings. As we increase the polynomial of the control func-
  34
    The market return is the value-weighted return of all CRSP firms incorporated in the US and listed on
the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11. It is available from Kenneth R.
French’s website http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/index.html.


                                                   33
tions to a higher degree, the size of the coefficient in front of distance drops and becomes
statistically insignificant.
     In Column 6, we estimate our performance regression by including a full set of household
demographics, stock characteristics, industry controls, and MSA characteristics. The mean
of the future 1-month weighted excess return Ri,j,t+1 = wi,j,t rj,t+1 is 0.03 bps. In the full
model without corrections (Column 6), a one standard deviation rise in distance is associated
with a 11.45×0.0017 = 0.020 bps fall in the future 1-month Ri,j,t+1 (or 67% of its mean). But
again, once we include our location selection control functions, the economic and statistical
significance of the coefficient on distance drop.
     With a 6th order correction (Column 10), the economic effect decreases to a 11.45 ×
0.0008 = 0.010 bps fall, a 50% drop from the without corrections case. The coefficient is
statistically insignificant. One way to interpret our findings is that proximity does not matter
much for portfolios or returns of these portfolios after accounting for selection. That is, the
imputed informational advantage of proximity for portfolios is not causal but mostly driven
by location selection.



9.      Conclusion

A long-standing puzzle in the household finance literature is that households hold undiversi-
fied stock portfolios tilted toward firms headquartered near where they reside. This puzzle is
generally explained by theories that assign a causal role to proximity. The literature implic-
itly assumes that households locate randomly, but a household in practice optimally locates
in a city depending on its preferences. In principle, it is expected that latent factors of this
selection are correlated with unobservable preferences for local stocks. We use models from
the literature on urban economics and real estate to account for the endogeneity of location
choices and show how to correct for the potential selection effects of location choices on
portfolio choices.



                                              34
   Using brokerage house data over the period of 1991 to 1996, we show that accounting
for location choices drastically reduces the impact of distance on household portfolios; the
decrease in the distance coefficient and the associated economic effect is roughly 50%. This
reduction is robust across a wide range of specifications for the portfolio choice. The same
is true when we apply this selection adjustment to the performance of household portfolios.
The effect of distance on the performance of households’ stock picks is mitigated when we
control for selection. These results verify the conjecture that location choice really matters,
paving the way for further work at the joint study of locational and investment decisions.
   One venue for future work is to relate or extend our analysis to an international setting.
While international equity home bias is not doubt driven by other factors such as trading
costs, our selection bias mechanism might nonetheless naturally have a role. Some house-
holds, particularly the wealthy ones or those working in certain industries, have a choice of
living abroad in cities such as London or Tokyo. To the extent we had data on households
living abroad and their stock portfolios, we can integrate the international analysis into our
setting and examine this issue.




                                              35
References

Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson, 2009, “The Age of Reason: Finan-
  cial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation,” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 2009(2), 51–117.

Bajari, P., and M. E. Kahn, 2005, “Estimating Housing Demand With an Application to
  Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  23(1), 20–33.

Barber, B. M., and T. Odean, 2000, “Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common
  Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors,” Journal of Finance, 55(2), 773–
  806.

         , 2002, “Online Investors: Do the Slow Die First?,” Review of Financial Studies,
  15(2), 455–487.

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan, 2007, “A Unified Framework for Measuring Prefer-
  ences for Schools and Neighborhoods,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(4), 588–638.

Bayer, P., R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins, 2016, “A Dynamic Model of Demand
  for Houses and Neighborhoods,” Econometrica, 84(3), 893–942.

Bayer, P. J., B. D. Bernheim, and J. K. Scholz, 2009, “The Effects of Financial Education in
  the Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers,” Economic Inquiry, 47(4), 605–624.

Benartzi, S., 2001, “Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Com-
  pany Stock,” Journal of Finance, 56(5), 1747–1764.

Bishop, K. C., 2007, “A Dynamic Model of Location Choice and Hedonic Valuation,” Work-
  ing Paper.




                                            36
Bourguignon, F., M. Fournier, and M. Gurgand, 2007, “Selection Bias Corrections Based on
  the Multinomial Logit Model: Monte Carlo Comparisons,” Journal of Economic Surveys,
  21(1), 174–205.

Brandt, W. M., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov, 2009, “Parametric Portfolio Policies:
  Exploiting Characteristics in the Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 22(9), 3411–3447.

Campbell, J. Y., 2006, “Household Finance,” The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1553–1604.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and N. Roussanov, 2009, “Conspicuous Consumption and Race,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 425–467.

Coval, J. D., and T. J. Moskowitz, 1999, “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference in
  Domestic Portfolios,” Journal of Finance, 54(6), 2045–2073.

       , 2001, “The Geography of Investment: Informed Trading and Asset Prices,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 109(4), 811–841.

Dahl, G. B., 2002, “Imobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
  Multiple Markets,” Econometrica, 70(6), 2367–2420.

DeMarzo, P. M., R. Kaniel, and I. Kremer, 2004, “Diversification as a Public Good: Com-
  munity Effects in Portfolio Choice,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1677–1716.

Diamond, R., 2016, “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging
  Location Choices by Skill: 1980–2000,” American Economic Review, 106(3), 479–524.

Dubin, J. A., and D. L. McFadden, 1984, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
  Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, Vol. 52(2), 345–362.

Fama, E. F., and J. D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), 607–636.


                                           37
Feng, L., and M. S. Seasholes, 2008, “Individual Investors and Gender Similarities in An
  Emerging Stock Market,” Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 16, 44–60.

French, K. R., and J. M. Poterba, 1991, “Investor Diversification and International Equity
  Markets,” American Economic Review, 81(2), 222–226.

Garleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen, 2013, “Dynamic Trading with Predictable Returns and
  Transaction Costs,” Journal of Finance, 68(6), 2309–2340.

Gomez, J.-P., R. Priestley, and F. Zapatero, 2009, “Implications of Keeping-Up-with-the-
  Joneses Behavior for the Equilibrium Cross Section of Stock Returns: International Evi-
  dence,” Journal of Finance, 64(6), 2703–2737.

Gompers, P. A., and A. Metrick, 2001, “Institutional Investors and Equity Prices,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 116(1), 229–259.

Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
  Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 1053–1073.

Heckman, J. J., 1977, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error (with an Application
  to the Estimation of Labor Supply Functions),” NBER Working Papers.

Hizmo, A., 2015, “Risk in Housing Markets: An Equilibrium Approach,” Working Paper.

Hjalmarsson, E., and P. Manchev, 2012, “Characteristic-Based Mean-Variance Portfolio
  Choice,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 36(5), 1392–1401.

Hong, H., W. Jiang, N. Wang, and B. Zhao, 2014, “Trading for Status,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 27, 3171–3212.

Huberman, G., 2001, “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies, 14(3),
  659–680.




                                            38
Ivković, Z., and S. Weisbenner, 2005, “Local Does as Local Is: Information Content of the
  Geography of Individual Investors’ Common Stock Investments,” The Journal of Finance,
  60(1), 267–306.

Kaplan, G., and S. Schulhofer-Wohl, 2012, “Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Inter-
  state Migration,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Keloharju, M., S. Knupfer, and E. Rantapuska, 2012, “Mutual Fund and Share Ownership
  in Finland,” Liiketaloudellinen aikakauskirja, 2, 178–198.

Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker, 2011, “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration
  Decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251.

Koijen, R. S., and M. Yogo, 2016, “An Equilibrium Model of Institutional Demand and Asset
  Prices,” Working Paper.

Lee, L.-F., 1983, “Generalized Econometric Models with Selectivity,” Econometrica, 51(2),
  507–512.

Lusardi, A., and O. Mitchell, 2007, “Financial Literacy and Retirement Preparedness: Evi-
  dence and Implications for Financial Education,” Business economics, 42(1), 35–44.

Luttmer, E. F. P., 2005, “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 963–1002.

Odean, T., 1999, “Do Investors Trade Too Much?,” American Economic Review, 89(5),
  1279–1298.

Ortalo-Magné, F., and A. Prat, 2016, “Spatial Asset Pricing: A First Step,” Economica, 83,
  130–171.

Pirinsky, C., and Q. Wang, 2006, “Does Corporate Headquarters Location Matter for Stock
  Returns?,” Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1991–2015.


                                              39
Puhani, P. A., 2000, “The Heckman Correction for Sample Selection and Its Critique,”
  Journal of Economic Surveys, 14(1), 53–68.

Sharpe, W. F., 1964, “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Condi-
  tions of Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19(3), 425–442.

Shumway, T., M. B. Szefler, and K. Yuan, 2011, “The Information Content of Revealed
  Beliefs in Portfolio Holdings,” Working Paper.

Strauss-Kahn, V., and X. Vives, 2009, “Why and Where Do Headquarters Move?,” Regional
  Science and Urban Economics, 39(2), 168–186.

Zhu, N., 2002, “The Local Bias of Individual Investors,” Yale ICF working paper.




                                            40
                                         Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table reports the summary statistics of all the variables in our sample. Panel A shows the characteristics
of the 57 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). Pop is the population number, LogPop is the log of
population, Unemp is the unemployment rate, Incomepc is the income per capita, HPI is the housing price
index, and LogHPI is the log of HPI. Panel B shows the demographics of the households in our sample.
Income is the income level. LogIncome is the log of Income. Age is the age of the household head. LogAge
is the log of Age. Professional, Managerial, SalesServices, WhiteCollar, BlueCollar, Male, Married are
dummy variables that equal one if the household head has a professional-type job, managerial-type job,
sales-services-type job, white collar-type job, blue collar-type job, is a male, and is married respectively.
Kids is the number of kids under the age of 18 in a household. Panel C refers to the stock holdings of the
households and their distance. Portwt is the portfolio of a household on a stock. Numst is the number of
stocks that a household holds. Distance is the distance between a household’s residential zip code area and
the zip code area of a stock’s headquarters. Away250m (Away100m) is a dummy indicating whether a stock
is headquartered more than 250 miles (100 miles) away from a household’s residence. Panel D shows the
characteristics of the Russell 1000 stocks. Price is the price of a stock. LogPrice is the log of Price. Size is
the market capitalization. LogSize is the log of Size. BTM is the book-to-market ratio. Turnover is share
turnover. Momentum is the past 12-month return. Volatility is the volatility of the monthly returns in the
past 12 months. The last 17 variables of Food to Other are industry dummy variables that equal to one if
a stock belongs to that particular industry. The 17 industries are defined based on the categorization of the
Fama-French 17-industry portfolios. The sample is from January 1991 to November 1996.

                   Panel A: Characteristics of 58 Metropolitan Statistical   Areas (MSAs)
                                             Mean     S.D.    Median          Min     Max
                  Pop (million)               2.50    2.80       1.50         0.68   18.00
                  LogPop                     14.43    0.71      14.25        13.43   16.69
                  Unemp (%)                   5.80    1.92       5.49         2.92   15.63
                  Incomepc ($ thousand)      23.62    3.91      23.06        16.96   44.88
                  HPI (=100 in 1995Q1)       99.19    7.85     100.37        64.57   123.15
                  LogHPI                      4.59    0.08       4.61         4.17    4.81
                                   Panel B: Demographics of Households
                                           Mean    S.D.     Median            Min      Max
                  Income ($ thousand)      82.40   31.69     87.50           10.00    125.00
                  LogIncome                11.22    0.50     11.38            9.21     11.74
                  Age (years)              47.73   10.59     46.00           24.00     94.00
                  LogAge                    3.84   0.22      3.83             3.18      4.54
                  Professional (%)          55.1
                  Managerial (%)            27.7
                  SalesServices (%)          8.4
                  WhiteCollar (%)            4.9
                  BlueCollar (%)             3.9
                  Male (%)                  92.6
                  Married (%)               79.2
                  Kids                      0.67    0.94       0              0          5
                                   Panel C: Household Stock Holdings
                                         Mean      S.D.     Median            Min       Max
                Portval ($ thousand)     39.84    152.10     14.72            0.00    5,108.17
                Portwt                  11.2bps     0.03       0                0         1
                Numst                     1.85      1.55       1                1        24
                Distance (degrees)       17.60     11.45     15.66            0.00     39.72
                Away250m (%)              88.2
                Away100m (%)              93.6



                                                      41
                      Table Cont’d: Summary Statistics

                 Panel D: Characteristics of Russell 1000 Stocks
                         Mean       S.D.       Median        Min        Max
Price ($)                33.94      25.06       29.62        0.03     684.00
LogPrice ($)              3.32       0.69        3.39       -3.51       6.53
Size ($ million)        3455.53   8106.10      1229.75       0.56    130000.00
LogSize ($ million)       7.23       1.25        7.11       -0.57      11.78
BTM                       0.43       4.09        0.43      -271.51     320.13
Turnover                  0.30       0.93        0.17        0.00     113.05
Momentum                  0.17       2.15        0.07       -0.99     217.09
Volatility                0.18       1.01        0.12        0.00      67.58
Food (%)                   4.0
Mines (%)                  2.0
Oil (%)                    6.0
Clths (%)                  1.0
Durbl (%)                  1.0
Chems (%)                  3.0
Cnsum (%)                 5.0
Cnstr (%)                  2.0
Steel (%)                  2.0
FabPr (%)                  1.0
Machn (%)                 12.0
Cars (%)                   2.0
Trans (%)                  3.0
Utils (%)                  6.0
Rtail (%)                  8.0
Finan (%)                 16.0
Other (%)                 26.0




                                      42
                                  Table 2: Local Bias among Households

This table provides summary statistics for the local bias of household portfolio holdings in our data. Column
2 (Avg. Distance from Holdings) reports the average distance of households
                                                                        P P from the stocks they hold in
their portfolios. The average distance in Column 2 is computed as I1 i j wji dij , where dij is the distance
between household i’s residential area and the headquarters area of stock j, wji is household i’s portfolio
weight on stockP  j, P
                     and I is the total number of households. Column 3 (Avg. Distance from Benchmark) is
computed as I1 i j w̄j dij , where w̄j is a benchmark Russell 1000 portfolio weight on stock j, and dij and
I are the same as in Column 2. In Row 1 the benchmark is the equally weighted portfolio. In Row 2 the
benchmark is the value-weighted portfolio. Column 4 (Difference) reports the difference between Column 2
and Column 3, which is the local bias in distance units. Column 5 (% Bias (LB)) reports the local bias (LB)
measure as a percentage. Column 6 (t-stat) reports the t-statistics for the LB measure. The sample period
is from January 1991 to November 1996.

                             Avg. Distance from
               Weights     Holdings    Benchmark          Difference   % Bias (LB)     t-stat
               Equal         9.38        17.67               8.29         45.45        52.74
               Value         9.38        17.65               8.26         43.72        47.65




                                                     43
                   Table 3: Conditional Logit Estimation of Household Location Choice

This table presents the results from the maximum likelihood estimation of the two conditional logit models
for household location choices. t-statistics (shown in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at
the household level, with *, **, *** denoting statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The choice
set of households consists of 57 MSAs. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if a
household resides in the specific MSA. The main explanatory variables are MSA characteristics that include
the log of the population number in an MSA (LogPop), the unemployment rate (Unemp), the income per
capita (Incomepc), and the log of the housing price index (LogHPI). We also include all pair-wise interaction
terms between these MSA characteristics variables and the household demographics variables LogIncome,
LogAge, Managerial, SalesServices, WhiteCollar, BlueCollar, Male, Married, Kids (shown in Panel B of
Table 1) in our main location choice model in Column 1. For comparison, we show the estimation results
from the model where the interaction terms are not included in Column 2. Log-likelihood is the estimated
log-likelihood value. Pseudo R2 is the McFadden’s pseudo R2 measure based on the estimated log-likelihood
value. N is the number of observations.

                                                              (1)           (2)
                            LogPop                          -0.265     0.938***
                                                           (-0.64)       (71.12)
                            Unemp                           -0.418     -0.124***
                                                           (-1.51)      (-14.17)
                            Incomepc                      -0.240**     0.075***
                                                           (-2.42)       (24.00)
                            LogHPI                          -3.712      0.507***
                                                           (-1.12)        (4.73)
                            LogPop×LogIncome                0.051*
                                                            (1.70)
                            LogPop×LogAge                 0.156**
                                                            (2.48)
                            LogPop×Managerial             0.096***
                                                            (3.07)
                            LogPop×SalesServices             0.039
                                                            (0.76)
                            LogPop×WhiteCollar            0.210***
                                                            (3.19)
                            LogPop×BlueCollar                0.093
                                                            (1.28)
                            LogPop×Male                      0.056
                                                            (1.15)
                            LogPop×Married                 -0.064*
                                                           (-1.83)
                            LogPop×Kids                     -0.012
                                                           (-0.79)
                            Unemp×LogIncome                 -0.008
                                                           (-0.44)
                            Unemp×LogAge                   0.094**
                                                            (2.18)
                            Unemp×Managerial                 0.003
                                                            (0.15)
                            Unemp×SalesServices             -0.006
                                                           (-0.17)
                            Unemp×WhiteCollar                0.058
                                                            (1.41)
                            Unemp×BlueCollar              0.118***
                                                            (3.04)


                                                     44
Table Cont’d: Conditional Logit Estimation of Household Location Choice

                                            (1)      (2)
           Unemp×Male                     0.013
                                          (0.34)
           Unemp×Married                  -0.010
                                         (-0.42)
           Unemp×Kids                     0.017*
                                          (1.72)
           Incomepc×LogIncome          0.051***
                                          (6.96)
           Incomepc×LogAge             -0.045***
                                         (-3.06)
           Incomepc×Managerial            -0.009
                                         (-1.24)
           Incomepc×SalesServices         -0.018
                                         (-1.48)
           Incomepc×WhiteCollar           -0.002
                                         (-0.09)
           Incomepc×BlueCollar            0.003
                                          (0.16)
           Incomepc×Male               -0.051***
                                         (-4.89)
           Incomepc×Married            -0.038***
                                         (-4.64)
           Incomepc×Kids                  0.000
                                          (0.08)
           LogHPI×LogIncome            0.936***
                                          (3.96)
           LogHPI×LogAge                -1.186**
                                         (-2.32)
           LogHPI×Managerial              -0.269
                                         (-1.09)
           LogHPI×SalesServices           -0.333
                                         (-0.86)
           LogHPI×WhiteCollar             0.253
                                          (0.46)
           LogHPI×BlueCollar            -1.258**
                                         (-2.22)
           LogHPI×Male                   -0.777*
                                         (-1.67)
           LogHPI×Married               -0.607**
                                         (-2.05)
           LogHPI×Kids                 -0.516***
                                         (-4.20)

           Log-likelihood              -38579.5    -38747.5
           Pseudo R2                     0.109       0.105
           N                            610584      610584




                                  45
       Table 4: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice, No Correction for Location Selection
This table presents the maximum likelihood estimation results from our Tobit models for household portfolio choices, without
any corrections for location selection biases. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and their
t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household
i. The key explanatory variable is Distance, the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code
area of stock j’s headquarters. Other variables include controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, and MSA
characteristics. The household demographics controls are: the log of a household’s income (LogIncome), the log of the age
of a household head (LogAge), dummy variables for a household head’s job codes (Managerial to BlueCollar), gender (Male)
and marital status (Married), and the number of kids under the age of 18 a household has (Kids). The stock characteristics
controls are: the log of the price (LogPrice), the log of the market capitalization (LogSize), the book-to-market ratio (BTM), the
turnover ratio (Turnover), the momentum of the past 12 months (Momentum), and the volatility (Volatility). Industry controls
denote 17 dummy variables for stocks belonging to the 17 Fama-French industry portfolios (the base in the regressions is the
Food industry). Controls for MSA characteristics include: the log of the population number (LogPop), the unemployment rate
(Unemp), the income per capita (Incomepc), the log of the housing price index (LogHPI), and the subscripts c and h denote
household residential and stock headquarters areas respectively. The constant term and the standard deviation of the normal
error term in the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                        Dependent Variable: Portfolio Weight wji
                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
                    Distance                  -0.012***       -0.012***        -0.013***         -0.014***
                                              (-20.301)       (-20.422)        (-22.815)         (-23.610)
                    LogIncome                                  0.034***         0.030**            0.028**
                                                                (2.899)          (2.575)           (2.396)
                    LogAge                                    0.086***         0.090***           0.096***
                                                                (3.573)          (3.796)           (4.039)
                    Managerial                                 -0.025**          -0.023*           -0.021*
                                                               (-2.134)         (-1.959)          (-1.841)
                    SalesServices                             -0.043***         -0.037**          -0.036**
                                                               (-2.631)         (-2.296)          (-2.208)
                    WhiteCollar                                  -0.029           -0.031            -0.029
                                                               (-1.449)         (-1.557)          (-1.457)
                    BlueCollar                                  -0.053*          -0.051*           -0.049*
                                                               (-1.955)         (-1.946)          (-1.844)
                    Male                                         0.019             0.025             0.028
                                                                (1.065)          (1.413)           (1.604)
                    Married                                      -0.019           -0.016            -0.015
                                                               (-1.363)         (-1.159)          (-1.078)
                    Kids                                       -0.013**         -0.014**          -0.013**
                                                               (-2.318)         (-2.491)          (-2.359)
                    LogPrice                                                   -0.376***         -0.381***
                                                                               (-29.959)         (-29.896)
                    LogSize                                                    0.429***           0.429***
                                                                                (53.107)          (52.566)
                    BTM                                                         0.099***          0.100***
                                                                                 (6.373)           (6.483)
                    Turnover                                                    0.396***          0.376***
                                                                                (29.004)          (27.120)
                    Momentum                                                    -0.035**          -0.036**
                                                                                (-2.390)          (-2.383)
                    Volatility                                                     0.020             0.004
                                                                                 (1.192)           (0.854)
                    LogPopc                                                                      -0.020***
                                                                                                  (-2.614)
                    Unempc                                                                          0.001
                                                                                                   (0.078)
                    Incomepcc                                                                       0.002
                                                                                                   (1.111)
                    LogHPIc                                                                         -0.356
                                                                                                   (0.963)
                    LogPoph                                                                      -0.029***
                                                                                                  (-3.625)
                    Unemph                                                                          0.010
                                                                                                   (1.394)
                    Incomepch                                                                     0.004***
                                                                                                   (2.662)
                    LogHPIh                                                                         -0.687
                                                                                                   (0.755)
                    Industry controls            NO                 NO              YES               YES



                                                               46
      Table 5: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice, with Correction for Location Selection
This table shows the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for location
selection biases. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown in
parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%,
1% respectively. The dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household i. The key explanatory
variable is Distance, the distance between household i’s zip code area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters. The
correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections are approximated by polynomials. The approximation
order is 1, 2 and 4. We do not include other control variables besides Distance in these Tobit regressions. The constant term
and the standard deviation of the normal error term in the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample
period is from January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                 Dependent Variable: Portfolio        Weight wji
                                                   (1)             (2)                      (3)
                           Distance            -0.010***      -0.008***                 -0.006***
                                               (-17.794)      (-14.698)                 (-11.068)
                           psc                 3.122***      14.558***                  61.141***
                                                (17.670)       (14.732)                  (16.171)
                           pdh                 1.167***          -0.402                  9.133***
                                                 (9.577)       (-0.884)                   (4.336)
                           pdc                 -0.889***      -3.507***                -19.156***
                                                (-6.013)       (-7.908)                  (-9.249)
                           (psc )2                            -0.880***                -14.106***
                                                              (-10.726)                 (-12.590)
                           (pdh )2                              0.062**                 -2.799***
                                                                (2.546)                  (-6.012)
                           pdh pdc                             0.284***                  3.816***
                                                                (8.208)                   (7.422)
                           (pdc )2                             0.135***                  3.013***
                                                                (5.366)                   (7.430)
                           (psc )3                                                     103.173***
                                                                                         (10.037)
                           (pdh )3                                                      24.822***
                                                                                          (6.241)
                           (pdh )2 pdc                                                  -0.262***
                                                                                         (-5.986)
                           pdh (pdc )2                                                  -0.246***
                                                                                         (-6.437)
                           (pdc )3                                                     -18.787***
                                                                                         (-6.252)
                           (psc )4                                                    -236.548***
                                                                                         (-8.186)
                           (pdh )4                                                     -64.993***
                                                                                         (-5.849)
                           (pdh )3 pdc                                                   0.633***
                                                                                          (4.528)
                           (pdh )2 (pdc )2                                               0.006***
                                                                                          (3.863)
                           pdh (pdc )3                                                   0.498***
                                                                                          (4.985)
                           (pdc )4                                                      39.799***
                                                                                          (5.670)




                                                              47
Table 6: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection, Full Controls
This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for location
selection bias, and with controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industries and MSA characteristics included.
The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on
standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The
dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household i. The key explanatory variable is Distance,
the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters. The household
demographics controls LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics controls LogPrice to Volatility, the industry controls, and
the MSA characteristics controls LogPopc to LogHPIh are the same as those shown in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders
of the polynomials used for approximating the correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The
constant term and the standard deviation of the normal error term in the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes.
The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                      Dependent Variable: Portfolio Weight   wji
                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)
 Distance            -0.011***   -0.008***   -0.006*** -0.011*** -0.009*** -0.007***          -0.012***   -0.009***   -0.007***
                     (-17.890)   (-14.769)   (-11.140) (-19.944) (-16.682) (-13.280)          (-20.716)   (-17.356)   (-13.726)
 LogIncome            0.029**      0.027**      0.017    0.039*** 0.032***        0.024**      0.043***    0.030**        0.019
                       (2.445)     (2.196)     (1.379)     (3.343)    (2.739)     (2.047)       (3.637)     (2.497)     (1.591)
 LogAge              0.083***    0.089***    0.088*** 0.094*** 0.100*** 0.105***               0.101***   0.102***    0.105***
                       (3.468)     (3.687)     (3.657)     (3.995)    (4.216)     (4.435)       (4.294)     (4.319)     (4.426)
 Managerial           -0.029**    -0.027**    -0.029**     -0.021*    -0.021*      -0.019        -0.017     -0.021*     -0.019*
                      (-2.401)    (-2.303)    (-2.451)    (-1.774)   (-1.769)    (-1.575)      (-1.434)    (-1.759)    (-1.651)
 SalesServices       -0.044***   -0.043***    -0.040**    -0.039**   -0.038**    -0.036**      -0.038**    -0.037**    -0.034**
                      (-2.697)    (-2.669)    (-2.494)    (-2.432)   (-2.365)    (-2.218)      (-2.377)    (-2.285)    (-2.092)
 WhiteCollar           -0.038*    -0.048**    -0.042**      -0.018    -0.035*     -0.034*        -0.008     -0.040*      -0.034
                      (-1.866)    (-2.286)    (-1.989)    (-0.910)   (-1.692)    (-1.646)      (-0.387)    (-1.896)    (-1.640)
 BlueCollar           -0.056**    -0.058**    -0.053**     -0.045*    -0.049*      -0.043        -0.039     -0.048*     -0.043*
                      (-2.092)    (-2.132)    (-1.970)    (-1.731)   (-1.859)    (-1.630)      (-1.473)    (-1.835)    (-1.663)
 Male                   0.020        0.024      0.021        0.021     0.027        0.027         0.021     0.031*       0.030*
                       (1.117)     (1.356)     (1.155)     (1.215)    (1.582)     (1.590)       (1.236)     (1.819)     (1.720)
 Married                -0.013      -0.010      -0.001     -0.023*     -0.015      -0.008      -0.028**      -0.011      -0.004
                      (-0.968)    (-0.740)    (-0.095)    (-1.680)   (-1.104)    (-0.631)      (-2.041)    (-0.840)    (-0.350)
 Kids                 -0.013**    -0.012**    -0.012** -0.015*** -0.013**        -0.013**     -0.014***    -0.012**    -0.012**
                      (-2.244)    (-2.047)    (-2.064)    (-2.626)   (-2.390)    (-2.313)      (-2.597)    (-2.261)    (-2.212)
 LogPrice                                                -0.376*** -0.375*** -0.370***        -0.379***   -0.378***   -0.374***
                                                         (-29.875) (-29.701) (-29.438)        (-29.690)   (-29.620)   (-29.423)
 LogSize                                                 0.430*** 0.428*** 0.423***            0.429***    0.428***    0.426***
                                                          (52.684)   (52.579)    (52.524)      (52.525)    (52.389)    (52.429)
 BTM                                                     0.101*** 0.101*** 0.102***            0.102***    0.101***   0.102***
                                                           (6.442)    (6.402)     (6.390)       (6.534)     (6.466)     (6.461)
 Turnover                                                0.391*** 0.385*** 0.370***            0.370***    0.368***   0.356***
                                                          (28.643)   (28.299)    (27.110)      (26.714)    (26.527)    (25.424)
 Momentum                                                 -0.036**   -0.035**    -0.035**      -0.037**    -0.036**    -0.036**
                                                          (-2.419)   (-2.409)    (-2.407)      (-2.427)    (-2.372)    (-2.384)
 Volatility                                                 0.020      0.024        0.017        0.003       0.006        0.001
                                                           (1.181)    (1.307)     (1.231)       (0.870)     (0.933)     (0.870)
 LogPopc                                                                                         0.008       -0.013     -0.040*
                                                                                                (0.718)    (-0.790)    (-1.832)
 Unempc                                                                                          -0.002      -0.003      -0.003
                                                                                               (-0.440)    (-0.684)    (-0.544)
 Incomepcc                                                                                       0.003        0.001      -0.004
                                                                                                (1.542)     (0.267)    (-1.542)
 LogHPIc                                                                                         -0.303      -0.199      -0.047
                                                                                                (1.326)     (1.213)     (0.839)
 LogPoph                                                                                         0.010        0.013   -0.110***
                                                                                                (0.798)     (0.514)    (-4.760)
 Unemph                                                                                          0.011        0.007    0.023***
                                                                                                (1.452)     (1.000)     (3.331)
 Incomepch                                                                                     0.007***    0.006***     -0.005*
                                                                                                (3.919)     (2.784)    (-1.892)
 LogHPIh                                                                                         -0.552      -0.441       0.016
                                                                                                (1.113)     (1.349)     (1.385)
 Industry controls     NO          NO           NO          YES         YES         YES            YES      YES         YES
 Ψ1st                  YES         YES          YES         YES         YES         YES            YES      YES         YES
 Ψ2nd                  NO          YES          YES         NO          YES         YES            NO       YES         YES
 Ψ3rd                  NO          NO           YES         NO          NO          YES            NO       NO          YES
 Ψ4th                  NO          NO           YES         NO          NO          YES            NO       NO          YES




                                                              48
                  Table 7: Economic Effects of Distance on Household Portfolio Weights

This table shows the economic effect of a one standard deviation increase in Distance on the portfolio
weight of a household on a stock, from different specifications of our household portfolio choice model. The
economic effect is calculated based on the marginal effect of Distance on the portfolio weight from the Tobit
estimation, with all other control variables anchored at their mean levels. The marginal effect is computed
in each monthly estimation and then averaged across all months. Corrections denote whether the 4th order
correction function for location selection bias is included, and Full Controls denote whether the full set of
controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industry and MSA characteristics are included.
The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                            Full Controls      No          Yes
                            Corrections
                            No                               -3.8bps     -1.9bps
                            Yes                              -1.8bps     -0.9bps




                                                     49
Table 8: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection, Full Con-
trols, Sub-samples based on Income and Age
This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for loca-
tion selection biases, and with controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industries and MSA characteristics
included. The sub-samples are defined based on the median household income and age (i.e. using the cartesian product of
their values below and above) in every month. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and
their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household
i. The key explanatory variable is Distance, the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area
of stock j’s headquarters. The household demographics controls LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics controls LogPrice
to Volatility, the industry controls, and the controls for MSA characteristics LogPopH to LogHPIS are the same as those shown
in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders of the polynomials used for approximating the correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and
Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The constant term and the standard deviation of the normal error term in the Tobit
regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                           Poor and Young                                       Rich and Young
                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
   Distance               -0.016***    -0.014*** -0.011***      -0.008***      -0.013***   -0.011*** -0.009***      -0.007***
                          (-14.449)    (-12.701) (-10.336)       (-8.103)      (-10.380)    (-9.161)     (-7.713)    (-6.257)
   LogIncome                  0.014        0.031       0.011       -0.002          0.130       0.145        0.108       0.053
                            (0.663)      (1.476)     (0.490)     (-0.143)        (0.642)     (0.717)      (0.537)     (0.276)
   LogAge                    0.092         0.098       0.095        0.095         0.106        0.108        0.112       0.122
                            (1.214)      (1.298)     (1.260)      (1.267)        (1.204)     (1.243)      (1.285)     (1.404)
   Managerial                -0.010       -0.004      -0.007       -0.007         -0.011      -0.003       -0.007      -0.004
                           (-0.439)     (-0.186)    (-0.349)     (-0.315)       (-0.550)    (-0.212)     (-0.394)    (-0.271)
   SalesServices             -0.027       -0.030      -0.030       -0.027         -0.053     -0.059*       -0.052      -0.045
                           (-1.110)     (-1.222)    (-1.251)     (-1.130)       (-1.495)    (-1.681)     (-1.445)    (-1.251)
   WhiteCollar               -0.013        0.013      -0.031       -0.021         -0.032       0.003       -0.034      -0.026
                           (-0.389)      (0.407)    (-0.929)     (-0.631)       (-0.490)     (0.068)     (-0.522)    (-0.324)
   BlueCollar                 0.007        0.019       0.006        0.015      -0.146***   -0.133*** -0.148***      -0.135***
                            (0.175)      (0.414)     (0.164)      (0.343)       (-3.004)    (-2.700)     (-3.026)    (-2.838)
   Male                      0.005        -0.005       0.005       0.003          0.046        0.037        0.051       0.051
                            (0.166)     (-0.149)     (0.164)      (0.103)        (1.339)     (1.084)      (1.444)     (1.423)
   Married                   -0.025      -0.040*      -0.022       -0.015          0.020       0.001        0.027       0.033
                           (-1.140)     (-1.766)    (-0.955)     (-0.668)        (0.524)    (-0.015)      (0.688)     (0.822)
   Kids                      -0.015      -0.017*      -0.015       -0.014         -0.016      -0.017       -0.015      -0.015
                           (-1.591)     (-1.754)    (-1.616)     (-1.507)       (-1.285)    (-1.450)     (-1.242)    (-1.179)
   LogPrice               -0.420***    -0.419*** -0.416***      -0.412***      -0.377***   -0.374*** -0.373***      -0.372***
                          (-16.937)    (-16.832) (-16.738)      (-16.658)      (-13.758)   (-13.617) (-13.604)      (-13.614)
   LogSize                 0.487***     0.487***    0.485***     0.482***       0.433***   0.433***      0.432***    0.431***
                           (31.793)     (31.775)    (31.712)     (31.685)       (24.755)    (24.713)     (24.730)    (24.780)
   BTM                     0.103***    0.106***     0.104***     0.106***        0.073**     0.074**      0.073**    0.073**
                            (3.511)      (3.561)     (3.520)      (3.526)        (2.088)     (2.101)      (2.041)     (2.018)
   Turnover                0.448***    0.442***     0.437***     0.426***       0.402***   0.395***      0.392***    0.380***
                           (17.407)     (17.168)    (17.001)     (16.422)       (13.421)    (13.196)     (13.039)    (12.463)
   Momentum                -0.054**     -0.054**     -0.053*      -0.053*       -0.065**    -0.066**     -0.065**    -0.064**
                           (-1.963)     (-1.966)    (-1.935)     (-1.912)       (-2.153)    (-2.190)     (-2.157)    (-2.131)
   Volatility                 0.094        0.093       0.098        0.091          0.069       0.069        0.068       0.062
                            (1.517)      (1.530)     (1.589)      (1.516)        (1.004)     (1.017)      (1.034)     (1.002)
   LogPopc                  -0.025*        0.010       0.011       -0.019         -0.013       0.027       -0.013      -0.003
                           (-1.827)      (0.454)     (0.446)     (-0.468)       (-0.916)     (1.084)     (-0.354)    (-0.023)
   Unempc                    0.005         0.000      -0.003       -0.003         -0.002      -0.003       -0.003      -0.005
                            (0.179)     (-0.287)    (-0.614)     (-0.497)       (-0.249)    (-0.346)     (-0.339)    (-0.546)
   Incomepcc                 0.003         0.004       0.002       -0.004          0.002       0.005        0.000       0.001
                            (1.002)      (1.146)     (0.638)     (-0.828)        (0.484)     (1.200)      (0.038)     (0.063)
   LogHPIc                   -0.242       -0.174       0.092        0.174         -0.368      -0.244        0.032       0.303
                            (0.594)      (0.887)     (1.087)      (0.769)        (0.349)     (0.640)      (0.551)     (0.418)
   LogPoph                  -0.030*        0.012      -0.004     -0.102**         -0.026       0.024        0.054     -0.091*
                           (-1.746)      (0.565)    (-0.129)     (-2.288)       (-1.453)     (0.866)      (1.091)    (-1.735)
   Unemph                    0.011         0.010       0.009        0.021          0.008       0.009        0.003      0.019
                            (0.666)      (0.579)     (0.471)      (1.373)        (0.579)     (0.599)      (0.300)     (1.347)
   Incomepch                 0.002         0.005       0.001       -0.009          0.005    0.010**       0.011*       -0.006
                            (0.889)      (1.601)     (0.543)     (-1.579)        (1.412)     (2.292)      (1.954)    (-0.918)
   LogHPIh                   -0.566       -0.410      -0.049       0.463*         -0.719      -0.563       -0.546      -0.259
                            (1.143)      (1.349)     (1.637)      (1.758)        (0.562)     (0.814)      (0.845)     (0.502)
   Industry controls         YES         YES          YES           YES          YES          YES         YES          YES
   Ψ1st                      NO          YES          YES           YES          NO           YES         YES          YES
   Ψ2nd                      NO          NO           YES           YES          NO           NO          YES          YES
   Ψ3rd                      NO          NO           NO            YES          NO           NO          NO           YES
   Ψ4th                      NO          NO           NO            YES          NO           NO          NO           YES



                                                               50
Table Cont’d: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection, Full
Controls, Sub-samples based on Income and Age

                                        Poor and Old                                     Rich and Old
                           (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)        (13)        (14)         (15)       (16)
  Distance            -0.013***   -0.011*** -0.009***      -0.007***   -0.011***   -0.009*** -0.007***      -0.006***
                      (-12.655)   (-11.193)     (-9.474)    (-7.593)    (-9.444)    (-7.981)     (-6.654)    (-5.226)
  LogIncome               0.000       0.012       -0.002      -0.014      0.072        0.084        0.060       0.009
                        (0.037)     (0.586)     (-0.051)    (-0.608)     (0.320)     (0.375)      (0.254)     (0.009)
  LogAge                 0.100        0.106        0.106       0.103      -0.025      -0.014       -0.009      -0.017
                        (1.325)     (1.403)      (1.417)     (1.395)    (-0.277)    (-0.156)     (-0.094)    (-0.185)
  Managerial             -0.023      -0.020       -0.024      -0.023     -0.042*      -0.036      -0.040*     -0.043*
                       (-1.055)    (-0.915)     (-1.118)    (-1.058)    (-1.768)    (-1.524)     (-1.717)    (-1.819)
  SalesServices          -0.027      -0.028       -0.028      -0.028      -0.039      -0.042       -0.039      -0.035
                       (-0.891)    (-0.949)     (-0.964)    (-0.971)    (-1.014)    (-1.107)     (-1.023)    (-0.933)
  WhiteCollar            -0.034      -0.020       -0.046      -0.044      -0.063      -0.039       -0.086      -0.068
                       (-1.095)    (-0.641)     (-1.400)    (-1.335)    (-1.211)    (-0.747)     (-1.509)    (-1.176)
  BlueCollar           -0.078**    -0.070**     -0.079**    -0.078**      -0.096      -0.082       -0.096      -0.084
                       (-2.387)    (-2.163)     (-2.420)    (-2.427)    (-1.588)    (-1.372)     (-1.477)    (-1.256)
  Male                   0.045        0.041      0.054*        0.049       0.047       0.042        0.046      0.048
                        (1.526)     (1.394)      (1.826)     (1.628)     (1.069)     (0.965)      (1.113)     (1.076)
  Married                 0.002      -0.010        0.007       0.014      -0.047     -0.062*       -0.045      -0.034
                        (0.059)    (-0.417)      (0.289)     (0.614)    (-1.264)    (-1.653)     (-1.165)    (-0.886)
  Kids                   -0.010      -0.011       -0.009      -0.010      -0.005      -0.007       -0.004      -0.005
                       (-0.782)    (-0.833)     (-0.749)    (-0.757)    (-0.360)    (-0.499)     (-0.317)    (-0.382)
  LogPrice            -0.405***   -0.404*** -0.403***      -0.399***   -0.282***   -0.278*** -0.278***      -0.275***
                      (-17.552)   (-17.534) (-17.501)      (-17.378)   (-11.101)   (-10.913) (-10.899)      (-10.850)
  LogSize              0.416***    0.416***    0.416***     0.413***    0.356***   0.356***      0.355***    0.352***
                       (27.612)    (27.641)     (27.484)    (27.586)    (21.833)    (21.801)     (21.823)    (21.851)
  BTM                  0.119***   0.121***     0.119***     0.121***    0.091***   0.093***      0.093***    0.094***
                        (4.314)     (4.343)      (4.295)     (4.285)     (2.927)     (2.951)      (2.946)     (2.959)
  Turnover             0.330***   0.325***     0.323***     0.312***    0.302***   0.295***      0.293***    0.281***
                       (12.793)    (12.650)     (12.578)    (12.060)    (10.547)    (10.275)     (10.227)     (9.709)
  Momentum                0.001       0.001        0.002       0.001      -0.039      -0.040       -0.039      -0.039
                        (0.356)     (0.332)      (0.364)     (0.326)    (-1.236)    (-1.275)     (-1.260)    (-1.249)
  Volatility             -0.139      -0.140       -0.137      -0.141       0.005       0.006        0.006      -0.001
                       (-1.102)    (-1.105)     (-1.068)    (-1.102)     (0.275)     (0.294)      (0.300)     (0.292)
  LogPopc                -0.019      -0.003       -0.026     -0.074*      -0.018       0.009       -0.035      -0.080
                       (-1.247)    (-0.137)     (-0.806)    (-1.764)    (-1.089)     (0.354)     (-0.930)    (-1.314)
  Unempc                 0.002        0.000       -0.002       0.001      -0.002      -0.004       -0.003       0.001
                        (0.180)    (-0.074)     (-0.229)     (0.068)    (-0.294)    (-0.496)     (-0.384)    (-0.026)
  Incomepcc              0.005        0.005        0.003      -0.003      -0.004      -0.002       -0.005     -0.010*
                        (1.408)     (1.313)      (0.813)    (-0.855)    (-0.969)    (-0.587)     (-1.259)    (-1.675)
  LogHPIc                -0.373      -0.355       -0.312      -0.147      -0.372      -0.344       -0.362      -0.142
                        (0.549)     (0.628)      (0.630)     (0.644)     (0.486)     (0.647)      (0.244)     (0.070)
  LogPoph              -0.031**       0.001       -0.007   -0.154***     -0.027*       0.020        0.068     -0.107*
                       (-2.160)     (0.071)     (-0.261)    (-3.489)    (-1.732)     (0.747)      (1.467)    (-1.815)
  Unemph                 0.009        0.010        0.007     0.025**      0.010        0.012        0.005      0.023*
                        (0.670)     (0.742)      (0.537)     (2.106)     (0.844)     (0.979)      (0.454)     (1.858)
  Incomepch              0.003      0.005*         0.004      -0.005      0.006*   0.010***      0.013***      -0.002
                        (1.225)     (1.683)      (1.107)    (-1.177)     (1.905)     (2.691)      (2.835)    (-0.341)
  LogHPIh                -0.792      -0.676       -0.593      -0.135      -0.688      -0.527       -0.534      -0.187
                        (0.167)     (0.286)      (0.387)     (0.444)    (-0.520)    (-0.286)     (-0.012)    (-0.201)
  Industry controls     YES         YES         YES             YES      YES         YES         YES          YES
  Ψ1st                  NO          YES         YES             YES      NO          YES         YES          YES
  Ψ2nd                  NO          NO          YES             YES      NO          NO          YES          YES
  Ψ3rd                  NO          NO          NO              YES      NO          NO          NO           YES
  Ψ4th                  NO          NO          NO              YES      NO          NO          NO           YES




                                                           51
Table 9: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice, Using Higher Order Polynomials to Approximate
Correction Functions

This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with cor-
rections for location selection biases, where the correction functions for location selections are approximated
by high order polynomials from the 5th order to the 6th order. The regressions control for household demo-
graphics, stock characteristics and MSA characteristics. The results are time-series averages of the monthly
coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the
household level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent vari-
able wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household i. The key explanatory variable is Distance,
the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters.
For clarity purposes, we only show the coefficient estimates and their t-statistics for the Distance variable.
The Polynomial Order 5 to 6 on the left denotes the order of the approximating polynomials used (from the
5th order to the 6th order), and Household demographics, Stock characteristics, Industry controls and Zip
code area characteristics denote whether controls for these variables are included respectively. The sample
period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                  Dependent Variable: Portfolio Weight wji
                 Polynomial Order                   Coef Estimate and t-stat of Distance
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)
                 5                               -0.0062***     -0.0068***       -0.0069***
                                                  (-11.330)      (-12.701)        (-12.906)
                 6                               -0.0059***     -0.0065***       -0.0066***
                                                  (-10.822)      (-12.152)        (-12.270)

                 Household demographics             YES             YES              YES
                 Stock characteristics              NO              YES              YES
                 Industry controls                  NO              YES              YES
                 MSA characteristics                NO              NO               YES




                                                      52
Table 10: Regressions of Value-weighted Market Portfolio Weights and Households’ Portfolio Weight Devi-
ations from the Market
This table shows the results from linear regressions of value-weighted market portfolio weights and households’ portfolio weight
deviations from the market on our set of explanatory variables. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient
estimates and their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, ***
denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable in columns (1) to (4) is the value-weighted
market portfolio (Russell 1000) weight, and in columns (5) to (8) is the deviation of a household’s portfolio weight from the
market. The explanatory variables are the same as before, which include the key variable Distance, the household demographics
controls LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics controls LogPrice to Volatility, the industry controls, and the controls for
MSA characteristics LogPopH to LogHPIS that are the same as those shown in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders of the
polynomials used for approximating the correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The constant
term in the linear regression is not reported for clarity purposes. All of the coefficient estimates are in basis points. The sample
period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                               Coefficient Estimates in bps
                                  VW Market      Port Weight                         Deviation from VW Market Port Weight
                             (1)       (2)             (3)          (4)              (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)
 Distance                -0.018*** -0.017***         0.002*        0.002        -0.429***     -0.354*** -0.289***   -0.217***
                         (-12.381) (-12.434)        (1.826)      (0.367)        (-25.565)     (-22.139) (-18.658)   (-14.522)
 LogIncome                         -0.656***      -0.222***    -0.258***           -0.181       0.394**     0.007     -0.295*
                                   (-60.060)      (-87.025)     (-65.718)        (-1.111)       (2.380)   (0.036)    (-1.732)
 LogAge                            -0.379***      -0.068***    -0.029***        -1.025***      -0.792**  -0.826**    -0.726**
                                   (-14.744)      (-10.600)      (-5.645)        (-2.974)      (-2.373)  (-2.484)    (-2.186)
 Managerial                        -0.324***      -0.080***    -0.075***          -0.316*        -0.095    -0.244      -0.238
                                   (-33.055)      (-36.036)     (-35.809)        (-1.861)      (-0.587)  (-1.463)    (-1.433)
 SalesServices                      0.058***       0.027***     0.042***           0.130         0.051      0.089       0.178
                                     (5.225)        (9.889)     (12.433)          (0.422)       (0.140)   (0.285)     (0.630)
 WhiteCollar                       -0.563***      -0.192***    -0.276***            0.447      1.317***     0.507       0.349
                                   (-13.171)      (-21.326)     (-33.165)         (1.415)       (4.018)   (1.492)     (1.053)
 BlueCollar                        -0.433***      -0.119***    -0.126***            0.225         0.616     0.388       0.428
                                   (-16.629)      (-18.557)     (-19.380)         (0.591)       (1.639)   (1.033)     (1.173)
 Male                                0.064*        0.070***     0.146***         -0.654**     -0.907***  -0.665**    -0.581**
                                     (1.799)       (10.952)     (20.540)         (-2.357)      (-3.308)  (-2.408)    (-2.091)
 Married                            0.533***      0.174***      0.229***           0.057       -0.495**    -0.020       0.249
                                    (26.265)       (40.284)     (50.343)          (0.208)      (-2.475)  (-0.152)     (1.098)
 Kids                               0.068***       0.036***     0.054***           0.027         -0.025     0.034      0.042
                                    (14.682)       (34.210)     (42.950)          (0.385)      (-0.238)   (0.504)     (0.623)
 LogPrice                                         -8.472***    -8.476***        -1.734***     -1.638*** -1.635***   -1.530***
                                                   (-11704)     (-11883)         (-6.342)      (-6.035)  (-6.021)    (-5.629)
 LogSize                                         20.336***     20.335***        -5.820***     -5.818*** -5.825***   -5.836***
                                                    (23682)      (39585)        (-25.436)     (-25.441) (-25.506)   (-25.592)
 BTM                                               1.361***     1.381***         0.806***      0.786***  0.768***    0.767***
                                                     (1046)       (1152)         (11.274)      (10.886)  (10.856)    (10.629)
 Turnover                                         -1.403***    -1.500***        10.600*** 10.355*** 10.238***        9.858***
                                                     (-583)       (-702)         (19.254)      (18.890)  (18.672)    (17.999)
 Momentum                                          0.916***     0.947***        -1.536***     -1.579*** -1.563***   -1.582***
                                                     (2230)       (1856)         (-5.892)      (-6.050)  (-6.009)    (-6.078)
 Volatility                                        0.477***     0.435***           1.127         1.112      1.167       1.229
                                                     (1088)       (1168)          (1.310)       (1.348)   (1.414)     (1.527)
 LogPopc                                                           0.013        -1.200***        -0.119    -0.172     -0.588*
                                                                 (1.397)         (-9.190)      (-0.674)  (-0.761)    (-1.724)
 Unempc                                                        -0.008***         0.377***      0.275***     0.130      0.143
                                                                 (-3.520)         (4.054)       (2.898)   (1.126)     (1.068)
 Incomepcc                                                        -0.001         0.179***      0.206***  0.194***    0.133***
                                                                 (-1.532)         (6.165)       (6.876)   (6.239)     (3.524)
 LogHPIc                                                        0.236***       -11.397*** -9.432*** -10.494*** -4.941***
                                                                 (4.270)          (5.443)       (5.867)   (5.395)     (4.982)
 LogPoph                                                        2.232***        -1.517***         0.333     0.756   -3.014***
                                                                (65.767)         (-5.911)       (1.129)   (1.187)    (-3.992)
 Unemph                                                        -0.870***         0.813***      0.775***  0.588***    1.106***
                                                                  (-214)          (4.223)       (3.882)   (2.854)     (5.236)
 Incomepch                                                      0.055***         0.236***      0.354***  0.347***      0.064
                                                                (26.338)          (4.872)       (6.712)   (6.043)     (0.558)
 LogHPIh                                                        7.746***        -35.526**      -31.756*   -31.079      -9.755
                                                                   (250)         (-1.991)      (-1.654)  (-1.255)    (-1.018)
 Industry controls         NO           NO           YES          YES             YES           YES          YES          YES
 Ψ1st                      YES          YES          YES          YES             NO            YES          YES          YES
 Ψ2nd                      YES          YES          YES          YES             NO            NO           YES          YES
 Ψ3rd                      YES          YES          YES          YES             NO            NO           NO           YES
 Ψ4th                      YES          YES          YES          YES             NO            NO           NO           YES



                                                                53
                         Table 11: Performance of Local versus Non-Local Stocks Adjusted for Location Selection

                This table shows the coefficient estimates of the distance variable (Distance) from the regressions of predicting
                investment returns of households: Ri,j,t+1 = α+βdisti,j,t +γ 0 Xi,j,t +Ψt +i,j,t+1 . These return regressions are
                performed at the monthly level. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates, and
                the associated t-statistics for the monthly estimates (shown in parentheses) are based on Newey-West HAC
                standard errors with a lag order of 3 for all of the regressions. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%,
                5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable is Ri,j,t+1 = wi,j,t rj,t+1 , where wi,j,t is household i’s portfolio
                weight on stock j in month t, and rj,t+1 is stock j’s excess return over the market return in month t + 1.
                The key explanatory variable is Distance (disti,j,t ), the distance between household i’s residential zip code
                area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters (in month t). HH Dem., Stock Char., Industry Ctrl.,
                and MSA Char. denote whether controls (at month t) for household demographics, stock characteristics,
                industry, and MSA characteristics are included respectively. Ψ approx. denotes the order of the polynomials
                used for approximating the correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for selection biases (in month t).




54
                The controls and the correction polynomials are the same as those used in the portfolio weight estimations.
                The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                             Dep Var: Ri,j,t+1 = wi,j,t rj,t+1 (in bps)                      Dep Var: Ri,j,t+1 = wi,j,t rj,t+1 (in bps)
                         (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)              (6)        (7)         (8)           (9)        (10)
     Distance         -0.0011*   -0.0009     -0.0007       -0.0003    -0.0001         -0.0017*  -0.0016*     -0.0014*       -0.0010    -0.0008
                      (-1.645)   (-1.623) (-1.560) (-0.916) (-0.505)                  (-1.781)   (-1.828)    (-1.834)      (-1.630) (-1.554)
     HH Dem.             NO        NO          NO            NO         NO              YES        YES         YES           YES        YES
     Stock Char.         NO        NO          NO            NO         NO              YES        YES         YES           YES        YES
     Industry Ctrl.      NO        NO          NO            NO         NO              YES        YES         YES           YES        YES
     MSA Char.           NO        NO          NO            NO         NO              YES        YES         YES           YES        YES
     Ψ approx.           NO         1st        2nd           4th        6th              NO         1st         2nd           4th        6th
                Figure 1: Geographical Distribution of Households and Russell 1000 Stocks

This figure depicts the geographical coordinates of the 10,594 households and the 900 stocks in the Russell
1000 Index. The address ZIP-codes of households and the stocks’ headquarters are converted to geographical
coordinates based on the correspondence provided by the US Census Bureau. The horizontal axis is in
longitude coordinates, while the vertical axis is in latitude coordinates. The blue circles indicate households,
while the red squares indicate stocks. The sample period is from January 1991 to November 1996.




                                                      55
Figure 2: Coefficient Estimates of Distance across Time from Various Portfolio Choice Regressions with Full
Controls

This figure depicts the coefficient estimates of our key explanatory variable Distance across the time periods
from various portfolio choice regressions with full household demographics, stock characteristics, industry
and MSA characteristics controls. The vertical axis shows the values of the estimates. The horizontal axis
shows the time periods (year-month). The blue line represents the estimates from the regression without
any correction for location selection biases, while the green dotted line, the orange dashed line and the
red dash-dotted line represent regressions with correction functions for location selections approximated by
polynomials of order 1, 2 and 4 respectively. The sample period is from January 1991 (199101) to November
1996 (199611).



                               Coef Estimates of DIST from Various Portfolio Choice Regressions, Full Controls
        0.000

        -0.002

        -0.004

        -0.006

        -0.008

        -0.010

        -0.012

        -0.014

        -0.016

        -0.018

        -0.020
                 199101




                                             199110



                                                               199204

                                                                        199207



                                                                                            199301




                                                                                                                       199310




                                                                                                                                                  199407




                                                                                                                                                                             199504



                                                                                                                                                                                               199510

                                                                                                                                                                                                        199601



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          199607
                          199104

                                    199107



                                                      199201




                                                                                   199210



                                                                                                     199304

                                                                                                              199307



                                                                                                                                199401

                                                                                                                                         199404



                                                                                                                                                           199410

                                                                                                                                                                    199501



                                                                                                                                                                                      199507




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 199604



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   199610
                                   no correction                                 correction, order 1                                 correction, order 2                                  correction, order 4




                                                                                                                       56
Figure 3: t-Statistics of Distance Estimates across Time from Various Portfolio Choice Regressions with Full
Controls

This figure depicts the t-statistics (based on the standard errors clustered at the household level) of the
coefficient estimates of our key explanatory variable Distance across the time periods from various portfolio
choice regressions with full household demographics, stock characteristics, industry and MSA characteristics
controls. The vertical axis shows the values of the t-statistics. The horizontal axis shows the time periods
(year-month). The blue line represents the t-statistics from the regression without any correction for location
selection biases, while the green dotted line, the orange dashed line and the red dash-dotted line represent
regressions with correction functions for location selections approximated by polynomials of order 1, 2 and
4 respectively. The sample period is from January 1991 (199101) to November 1996 (199611).



                                  t-stats of DIST Estimates from Various Portfolio Choice Regressions, Full Controls
         0.0


         -5.0


        -10.0


        -15.0


        -20.0


        -25.0


        -30.0
                199101




                                                      199201




                                                                                           199301

                                                                                                    199304




                                                                                                                               199401

                                                                                                                                          199404




                                                                                                                                                                     199501

                                                                                                                                                                              199504




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  199604

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           199607
                         199104

                                    199107

                                             199110



                                                               199204

                                                                        199207

                                                                                  199210




                                                                                                             199307

                                                                                                                      199310




                                                                                                                                                   199407

                                                                                                                                                            199410




                                                                                                                                                                                       199507

                                                                                                                                                                                                199510

                                                                                                                                                                                                         199601




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    199610
                                   no correction                                 correction, order 1                                    correction, order 2                                 correction, order 4




                                                                                                                      57
                                                  Figure 4: Coefficient Estimates of Distance in Sub-samples

This figure depicts the coefficient estimates of our key explanatory variable Distance, averaged across the
time periods, in the four sub-samples based on quantiles of income and age. We assign households to four
groups, namely "Poor and Young", "Rich and Young", "Poor and Old" and "Rich and Old", depending on
whether their income and age is below or above the corresponding median values. The group average ("Group
Average") and the whole sample ("Whole Sample") results are also shown. The solid blue bars represent the
average estimates from regressions without any correction for location selection biases, while the dashed
orange bars represent those from regressions with correction functions for location selections approximated
by polynomials of order 4. The sample period is from January 1991 (199101) to November 1996 (199611).



                                                            Average Distance Coef. Estimates in Sub-samples
                                           Poor and Young    Rich and Young    Poor and Old     Rich and Old     Groups Average   Whole Sample
                                  0.000

                                  -0.002

                                  -0.004
        Distance Coef. Estimate




                                  -0.006

                                  -0.008

                                  -0.010

                                  -0.012

                                  -0.014

                                  -0.016

                                  -0.018

                                                               No correction     Correction function of order 4 used




                                                                                      58
Internet Appendix For Online
      Publication Only




             59
Appendix Table 1: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection,
Full Controls, with Distance Indicator Variables
This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for location
selection bias, and with controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industries and MSA characteristics included.
The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on
standard errors clustered at the household level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The
dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household i. The key explanatory variable is Away, an
indicator variable that equals one if the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area of stock
j’s headquarters is greater than a specific threshold value. In columns (1) to (2), the distance (away) threshold is 100 miles,
and in columns (3) to (4) it is 250 miles. The household demographics controls LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics
controls LogPrice to Volatility, the industry controls, and the MSA characteristics controls LogPopc to LogHPIh are the same
as those shown in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders of the polynomials used for approximating the correction functions
Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The constant term and the standard deviation of the normal error term in
the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                       100 Miles Away              250 Miles Away
                                                        (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)
                            Away                   -0.629*** -0.429***         -0.479*** -0.266***
                                                   (-33.743) (-18.130)         (-30.970) (-15.941)
                            LogIncome                0.027**        0.020        0.026**      0.021*
                                                     (2.287)      (1.609)        (2.230)      (1.725)
                            LogAge                  0.106***    0.109***        0.099***     0.107***
                                                     (4.512)      (4.637)        (4.198)      (4.527)
                            Managerial               -0.021*       -0.019         -0.019       -0.016
                                                    (-1.809)     (-1.583)       (-1.598)     (-1.398)
                            SalesServices           -0.036**     -0.034**       -0.034**     -0.033**
                                                    (-2.214)     (-2.091)       (-2.111)     (-2.067)
                            WhiteCollar               -0.029       -0.033         -0.029       -0.031
                                                    (-1.453)     (-1.596)       (-1.460)     (-1.479)
                            BlueCollar                -0.041       -0.039         -0.041       -0.038
                                                    (-1.563)     (-1.498)       (-1.574)     (-1.446)
                            Male                      0.033*      0.033*          0.029*      0.029*
                                                     (1.947)      (1.930)        (1.668)      (1.702)
                            Married                   -0.012       -0.005         -0.014       -0.007
                                                    (-0.884)     (-0.378)       (-1.006)     (-0.530)
                            Kids                     -0.010*      -0.011*       -0.012**     -0.012**
                                                    (-1.870)     (-1.907)       (-2.139)     (-2.129)
                            LogPrice               -0.380*** -0.374***         -0.381*** -0.374***
                                                   (-29.864) (-29.402)         (-29.872) (-29.410)
                            LogSize                0.428***      0.426***       0.428***     0.426***
                                                    (52.441)     (52.381)       (52.466)     (52.390)
                            BTM                     0.099***    0.101***       0.098***      0.101***
                                                     (6.407)      (6.426)        (6.347)      (6.405)
                            Turnover                0.357***    0.348***       0.364***      0.351***
                                                    (25.582)     (24.808)       (26.343)     (25.125)
                            Momentum                -0.034**     -0.035**       -0.035**     -0.035**
                                                    (-2.171)     (-2.297)       (-2.229)     (-2.322)
                            Volatility                -0.002       -0.005         -0.008       -0.006
                                                     (0.719)      (0.756)        (0.600)      (0.728)
                            LogPopc                   -0.005       -0.023         -0.001       -0.027
                                                    (-0.594)     (-1.006)       (-0.105)     (-1.190)
                            Unempc                 -0.016***     -0.011**       -0.011**       -0.008
                                                    (-3.118)     (-2.076)       (-2.178)     (-1.502)
                            Incomepcc              -0.012*** -0.010***         -0.009*** -0.008***
                                                    (-6.212)     (-3.756)       (-4.650)     (-3.284)
                            LogHPIc                   -0.183        0.015         -0.414       -0.075
                                                    (-0.815)     (-0.429)       (-1.624)     (-0.511)
                            LogPoph                 -0.021**    -0.094***      -0.025*** -0.111***
                                                    (-2.502)     (-4.148)       (-3.088)     (-4.815)
                            Unemph                    -0.004     0.015**          -0.004      0.017**
                                                    (-0.908)      (2.187)       (-0.896)      (2.500)
                            Incomepch              -0.008*** -0.010***          -0.005**    -0.010***
                                                    (-3.494)     (-3.734)       (-2.309)     (-3.519)
                            LogHPIh                   -0.422        0.066         -0.740       -0.047
                                                    (-0.055)      (0.703)       (-0.584)      (0.615)
                            Industry controls         YES           YES          YES          YES
                            Ψ1st                      NO            YES          NO           YES
                            Ψ2nd                      NO            YES          NO           YES
                            Ψ3rd                      NO            YES          NO           YES
                            Ψ4th                      NO            YES          NO           YES



                                                               60
Appendix Table 2: Conditional Logit Estimation of Household Location Choice, Alternative Location-Choice
Models

This table presents the results from the maximum likelihood estimation of three alternative conditional
logit models for household location choices. t-statistics (shown in parentheses) are based on standard errors
clustered at the household level, with *, **, *** denoting statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively.
The choice set of households in Columns 1 and 2 consists of 57 MSAs, while in Column 3 of 53 MSAs. The
dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if a household resides in the specific MSA. In
Column 1, we exclude household income (and its interactions with MSA demographics) from the explanatory
variables. In Column 2, we exclude household income and job codes (and their interactions with MSA
demographics) from the explanatory variables. In Column 3, we include the financial characteristics of the
stocks with headquarters in each city as additional explanatory variables. All other explanatory variables are
the same as in Table 3. Log-likelihood is the estimated log-likelihood value. Pseudo R2 is the McFadden’s
pseudo R2 measure based on the estimated log-likelihood value. N is the number of observations.

                                                      (1)           (2)            (3)
                         LogPop                      0.323         0.349         -0.672
                                                    (1.33)        (1.44)        (-1.55)
                         Unemp                    -0.512***     -0.514***        -0.070
                                                    (-3.03)       (-3.04)       (-0.25)
                         Incomepc                  0.322***      0.316***      -0.249**
                                                    (5.78)        (5.70)        (-2.21)
                         LogHPI                    6.831***     6.857***         -4.636
                                                    (3.41)        (3.43)        (-1.34)
                         LogPrice_MSA                                         -0.446***
                                                                                (-8.87)
                         LogSize_MSA                                          0.140***
                                                                                 (8.84)
                         BTM_MSA                                              -0.484***
                                                                                (-5.31)
                         Turnover_MSA                                          1.790***
                                                                                (17.46)
                         Momentum_MSA                                         -0.308***
                                                                                (-4.08)
                         Volatility_MSA                                       -1.792***
                                                                                (-5.61)
                         LogPop×LogIncome                                     0.083***
                                                                                 (2.64)
                         LogPop×LogAge            0.147**        0.155**       0.173***
                                                   (2.35)         (2.47)         (2.61)
                         LogPop×Managerial        0.099***                      0.081**
                                                   (3.18)                        (2.47)
                         LogPop×SalesServices       0.035                         0.043
                                                   (0.70)                        (0.81)
                         LogPop×WhiteCollar       0.195***                     0.218***
                                                   (2.99)                        (3.16)
                         LogPop×BlueCollar          0.069                         0.062
                                                   (0.96)                        (0.80)
                         LogPop×Male                0.061         0.048           0.032
                                                   (1.25)        (1.00)          (0.63)
                         LogPop×Married            -0.046        -0.047         -0.062*
                                                   (-1.37)       (-1.39)        (-1.67)
                         LogPop×Kids               -0.012        -0.013          -0.014
                                                   (-0.78)       (-0.83)        (-0.88)




                                                      61
Table Cont’d: Conditional Logit Estimation of Household Location Choice, Alternative Location-Choice
Models

                                                   (1)         (2)           (3)
                       Unemp×LogIncome                                   -0.044**
                                                                          (-2.30)
                       Unemp×LogAge             0.095**     0.099**       0.100**
                                                 (2.21)      (2.29)        (2.27)
                       Unemp×Managerial           0.002                     0.021
                                                 (0.11)                    (1.01)
                       Unemp×SalesServices       -0.005                    -0.005
                                                 (-0.15)                  (-0.14)
                       Unemp×WhiteCollar          0.060                   0.070*
                                                 (1.49)                    (1.65)
                       Unemp×BlueCollar         0.121***                 0.154***
                                                 (3.17)                    (3.51)
                       Unemp×Male                 0.012       0.011         0.050
                                                 (0.32)      (0.30)        (1.31)
                       Unemp×Married             -0.012      -0.015        -0.017
                                                 (-0.54)     (-0.67)      (-0.68)
                       Unemp×Kids                0.018*      0.017*        0.018*
                                                 (1.72)      (1.65)        (1.77)
                       Incomepc×LogIncome                                0.054***
                                                                           (6.57)
                       Incomepc×LogAge          -0.048***   -0.048***   -0.056***
                                                  (-3.27)     (-3.27)     (-3.28)
                       Incomepc×Managerial        -0.006                   -0.012
                                                  (-0.83)                 (-1.36)
                       Incomepc×SalesServices    -0.021*                   -0.018
                                                  (-1.68)                 (-1.26)
                       Incomepc×WhiteCollar       -0.016                   -0.005
                                                  (-0.98)                 (-0.27)
                       Incomepc×BlueCollar        -0.020                    0.000
                                                  (-1.13)                  (0.01)
                       Incomepc×Male            -0.047***   -0.046***   -0.059***
                                                  (-4.51)     (-4.42)     (-4.66)
                       Incomepc×Married         -0.022***   -0.022***   -0.042***
                                                  (-2.80)     (-2.75)     (-4.43)
                       Incomepc×Kids               0.001       0.001        0.000
                                                  (0.22)      (0.26)       (0.05)
                       LogHPI×LogIncome                                  1.045***
                                                                           (4.23)
                       LogHPI×LogAge             -1.281**   -1.321***    -1.117**
                                                  (-2.50)     (-2.58)     (-2.09)
                       LogHPI×Managerial          -0.199                   -0.221
                                                  (-0.81)                 (-0.86)
                       LogHPI×SalesServices       -0.391                   -0.314
                                                  (-1.01)                 (-0.76)
                       LogHPI×WhiteCollar         -0.026                    0.395
                                                  (-0.05)                  (0.69)
                       LogHPI×BlueCollar        -1.691***                -1.221**
                                                  (-3.03)                 (-2.08)
                       LogHPI×Male                -0.694      -0.744       -0.756
                                                  (-1.50)     (-1.61)     (-1.53)
                       LogHPI×Married             -0.308      -0.285     -0.678**
                                                  (-1.06)     (-0.99)     (-2.19)
                       LogHPI×Kids              -0.509***   -0.508***   -0.529***
                                                  (-4.14)     (-4.14)     (-4.10)
                       MSA industry controls      NO          NO          YES
                       Log-likelihood           -38650.4    -38679.2    -36268.2
                       Pseudo R2                 0.1076      0.1069      0.1247
                       N                         610584      610584      553108




                                                  62
Appendix Table 3: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection,
Full Controls, No Income or No Income and Job Code in the Location Model
This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for location
selection biases, and with controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industries and MSA characteristics in-
cluded. We exclude either the income of a household or the income and job code of a household from the explanatory variables
in our location choice estimation (first-stage conditional logit estimation). No Income refers to the case in which we exclude
household income, while No Income and Job Code refers to the case in which we exclude household income and job code in our
location choice estimation. The results are time-series averages of the monthly coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown
in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level from our portfolio choice estimation. *, **, *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by
household i. The key explanatory variable is Distance, the distance between household i’s residential zip code area and the zip
code area of stock j’s headquarters. The household demographics controls LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics controls
LogPrice to Volatility, the industry controls, and the controls for MSA characteristics LogPopc to LogHPIh are the same as
those shown in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders of the polynomials used for approximating the correction functions
Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The constant term and the standard deviation of the normal error term in
the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample period is January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                           No Income                         No Income and Job Code
                                    (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)              (5)         (6)         (7)
        Distance               -0.014***       -0.012***   -0.009*** -0.007***         -0.012*** -0.009*** -0.007***
                               (-23.610)       (-20.605)    (-16.903) (-13.370)        (-20.575) (-16.630) (-13.111)
        LogIncome                0.028**         0.028**     0.027**    0.024**          0.028**     0.027**     0.023**
                                 (2.396)         (2.427)     (2.338)    (2.031)          (2.404)     (2.319)     (1.975)
        LogAge                  0.096***       0.101***     0.103***  0.107***          0.102***    0.103***    0.107***
                                 (4.039)         (4.287)     (4.363)    (4.512)          (4.350)     (4.347)     (4.513)
        Managerial               -0.021*          -0.014      -0.019     -0.018          -0.021*     -0.020*      -0.019
                                (-1.841)        (-1.173)     (-1.632)  (-1.549)         (-1.791)     (-1.753)   (-1.634)
        SalesServices           -0.036**        -0.040**    -0.037**   -0.033**         -0.037**    -0.037**    -0.034**
                                (-2.208)        (-2.467)     (-2.325)  (-2.064)         (-2.317)     (-2.279)   (-2.100)
        WhiteCollar               -0.029          -0.008     -0.039*     -0.025           -0.027      -0.028      -0.026
                                (-1.457)        (-0.402)     (-1.842)  (-1.197)         (-1.382)     (-1.428)   (-1.332)
        BlueCollar               -0.049*         -0.045*     -0.047*     -0.040          -0.048*     -0.047*      -0.043
                                (-1.844)        (-1.716)     (-1.804)  (-1.514)         (-1.825)     (-1.783)   (-1.612)
        Male                      0.028            0.020      0.032*     0.030*            0.018      0.033*     0.032*
                                 (1.604)         (1.167)     (1.826)    (1.728)          (1.070)     (1.889)     (1.784)
        Married                   -0.015         -0.026*      -0.012     -0.009          -0.027*      -0.010      -0.007
                                (-1.078)        (-1.888)     (-0.878)  (-0.676)         (-1.954)     (-0.705)   (-0.507)
        Kids                    -0.013**       -0.015***    -0.013**   -0.012**        -0.015***    -0.013**    -0.012**
                                (-2.359)        (-2.672)     (-2.326)  (-2.201)         (-2.708)     (-2.298)   (-2.135)
        LogPrice               -0.381***       -0.378***   -0.377*** -0.373***         -0.378*** -0.376*** -0.373***
                               (-29.896)       (-29.600)    (-29.552) (-29.403)        (-29.565) (-29.501) (-29.385)
        LogSize                 0.429***        0.429***    0.428***   0.425***         0.429***    0.428***    0.424***
                                (52.566)        (52.519)    (52.409)   (52.419)         (52.517)    (52.356)    (52.466)
        BTM                     0.100***       0.102***     0.101***  0.102***          0.102***    0.101***    0.103***
                                 (6.483)         (6.548)     (6.443)    (6.461)          (6.550)     (6.430)     (6.511)
        Turnover                0.376***       0.369***     0.367***  0.354***          0.369***    0.366***    0.351***
                                (27.120)        (26.606)    (26.433)   (25.241)         (26.581)    (26.385)    (24.972)
        Momentum                -0.036**        -0.037**    -0.036**   -0.036**         -0.037**    -0.036**    -0.036**
                                (-2.383)        (-2.452)     (-2.387)  (-2.375)         (-2.460)     (-2.385)   (-2.373)
        Volatility                 0.004           0.003       0.007     -0.001            0.003      0.007       -0.004
                                 (0.854)         (0.883)     (0.972)    (0.822)          (0.886)     (0.986)     (0.766)
        LogPopc                -0.020***           0.015      -0.009     -0.018           0.018       -0.011       0.002
                                (-2.614)         (1.232)     (-0.489)  (-0.643)          (1.412)     (-0.568)    (0.109)
        Unempc                    0.001           -0.002      -0.003     -0.004           -0.002      -0.003      -0.006
                                 (0.078)        (-0.424)     (-0.681)  (-0.796)         (-0.401)     (-0.633)   (-1.049)
        Incomepcc                 0.002           0.003*       0.001     -0.002           0.004*       0.001       0.000
                                 (1.111)         (1.740)     (0.374)   (-0.704)          (1.826)     (0.246)    (-0.062)
        LogHPIc                   -0.356          -0.287      -0.147     -0.034           -0.278      -0.117      -0.033
                                 (0.963)         (1.365)     (1.294)    (0.791)          (1.390)     (1.279)     (0.675)
        LogPoph                -0.029***          0.024*       0.013  -0.134***          0.028**       0.017   -0.179***
                                (-3.625)         (1.910)     (0.352)   (-4.884)          (2.161)     (0.396)    (-5.465)
        Unemph                    0.010            0.011       0.009  0.025***             0.012       0.009    0.029***
                                 (1.394)         (1.571)     (1.279)    (3.749)          (1.613)     (1.289)     (4.281)
        Incomepch               0.004***        0.008***    0.006***   -0.007**         0.009***    0.006*** -0.011***
                                 (2.662)         (4.473)     (2.781)   (-2.324)          (4.584)     (2.751)    (-3.143)
        LogHPIh                   -0.687          -0.509      -0.306      0.035           -0.493      -0.269      -0.040
                                 (0.755)         (1.189)     (1.454)    (1.110)          (1.218)     (1.458)     (0.620)
        Industry controls          YES             YES         YES        YES              YES         YES         YES
        Ψ1st                        NO             YES         YES        YES              YES         YES         YES
        Ψ2nd                        NO              NO         YES        YES               NO         YES         YES
        Ψ3rd                        NO              NO          NO        YES               NO          NO         YES
        Ψ4th                        NO              NO          NO        YES               NO          NO         YES

                                                               63
Appendix Table 4: Tobit Estimation of Household Portfolio Choice with Correction for Location Selection,
Full Controls, with Stock Characteristics in the Location Model
This table presents the results from the Tobit regressions of our household portfolio choice model with corrections for loca-
tion selection biases, and with controls for household demographics, stock characteristics, industries and MSA characteristics
included. We control for the financial characteristics of the stocks with headquarters in each city in the explanatory variables
in our location choice estimation (first-stage conditional logit estimation). The results are time-series averages of the monthly
coefficient estimates and their t-statistics (shown in parentheses) based on standard errors clustered at the household level from
our portfolio choice estimation. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, 1% respectively. The dependent variable
wji is the portfolio weight allocated to stock j by household i. The key explanatory variable is Distance, the distance between
household i’s residential zip code area and the zip code area of stock j’s headquarters. The household demographics controls
LogIncome to Kids, the stock characteristics controls LogPrice to Volatility, the industry controls, and the controls for MSA
characteristics LogPopc to LogHPIh are the same as those shown in Table 4. Ψ1st to Ψ4th denote the orders of the polynomials
used for approximating the correction functions Ψs (pi,c ) and Ψd (pi,h , pi,c ) for location selections. The constant term and the
standard deviation of the normal error term in the Tobit regression are not reported for clarity purposes. The sample period is
January 1991 to November 1996.

                                                        Dependent Variable: Portfolio Weight wji
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                           Distance              -0.014***     -0.011***     -0.009***     -0.007***
                                                 (-23.547)     (-19.741)     (-16.063)      (-12.813)
                           LogIncome              0.029**       0.035***       0.030**        0.024*
                                                   (2.485)       (2.909)       (2.459)       (1.953)
                           LogAge                0.092***      0.092***       0.104***      0.101***
                                                   (3.853)       (3.844)       (4.310)       (4.225)
                           Managerial              -0.020*       -0.020*        -0.017        -0.018
                                                  (-1.741)      (-1.692)      (-1.475)       (-1.559)
                           SalesServices          -0.036**      -0.037**      -0.036**      -0.036**
                                                  (-2.218)      (-2.304)      (-2.223)       (-2.226)
                           WhiteCollar              -0.026        -0.020        -0.024        -0.028
                                                  (-1.330)      (-0.986)      (-1.137)       (-1.361)
                           BlueCollar              -0.044*        -0.041        -0.041        -0.036
                                                  (-1.656)      (-1.543)      (-1.533)       (-1.340)
                           Male                     0.026          0.023       0.030*          0.023
                                                   (1.500)       (1.303)       (1.718)       (1.345)
                           Married                  -0.015        -0.020        -0.015        -0.011
                                                  (-1.089)      (-1.443)      (-1.100)       (-0.777)
                           Kids                   -0.013**      -0.013**      -0.012**      -0.012**
                                                  (-2.275)      (-2.381)      (-2.160)       (-2.208)
                           LogPrice              -0.380***     -0.381***     -0.375***     -0.369***
                                                 (-29.624)     (-29.726)     (-29.310)      (-28.910)
                           LogSize                0.428***      0.429***      0.425***      0.419***
                                                  (52.080)      (51.987)      (51.794)      (51.684)
                           BTM                    0.098***     0.098***       0.098***      0.101***
                                                   (6.325)       (6.333)       (6.318)       (6.386)
                           Turnover               0.376***     0.376***       0.358***      0.340***
                                                  (26.820)      (26.731)      (24.865)      (23.328)
                           Momentum               -0.037**      -0.036**      -0.035**      -0.035**
                                                  (-2.386)      (-2.300)      (-2.276)       (-2.316)
                           Volatility                0.005         0.005         0.011         0.003
                                                   (0.854)       (0.830)       (1.012)       (0.918)
                           LogPopc               -0.023***        -0.002         0.000         0.003
                                                  (-2.753)      (-0.126)       (0.009)       (0.276)
                           Unempc                    0.002        -0.001        -0.004        -0.004
                                                   (0.116)      (-0.372)      (-0.899)       (-0.880)
                           Incomepcc                 0.002         0.003        0.001          0.000
                                                   (1.024)       (1.422)       (0.244)       (0.096)
                           LogHPIc                  -0.299        -0.322        -0.136        -0.098
                                                   (1.232)       (1.274)       (1.399)       (1.171)
                           LogPoph               -0.030***     -0.036***     -0.086***     -0.114***
                                                  (-3.736)      (-3.258)      (-6.517)       (-8.205)
                           Unemph                    0.010         0.006        0.009       0.019***
                                                   (1.417)       (0.832)       (1.158)       (2.591)
                           Incomepch              0.004***        0.003*        -0.004     -0.007***
                                                   (2.792)       (1.727)      (-1.611)       (-2.649)
                           LogHPIh                  -0.693        -0.716        -0.183         0.325
                                                   (0.807)       (0.892)       (1.286)       (1.599)
                           Industry controls         YES           YES           YES           YES
                           Ψ1st                       NO           YES           YES           YES
                           Ψ2nd                       NO            NO           YES           YES
                           Ψ3rd                       NO            NO            NO           YES
                           Ψ4th                       NO            NO            NO           YES


                                                               64
