                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         PLEDGEABILITY, INDUSTRY LIQUIDITY, AND FINANCING CYCLES

                                      Douglas W. Diamond
                                          Yunzhi Hu
                                       Raghuram G. Rajan

                                       Working Paper 23055
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23055


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




Diamond and Rajan thank the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago Booth and the
National Science Foundation for research support. Rajan also thanks the Stigler Center. We are
grateful for helpful comments from three referees, the Editor, Florian Heider, Alan Morrison,
Martin Oehmke, and Adriano A. Rampini, as well as workshop participants at the OXFIT 2014
conference, Chicago Booth, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond, the NBER 2015 Corporate Finance Summer Institute, Sciences Po, American
Finance Association meetings in 2016 in San Francisco, Princeton, MIT Sloan, the European
Central Bank, Boston University, Harvard, Stanford, Washington University in St. Louis, and the
University of Maryland. The authors have read the Journal of Finance’s disclosure policy and
have no conflicts of interest to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Douglas W. Diamond, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Pledgeability, Industry Liquidity, and Financing Cycles
Douglas W. Diamond, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 23055
January 2017, Revised June 2020
JEL No. E00,E02,E59,G20,G21,G31,G33

                                         ABSTRACT

Why do firms choose high debt when they anticipate high valuations, and underperform
subsequently?We propose a theory of financing cycles where the importance of creditors’ control
rights over cash flows (“pledgeability”) varies with industry liquidity. The market allows firms
take on more debt when they anticipate higher future liquidity. However, both high anticipated
liquidity and the resulting high debt limit their incentives to enhance pledgeability. This has
prolonged adverse effects in a downturn. Because these effects are hard to contract upon, higher
anticipated liquidity can also reduce a firm’s current access to finance.


Douglas W. Diamond                             Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business                       Booth School of Business
University of Chicago                          University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                       and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu               raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Yunzhi Hu
CB #3490
University of North Carolina
CB #3490, 4103 McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 48823
United States
Yunzhi_Hu@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
Why do downturns following episodes of high firm valuations result in more protracted recessions (see
Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) and López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017))? 1 One traditional
rationale is based on the idea of “debt overhang” – debt built up during the boom restricts investment and
borrowing during the bust. However, if everyone knows that debt reduces investment, debt holders have
an incentive to write down the debt in return for a stake in the firm’s growth. For debt overhang to be a
serious concern, the firm and debt holders must be unable to negotiate value-enhancing contracts. Another
view is that borrowers cannot be trusted to pursue only value-enhancing investments, even in a downturn,
in which case debt overhang is needed to constrain the borrower’s investment – overhang is a second-best
solution to a fundamental moral hazard problem (see Hart and Moore (1995) or Shleifer and Vishny
(1992)). The immediate questions raised by the latter view is why would we want to constrain borrowers
more in bad times following high valuations, when the constraints imposed by debt are already high, and
why would the moral hazard problem be so much more serious in such episodes.

           In this paper we provide an explanation for high debt and show why its consequences are more
acute following periods of high valuations and rational optimism about future values. In doing so, we
differentiate between financier control rights that are due solely to high resale prices for assets and control
rights that derive from pledging cash flows. The former are especially useful in enforcing claims during
an asset price boom, while the latter facilitate enforcement of external claims at other times, including
downturns. The transition between regimes in which the importance of control rights associated with cash
flows differ significantly causes the debt built up during a boom to have prolonged adverse effects during
a downturn.

           To be more specific, consider an industry that requires special industry knowledge to produce.
Within the industry, there are firms run by incumbents, there are experts (those who know the industry
well enough to be able to run firms as efficiently as the incumbents), and there are industry outsiders
(such as financiers who do not know how to run industry firms but have general managerial/financial
skills).

           Financiers have two sorts of control rights: control through the right to repossess and sell the
underlying asset being financed if payments are missed, and control over the cash flows generated by the
asset. The first right only requires the frictionless enforcement of property rights in the economy, which
we assume. This right is particularly valuable when a large number of capable potential buyers are willing


1
 Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) document a negative correlation between pre-crisis spreads and credit growth, as
well as a positive correlation between the change in spread as the crisis hits and the severity of the subsequent crisis.
López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) show that narrow credit spreads predict a slowdown in real activity in
subsequent years, including in GDP growth, investment, consumption, and employment.

                                                            2
to pay a high price for the firm’s assets. Greater wealth among experts (which we term industry liquidity)
increases the availability of this asset-sale-based financing. Because we analyze a single industry, high
levels of this industry liquidity can be interpreted as an economy-wide boom.

        The second type of control right is conferred on creditors by the firm’s incumbent manager as she
makes the firm’s cash flows more appropriable by, or pledgeable to, creditors over the medium term. For
example, she could improve accounting quality or set up escrow accounts so that cash flows are hard to
divert. In general, an increase in experts’ higher prospective wealth (that is, liquidity) as well as in their
ability to borrow against the future cash flows of the firm they buy (that is, pledgeability) will increase
their bids for the firm. In turn, higher prospective bids will increase debt recovery, and thus the
willingness of creditors to lend up front. It therefore follows that higher liquidity and pledgeability
increase the firm’s debt capacity.

        However, pledgeability is endogenously determined. Consider the incentives of an incumbent
firm manager while choosing cash flow pledgeability for the next period. We assume that she may sell
some or all of the firm next period with some probability, either because she is no longer capable of
running it or because she needs to raise capital for new investment. If she owned the firm and had no debt
claims outstanding, she would undoubtedly want to increase pledgeability, especially if the direct costs of
doing so are small – this would simply increase the amount that she would obtain by selling the firm to
experts if she lost ability to run the firm. If she has taken on debt, however, enhancing cash flow
pledgeability is a double-edged sword. Higher bids from experts also allow existing creditors to collect
more if the incumbent stays in control because creditors have the right to seize assets and sell them when
not paid in full. In such situations, the incumbent has to “buy” the firm from creditors by outbidding
experts (or paying debt fully). The higher the probability that she retains ability and stays in control, and
the higher the outstanding debt, the lower her incentives to raise pledgeability. Higher outstanding debt
thus reduces the incumbent manager’s incentives to raise pledgeability.

        Now consider the effect of industry liquidity on pledgeability choice. If experts are rational, they
will never pay more for the firm than its fundamental value. When future industry liquidity is very high,
experts will have enough wealth to buy the firm at full value without needing to borrow more against the
firm’s future cash flows. If so, higher pledgeability has no effect on how much experts will bid to pay for
the firm. In other words, high future liquidity crowds out the need for pledgeability in enhancing debt
repayments. We therefore have two influences on pledgeability – the level of outstanding debt and the
anticipated liquidity of experts. The key results of the paper stem from the interaction between the two.




                                                       3
        To see this, consider a prospective boom, which is anticipated with high probability, during
which experts will have plenty of wealth. Repayment of any corporate borrowing today is enforced by
the potential high resale value of the firm – at the future date, wealthy experts will bid full value for the
firm as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992), without needing high pledgeability to make their bid. The high
anticipated resale value increases the promised payment that a firm can credibly repay and thus the
amount it can borrow today (see Acharya and Viswanathan (2011)).

        Since pledgeability is not needed to enforce repayment in a future highly liquid state, a high
probability of such a state encourages creditors to lend large amounts to the incumbent up front, even
though they know that doing so crowds out the incumbent’s incentives to enhance pledgeability, and even
if there is a possible low liquidity state in which pledgeability is needed to enhance creditor rights.
Prospective liquidity thus encourages borrowing, which can crowd out pledgeability. Consequently, if the
low-liquidity state is realized, the enforceability of the firm’s debt, as well as its borrowing capacity, will
fall significantly because pledgeability has been set low. Experts, also hit by the downturn, no longer have
much personal wealth, nor does the low-cash-flow pledgeability of the firm allow them to borrow against
future cash flows to pay for the firm. The adverse effect of anticipated liquidity on pledgeability via
higher leverage is a key new focus of this paper.

        Since external claims are high in these low-liquidity episodes, the firm may be sold to outsiders.
While industry outsiders have little ability to operate the firm themselves, this may be a virtue – outsiders
have strong incentives to improve cash flow pledgeability because they do not want to own the firm long
term, but rather want to sell the firm back to experts at a high price. Outsiders play a critical role,
therefore, not because they are flush with funds, but because they are not subject to moral hazard over
pledgeability in the face of substantial debt.

        Importantly, creditors have little incentive to renegotiate fixed debt claims down during a
downturn, since reallocation of the firm to industry outsiders may be the outcome that maximizes their
claims, given past pledgeability choices. Consequently, in a downturn following a boom, a larger number
of the new asset owners will be less-productive industry outsiders, reducing average productivity. Eisfeldt
and Rampini (2006, 2008) provide evidence consistent with this argument.

        Eventually, as the economy recovers, the outsiders sell the assets back to the more productive
experts, as their higher pledgeability increases experts’ ability to raise money against future cash flows.
Recoveries following an asset price boom and high leverage are thus delayed, not just because debt has to
be written down – where frictions in writing down debt would increase the length of the delay – but also
because firms have to restore the pledgeability of their cash flows to cope in a world in which liquidity is

                                                       4
scarcer. It is the need to raise pledgeability that may prolong the downturn. Higher anticipated liquidity in
some future states can therefore induce more eventual misallocation in less liquid states, a spillover effect
between states that operates through leverage and pledgeability! Importantly, we will show that, through
its effect on leverage and pledgeability, higher anticipated liquidity can reduce the amount of funding that
can be raised up front.

        All this suggests a financing cycle in the amount of leverage available to firms. In booms, when
high future resale prices (as opposed to fire-sale prices) for assets are likely, financial markets allow
firms to raise more with extremely high promised debt repayment. Such booms can be followed by busts,
with the ability to raise debt financing lower than normal because pledgeability was previously set low.
The economy need not oscillate only between booms and busts. In normal times, when anticipated
liquidity is lower than that prevailing in booms, the credit market will naturally limit the amount that an
incumbent promises, so as to ensure that she has incentives to keep pledgeability high. Indeed, firms will
be able to raise more with moderate promised payments than with very high promised payments.
Effectively, the financial market provides a lower leverage limit at such times.

        The leverage overhang on the pledgeability choice resembles traditional debt overhang (Myers
(1977)), whereby decisions of equity-maximizing managers, such as investment, are distorted when they
cause an increase in the value of outstanding debt. The pledgeability decision that we model is similarly
distorted because while benefiting the incumbent by raising the firm’s resale value, it also helps creditors
collect payments.

        Our model is also related to Jensen (1986). In Jensen (1986), leverage alone is sufficient to get
managers to pay out free cash flow. Instead, we argue that the extent of “free” cash flow is endogenous,
with one of the effects of high debt being that firm managers tunnel even more cash flow out of the firm,
thus “freeing” it. As Jensen (1997) argues, and our model suggests, the prospective future sale of the firm
in management buyouts may be what is needed to incentivize management to not tunnel.

        Our paper is most closely related to Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008),
as we discuss in Section I below where we lay out the model. Our paper also explains why asset price
booms based on a combination of liquidity and leverage can be fragile (see, for example, Borio and Lowe
(2002), Adrian and Shin (2010), and Rajan and Ramcharan (2015)), and offers a reason why credit cycles
emerge, though a dynamic extension to the model is needed to explain the properties of such cycles fully
(see, for example, Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)). 2 More broadly, our paper provides theoretical

2
 See Benmelech and Bergman (2011), Coval and Stafford (2007), and Shleifer and Vishny (2011) for
comprehensive reviews.

                                                      5
underpinnings for financing cycles (Borio (2014)), where a simultaneous and sustained increase in asset
prices and leverage could significantly increase the persistence of business cycle downturns.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we describe the basic framework and
the timing of decisions in a two-period model, and in Section II we provide two motivating examples.
Section III proceeds with the formal analysis on pledgeability choices when financing is provided via debt
contracts. The maximum amount that can be pledged to outside investors is characterized, and the
fundamental trade-offs in the model are explained. We discuss robustness of the model to alternative
assumptions in Section IV, and empirical implications and the relationship to the literature in Section V.
Finally, in Section VI we conclude.

                                             I. The Framework

A. The Industry and States of Nature
         Consider an industry with three dates (0, 1, 2) and two periods between these dates, with date t
marking the end of period t. A period is a phase of the financing cycle (see Borio (2014), for example),
which extends over several years. At the beginning of each period, the state of the industry is realized.
The industry can prosper in good state G with probability q , or can be distressed in bad state B with
probability of 1-q. In period 2, we assume that the industry returns to state G for sure – this is meant to
represent the long-run state of the industry (we model economic fluctuations but not apocalypse). Figure 1
illustrates the possible states of nature.




                                             Figure 1. States of nature.




                                                         6
B. Agents and the Asset
        There are two types of agents in the economy. Expert (E) managers have high ability to produce
with an asset, which we call the firm. Some mutual specialization is established over the period between
the incumbent expert manager and the firm, which creates a value to incumbency. Therefore, when the

state is G, only the expert manager in place at the beginning of that period t can produce cash flows Ct

with the asset over the period. In the B state, however, even an expert manager cannot produce cash
flows. There are also inexpert industry outsiders who are low ability (L) managers. They cannot produce
cash flows regardless of the state. Financiers can be thought of as low-ability managers who have funds
to lend provided they break even. All agents are risk neutral. We ignore time discounting, which is just a
matter of rescaling the cash flows.

        A high-ability expert manager retains her ability into the next period with probability      θ < 1,
otherwise she turns into a low-ability manager. Think of      θ as the degree of firm stability. Intuitively, the
critical capabilities for success are likely to be stable in a mature firm, or in a firm in an industry with
little technological innovation. However, in a young firm that has yet to settle into its strategic niche or in
an industry with significant innovation, the critical capabilities for success can vary over time — a
manager who is appropriate in a particular period may be ineffective in the next. This is the sense in
which an incumbent can lose ability, which occurs with higher probability in a young firm or a changing
industry. As we will see below, an alternative interpretation is that (1 − θ ) is the probability of arrival of

an investment opportunity or a funding need. Stability      θ under that interpretation would be the degree to
which the firm has no future funding needs.

        The incumbent’s loss of ability in the next period becomes known to all shortly before the end of
the current period. Loss of ability is not an industry-wide occurrence and is independent across managers.
So even if a manager loses her ability, a large number of other experts are equally able to take her place
next period. If a new expert takes over at the end of the current period, she will shape the firm according
to her idiosyncratic management style, producing cash flows with the firm’s assets in future periods in
good states. A manager’s (both the incumbent and other bidders) type next period is observable but not
verifiable and hence cannot be written into contacts.

C. Financial Contracts
        A manager can raise money from financiers against the asset by writing one-period financial

contracts. We focus on debt contracts with promised payments at the end of period t, denoted by Dt , for

most of our analysis. We can justify this by assuming that the aggregate state st is observable but not


                                                        7
verifiable. Below we will discuss how the analysis changes when the aggregate state st is verifiable and

contracts can be state-contingent.

         Having acquired control of the firm, the incumbent manager would like to keep the realized cash
flow for herself rather than share it with financiers. Two types of financier control rights force the
manager to repay the external claims. First, the financier automatically gets paid the “pledgeable” portion
of the cash flow produced over the period, up to the amount of the financier’s claim. Second, just before
the end of the period, the financier has the right to seize and auction the firm to the highest bidder if he
has not been paid in full. As in Hart and Moore (1994), giving financiers this right in case of default can
induce the borrower to pay more than the pledgeable cash flow this period. Below, we describe these two
control rights in more detail.

D. Control Rights over Cash Flow: Pledgeability
        Let us define cash flow pledgeability as the fraction of realized cash flows that are automatically
directed to an outside financier. The incumbent chooses pledgeability this period. It is then embedded

next period, and persists for the entire period. Thus, pledgeability γ t +1 set in period t is the fraction of

period t+1’s cash flows that can be automatically paid to outside financiers. The range of feasible

pledgeability levels is   γ t +1 ∈ [γ , γ ] , where γ and γ satisfy 0 ≤ γ < γ ≤ 1 . In general, the range of
feasible pledgeability levels is determined by the institutions supporting corporate governance (such as

regulators, investigative agencies, laws, and the judiciary). Setting    γ t +1 > γ   costs ε ≥ 0. We present our

results primarily for the case in which ε → 0 ; positive     ε   only alters the results quantitatively. While
any level of pledgeability between γ and γ is feasible, in equilibrium the incumbent will choose either

γ t +1 = γ or γ t +1 = γ because, as will be clear shortly, the incumbent’s payoff is always linear in
pledgeability γ t +1 .

         A manager can tunnel cash flows out of the firm and into her pockets in a number of ways.
Increasing pledgeability means closing off tunnels for cash flows generated by a future manager. For
example, by moving to a simpler corporate structure today, or by making contracts with suppliers more
transparent with stricter rules on dealing with related parties, the incumbent ensures that future cash flows
cannot be diverted to some nontransparent entity (see, for example, Rajan (2012)). By improving the
quality of the accounting systems in place, including the detail and timeliness of disclosures, and by
hiring a reputable auditor, the incumbent restricts the scope for future managers to play accounting games
to hide cash flows. Any rapid shift from transparent accounting procedures to less transparent procedures,


                                                         8
or from a reputable auditor to a less reputable auditor, would be noticed and invite closer scrutiny,
defeating the objective of tunneling. Similarly, by taking on debt with strict financial covenants, such as
minimum liquidity ratios, minimum collateral requirements, or sinking fund requirements, the incumbent
ensures that the firm is positioned to raise new debt with similar tough covenants when the current debt
matures, giving future lenders the confidence that cash flows will not be tunneled. More broadly, any
structure that enhances future corporate governance, and cannot be fully reversed quickly, enhances
future pledgeability.

        While the laxity of the general governance environment in a country determines γ , the scope

for an individual corporation to improve on it determines γ . Note also that while we assume that
pledgeability can be fixed for the next period, we do not assume that it is fixed permanently. Over time,
accountant quality can decrease when accountants come up for rotation, for example, and as the
environment itself changes, new ways of tunneling emerge. Allowing pledgeability to be chosen for only
the next period captures the sense of fixity over the medium term but not over the long run.

        While a low-ability incumbent does not have industry-specific managerial ability to generate cash
flows, he has general governance capabilities and can set next period’s pledgeability. Below we will see
that his inability to generate cash flows can sometimes be a benefit.

E. Control Rights over Assets: Auction and Resale
        If creditors have not been paid in full from the pledged cash flows and any additional sum the
incumbent voluntarily pays, then they get the right to auction the firm to the highest bidder at date t . One
can think of such an auction as a form of bankruptcy. The incumbent manager who has failed to make the
full payment may also bid in this auction. Therefore, the incumbent can retain control by either paying off
the creditors in full (possibly by borrowing once again against future pledgeable cash flows) or by paying
less than the full contracted amount and outbidding other bidders in the auction. The precise format of the
auction does not matter, so long as what the incumbent is forced to pay rises with what other bidders are
willing to bid. We assume that the incumbent can always bid using other proxies, so contracts that ban
the incumbent from participating in the auction after nonpayment are infeasible. Essentially, as in Hart
and Moore (1994), we rule out “take-it-or-leave-it” threats from the lender that would allow him to
extract all the cash the incumbent has without invoking the outside option of selling the asset to others.

F. Initial Conditions and Wealth
        Let ω1         and ω1
              I , s1        E , s1
                                     respectively be the wealth levels of the incumbent and experts in state s1,

with the latter also termed industry liquidity. The wealth level of the incumbent is augmented by the


                                                             9
unpledged cash flows she generates within the firm       (1 − γ 1 ) C1 in state G but not in B, so ω
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                    I ,G
                                                                                                           ≥ ω1I , B .

We also assume that ω1         ≥ ω1E , B because industry prosperity lifts the private income of experts as they
                        E ,G


work as contractors, consultants, or employees in the industry.

        We assume that at date 0, the firm already exists, put together by a founder who has to sell. The
reason for this sale is unimportant – the founder may want to retire, may have lost her ability, or may be
bankrupt in which case the firm is being sold by the receiver. All that matters is that she sells out entirely
and thus wants the highest price. To simplify notation, for now we assume that each bidder must always
raise the largest amount from financiers to avoid being outbid. A sufficient condition to guarantee this is
that all potential bidders have no wealth at date 0 and compete by promising creditors the largest possible
payment that is credible.

G. Efficiency
         The measure of unconstrained economic efficiency that we use in the rest of this paper is the
extent to which the asset is in the hands of the most productive owner at the time. We do not model
investment, but instead assume that the asset exists and can be bought by a bidder in an up-front auction.
The auction determines the price of the asset and the type of incumbent. An alternative approach, which
follows easily from the analysis, is to put a minimum scale on the value of real inputs to be assembled
into the firm at date 0, and assume that the firm starts at that date only if enough funding is available to
buy those inputs. As a result, inefficient underinvestment may occur if moral hazard (which we analyze
shortly) pushes available funds at date 0 below this floor. We illustrate an extreme consequence of this
channel later, with an example showing that higher liquidity ex post, working through leverage and lower
pledgeability, can actually reduce the amount raised up front.

H. Timing
        The timing of events is described in Figure 2. After the initial auction, the incumbent takes on

debt D1 that is due at date 1. We assume that the incumbent sets pledgeability        γ 2 only knowing the
probability of states G and B. Next, the state is realized, and her ability in period 2 is known. Production

then takes place and the pledgeable fraction     γ 1 of cash flows (set in the previous period) goes to
financiers automatically if state G is realized. The incumbent either pays the remaining balance due or
enters the auction. The period ends with a new incumbent potentially in place.




                                                         10
                                      Figure 2. Timing and decisions in period 1.




                                         II. Two Motivating Examples

    In this section we develop two examples where we illustrate three effects that together constitute the
core of our results. First, both high pledgeability and higher anticipated liquidity weakly enhance
enforceable debt repayment. Second, higher outstanding debt reduces the incumbent’s incentives to set
pledgeability high. Third, higher anticipated liquidity reduces the need for high pledgeability in enforcing
debt repayment. Taken together, these three effects imply that higher anticipated liquidity may incentivize
the incumbent to take so much debt that she neglects pledgeability, but this may be the debt level that
allows her to raise the most funding up front. In sum, higher anticipated liquidity enhances leverage and
crowds out pledgeability.

Let the parameters for the examples be given as follows: C1 =0, C2 =1, θ =0.5, γ =0.3, γ =0.6, ω1 =0.8,
                                                                                                      I ,G


ω1I , B =0, ω1E , B =0, γ 1 =0, q =0.8, and ε → 0 .

EXAMPLE 1: Low anticipated industry liquidity: ω1
                                                       E ,G
                                                              =0.2.

        Debt repayment at date 1 is enforced by the lender, who can seize the firm and auction it to
experts. The incumbent has to either pay the amount due or match the auction price, and will choose to
pay the lower of the two, defaulting strategically if the anticipated auction price is less than the promised
debt payment. Of course, if the incumbent loses ability, she has no option but to sell in an auction since
she cannot run the firm. She will use the auction proceeds to pay debt.

        Raising the pledgeability of future cash flows can increase the amount that experts can borrow
against the firm and (weakly) increase their bids for the firm’s assets. Similarly, higher realized expert
wealth or liquidity will also increase expert bids. In state G, an expert can bid using her personal wealth
0.2 and the amount that she can borrow against future cash flows. If period-2 pledgeability has been set
high (this is set earlier in period 1 before the state is known), then she can borrow 0.6 times the date-2
cash flow of one and therefore will bid up to 0.8 in total. If pledgeability has been set low, the amount
she can borrow against date-2 cash flows falls to 0.3, in which case she can only bid up to 0.5. Similarly,

                                                          11
in state B where her wealth is zero, the expert can bid up to 0.6 if pledgeability has been set high and 0.3
if set low. In sum, higher liquidity and higher pledgeability increase expert bids, and thus enforce
greater repayment. Note that all of these bids fall below one, the value of the future cash flows from the
asset, which means that the asset is underpriced and an expert who acquires the asset will enjoy some
positive rents.

        Now let us examine the effect of higher debt on the incumbent’s pledgeability choice. Consider
first an incumbent manager’s choice when she owns the entire firm and has no debt due at date 1. In this
case, since the incumbent who retains ability pays nothing to retain control of the firm, the pledgeability
choice will have no effect on how much she has to pay to remain in control of the firm. On the other hand,
if the incumbent manager loses ability and needs to sell the firm, higher pledgeability will increase expert
bids by 0.3 and thus the selling price in both state G and state B by 0.3. If the cost of increasing
pledgeability is small, as assumed, the incumbent will invariably choose to increase pledgeability.

        Consider next the case in which the incumbent manages an identical but highly levered firm with
payment of 0.8 due on date 1. In this case, the incumbent does not benefit from high pledgeability when
she loses ability, because the proceeds from selling the asset must first be used to repay the outstanding
debt. Since expert bids never exceed 0.8 (the bid in state G with high pledgeability), debt consumes all of
the auction proceeds. However, since higher pledgeability will increase expert bids by 0.3, it will
increase by 0.3 the amount that the incumbent manager has to pay to stay in control when she retains
ability. To see this, note that the incumbent can retain control either by fully repaying the outstanding
debt of 0.8 or by defaulting strategically and outbidding other experts in the auction (similar to Chapter 11
bankruptcy). High pledgeability increases experts’ bids by 0.3 in both states B and G, implying that the
incumbent has to pay 0.3 more in either state. Given that she retains ability with probability θ = 0.5,
raising pledgeability reduces her expected payoff by 0.15. So with a promised payment of 0.8, she has no
incentive to raise pledgeability.

         In Section III.B, we formally show that there is a maximum level of date-1 debt payment
(between 0 and 0.8) that still leaves the incumbent with incentives to increase future pledgeability. We
will see that this intermediate debt payment allows the borrower to commit to pay more to financiers and
thus allows them to raise more up front. The point, however, is that higher debt reduces the incumbent’s
incentives to raise pledgeability.

EXAMPLE 2: High anticipated industry liquidity ω1
                                                   E ,G
                                                          = 0.8.




                                                          12
        Suppose now that the anticipated liquidity in state G increases to 0.8. The increased net worth
enables the expert to bid up to 1.4 in state G when pledgeability has been set high and 1.1 when
pledgeability has been set low. In either case, she will bid no more than one, the full value of the future
cash flows, C2 , generated by the asset. Given that the expert can bid that amount even if pledgeability

were set low, higher pledgeability has no effect on the expert bid and hence on debt recovery at date 1 in
state G. In effect, high liquidity crowds out the need for pledgeability. Ex ante, when the incumbent
manager chooses pledgeability in period 1 prior to the aggregate state being realized, her incentives for
setting higher pledgeability can come only from state B.

        It is easy to see that at the promised date-1 debt payment in state B of 0.45, the incumbent is
indifferent between setting pledgeability low or high: when she loses ability she is able to receive 0.6-
0.45=0.15 if she had set pledgeability high but gets nothing if she had set it low, whereas when she retains
ability, she has to pay 0.45 if she set pledgeability high but only 0.3 if she set it low. The expected
benefits and costs balance when promised debt is 0.45, since the probability that she loses ability is 0.5.
At any higher promised debt payment, she would set pledgeability low. In sum, when anticipated industry

liquidity ω1
            E ,G
                   is high, 0.45 is the highest level of debt that incentivizes high pledgeability.

        Unlike in Example 1, this incentive-compatible debt level is no longer the debt level that enables
the incumbent to commit to pay financiers the most and thus raise the most from them up front. If the
incumbent borrows at date 0 by setting date-1 debt payment at one, she will set pledgeability low, fully
repay the debt in state G (which happens with probability 0.8), but default in state B, in which case
creditors will only recover 0.3. Expecting this, risk-neutral creditors will be willing to extend a risky loan
amount of 0.86, with face value one. By contrast, by setting the face value at 0.45, the incumbent can only
borrow 0.45 up front. Thus, greater liquidity enhances leverage, which crowds out pledgeability.

                                              III. Solving the Model

We now present the model formally. Because there is a single state in period 2, after which the economy
ends, both the high-type expert as well as the incumbent who retains ability can commit only to repay

D2 = γ 2C2 in period 2, where γ 2 is the pledgeability set by the incumbent in period 1. As a result, they

can borrow up to D2 = γ 2C2 when bidding for control at date 1. In Section III.A, we impose parametric

assumptions that resemble the industry after a period of sustained prosperity (as in Example 2). We show
that if prosperity is likely to continue, high anticipated liquidity supports high leverage and leads to low
pledgeability choice. If prosperity does not continue and liquidity falls, access to finance will drop more
than proportionally. In Section III.B, we describe the outcomes when the states resemble more normal

                                                         13
circumstances. The comparison between prosperity and normal circumstances highlights the effect of
anticipated industry liquidity on pledgeability. In Section III.C, the parametric assumptions describe an
industry after a period of distress, when low anticipated liquidity restricts the amount of leverage and
encourages high pledgeability choice. The cases in Sections III.A, III.B, and III.C cover all of the possible
state-specific situations that could arise.

A. Case 1: The Industry after a Period of Prosperity
         In this subsection, we formalize the analysis highlighted in Example 2 with more general
parameters. The following parametric assumptions allow us to focus on a case that highlights a key result
of the paper.

ASSUMPTION 1:

    a.   ω1E ,G + γ C2 ≥ C2
    b.   ω1E , B + γ C2 < C2 and ω1I , B ≥ ω1E , B .

         Assumption 1a ensures that in state G, industry liquidity is high enough that experts can afford to

pay the full price of the asset even if pledgeability is set as low as γ . Experts have wealth ω1
                                                                                                         E ,G
                                                                                                                and can

borrow up to γ C2 . Their maximum bid is therefore           ω1E ,G + γ C2 , which exceeds the full value of the
asset C2 . Assumption 1b ensures there is limited industry liquidity in the bad state B, so that experts

cannot bid the full value of the asset if pledgeability is set low. Meanwhile, the incumbent has more
wealth than experts in that state, so she can retain control by outbidding experts in a possible date-1
auction (since pledgeability increases what both parties can borrow by the same amount). The states here,
given Assumptions 1a and 1b, represent situations following a time in which the industry has prospered.
In state G, prosperity continues into a boom, while in state B, prosperity turns to temporary distress. We
now solve the model backwards, having already determined what happens in period 2.

                                                        A.1. Date 1

         Consider now the payments and decisions made in period 1. We focus on a high-ability

incumbent’s incentive in setting pledgeability and how it is affected by the promised payment D1 . We

then solve for the maximum amount a high-ability manager can raise, and therefore bid, at date 0.

         If state G is realized in period 1, cash      γ 1C1 is verifiable and goes directly to the financier (up to
the value of the promised claim D1 ), where        γ 1 is the pledgeability that has been set in period 0. Let us

                                                            14
           s                                                                              G
define D1 1 as the remaining payment due at date 1. Clearly, D=
                                                              1 D1 − γ 1 C1 if                                      γ 1C1 < D1 , 3 and

D1B = D1 . In any date-1 auction for the firm, industry outsiders will not bid to take direct control of the
firm since the firm generates no cash flow in the last period and the firm has no residual value. Therefore,
to retain control, the incumbent needs to either pay off her debt entirely or outbid experts in the date-1
auction. Next, we show how experts’ bids are affected by the incumbent by the choice of pledgeability

γ2.

Experts’ Bid

           In any auction for the firm held at date 1 in state s1 ∈ {G , B} , experts bid using their date-1

wealth ω1                and the amount of future cash flows γ 2C2 that they can borrow against (because the cash
                E , s1



flows are pledgeable) at date 1. Therefore, the total amount that they each can bid is ω1                                          + γ 2 C2 . Of
                                                                                                                          E , s1



course, they will not bid more than the total value of future cash flows, C2 . So the maximum auction bid

             B1 1 (γ 2 )
at date 1 is =
                         E ,s
                                           min ω1E , s1 + γ 2 C2 , C2  . To retain control, the incumbent pays the minimum of
the remaining debt or outbids experts. That is, she pays
                                 
       {                           }            {                       }
min D1s1 , B1E , s1 ( γ 2 ) = min D1s1 , ω1E , s1 + γ 2 C2 , C2 . Clearly, through the choice of pledgeability, γ 2 ,
the incumbent can potentially affect the amount of payment needed for her to stay in control.

           Note that higher pledgeability is valuable only if there is potential underpricing, a positive
difference between the present value of future cash flows accruing to an expert if he buys the firm and the
amount that he can bid if the incumbent has set period-2 pledgeability low. The underpricing equals

                                       {                       }
                   max (1 − γ ) C2 − ω1E , s1 , 0 at date 1. By choosing a higher level of period-2
C2 − B1E , s1 (γ ) =

pledgeability, the incumbent can increase experts’ bids from B1
                                                                                            E , s1
                                                                                                     (γ ) , thus reducing underpricing.

Incumbent Bid

           The cash that the incumbent has at date 1 is ω1
                                                                              I , s1
                                                                                       in state s1 . If she retains ability, she can also

raise funds against period 2’s output,                   γ 2C2 . Therefore, the incumbent can pay as much as


                  
3
    Note that     D1G = 0 if γ 1C1 ≥ D1 . For now, we assume that the incumbent always levers up fully so that in
equilibrium,         γ 1C1      is less than   D1 .

                                                                         15
=
B1
  I , s1
         (γ 2 ) min {ω1I ,s1 + γ 2C2 , C2 } to the financier. Comparing B1I ,s1 (γ 2 ) and B1E ,s1 (γ 2 ) , we see that
the incumbent will outbid experts whenever she has (weakly) more wealth ( ω1                                             ≥ ω1E , s1 ), since both
                                                                                                                I , s1



parties can borrow up to                γ 2C2 if needed. Of course, she will outbid by paying a vanishingly small amount
over B1
           E , s1
                    (γ 2 ) . The incumbent is always willing to hold on to the asset if she can outbid, since the
continuation value of the asset, C2 , is identical for the incumbent and experts.

Pledgeability Choice
                                                                                               
            Let us now see how the promised remaining payment                                  D1s
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                      affects pledgeability choice. Let
         
       (                  )
V1I , s1 D1s1 , γ 2 be the incumbent’s payoff in state s1 when she chooses γ 2 , given the remaining required
                
payment         D1s   1
                          . If state s1 is known to be realized for sure, the incumbent’s benefit from choosing high
                                                s                 s1                  
versus low pledgeability is ∆11 D
                                =1
                                   1
                                     V1     s
                                                ( )     I , s1
                                                                 (D1        )              (          )
                                                                         , γ − V1I , s1 D1s1 , γ . Given the probability of the good

state being q , the risk-neutral incumbent will choose high pledgeability for any given D1 if and only if
                                   B
q ∆1
   G
       ( ) + (1 − q)∆ ( D ) ≥ 0 . Below, we solve for V
        D1G                    1
                                B
                                    1                                           1
                                                                                 I , s1
                                                                                          and ∆1 separately in the different states.
                                                                                                 s1




State G - The Continued Boom: Pledgeability Does Not Matter for Repayment (No Potential Underpricing)

            Assumption 1a guarantees that             B1E ,G (γ ) = min {ω1E ,G + γ C2 , C2 } =
                                                                                              C2 . In this case, industry
liquidity is sufficiently high that high-ability experts can pay the full price of the asset, even if the
incumbent has chosen low pledgeability. Therefore, there is no potential underpricing and raising
pledgeability does not change enforceable payments, even while resulting in cost                                         ε . External payments
are committed through the high resale price of the asset, and high pledgeability is neither needed nor
desired by anyone. No incentive to raise pledgeability can emanate from this state – liquidity crowds out
pledgeability.

                                                                                               G
LEMMA 1: Given Assumption 1a and the remaining payment D1 ≤ C2 ,
                                                                                                  G                            G
V1I ,G ( D1G , γ 2 ) =C2 − D1G − ε ⋅1γ 2 >γ for γ 2 ∈ γ , γ  . Therefore,                    ∆1 D1
                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                       ( ) ≡ −ε      for any D1 .


            In words, if state G were to occur for sure, the incumbent would lose ε for sure by choosing high
pledgeability over low pledgeability. Now consider the incentives arising from state B.



                                                                           16
State B - Temporary Distress: Incumbent Can Always Outbid Experts
            Assumption 1b implies that industry liquidity in state B is limited, so that the firm is potentially
underpriced, and thus, there are potential rents to high-ability experts in the auction. Moreover, since

ω1I , B ≥ ω1E , B and both the incumbent and experts can borrow up to γ 2C2 in the date-1 auction, the
incumbent can outbid the experts regardless of her choice of pledgeability. In this case, if the incumbent
                                                                                     
                                                                                 {               }
retains ability, she receives output C2 but repays min D1B , B1E , B (γ 2 ) to stay in control. Her net
                                                  
                                              {                    }
continuation payoff is C2 − min D1B , B1E , B (γ 2 ) . By contrast, if she loses her ability and has to sell the
                                                                                        
firm at price B1
                      E ,B
                             (γ 2 ) , her continuation payoff is B1E , B (γ 2 ) − min { D1B , B1E , B (γ 2 )} . The incumbent’s
payoff in state B is thus
                                                                                
        (         )
V1I , B D1B , γ 2 =          (            {                   })                     (               {
                  θ C2 − min D1B , B1E , B (γ 2 ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B (γ 2 ) − min D1B , B1E , B (γ 2 ) − ε 1{γ               })        2 >γ   },
which is a weighted average of the payoff if she retains her ability and stays in control and the payoff if

she loses ability and has to sell the firm. Note that a higher γ 2 (weakly) increases the amount the

incumbent has to pay the financier when she retains ability and control, therefore (weakly) decreasing the
first term, while it (weakly) increases the amount the incumbent gets in the auction if she loses capability,

thus (weakly) increasing the second term. In choosing to increase γ 2 , the incumbent therefore trades off

higher possible repayments when she buys the firm from the lender against higher possible resale value

when she sells the firm after losing ability. Clearly, she chooses γ 2 = γ if and only if

                                                                                            
              (                                       )            (
            θ C2 − min {D1B , B1E , B (γ )} + (1 − θ ) B1E , B (γ ) − min {D1B , B1E , B (γ )} − ε           )
                                                                                            
                                  (                                    })                (                                        })
                                                                                                                   (1)
                                                  {                                                      {
                              ≥ θ C2 − min D1B , B1E , B ( γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B (γ ) − min D1B , B1E , B ( γ ) ,


where the left-hand side is the incumbent’s continuation value if she chooses γ 2 = γ , while the right-

hand side is the continuation value if she chooses                      γ2 = γ . 4



4
    Constraint (1) can be equivalently written in terms of primitives:

                                                                                                                
                                                                             {
θ max {C2 − D1B , (1 − γ ) C2 − ω1E , B , 0} + (1 − θ ) max min {ω1E , B + γ C2 , C2 } − D1B , 0 − ε                 }
                                                                                        
             {                                            }                      {
≥ θ max C2 − D1B , (1 − γ ) C2 − ω1E , B , 0 + (1 − θ ) max min {ω1E , B + γ C2 , C2 } − D1B , 0 .                       }
                                                                            17
                                                                                                       B
         Importantly, a higher outstanding promised remaining payment D1 reduces the incumbent’s
                                                                                                                                 B
incentives to choose higher γ 2 . This result can be easily seen from inequality (1). When D1 ≥ B1                                           (γ ) ,
                                                                                                                                      E ,B



the inequality reduces to θ C2 − B1(         E ,B
                                                                    (                           )
                                                    (γ ) ) − ε ≥ θ C2 − B1E , B ( γ ) , which never holds. In this case, the
                                                                        
                                                                                              ( )
incumbent always chooses low pledgeability. When D1B ≤ B1E , B γ , however, the inequality reduces to
                                                                                                               
θ ( C2 − D1B ) + (1 − θ ) ( B1E , B (γ ) − D1B ) − ε ≥ θ ( C2 − D1B ) + (1 − θ ) ( B1E , B (γ ) − D1B ) , which always
                B
holds. When D1 ∈ B1    (   E ,B
                                  (γ ) , B
                                         1
                                          E ,B
                                                     )
                                                 (γ ) , the inequality reduces to
                                          
                                                             (                            )
θ ( C2 − D1B ) + (1 − θ ) ( B1E , B (γ ) − D1B ) − ε ≥ θ C2 − B1E , B ( γ ) so that high pledgeability γ 2 = γ is
                      B
chosen if and only if D1 ≤ D1
                             B ,PayIC
                                      , where D=
                                               1
                                                B ,PayIC
                                                         θ B1E , B (γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B (γ ) − ε . Superscript “PayIC”
indicates that the required payment makes the choice of high pledgeability incentive-compatible.
Intuitively, with higher debt, more of the pledgeable cash flows are captured by financiers if the
incumbent stays in control, and more of the resale value also goes to financiers if the asset is sold. This is
the source of moral hazard over pledgeability. It is easier to incentivize the incumbent, and thus raise the
incentive-compatible level of debt, when the probability ( 1 − θ ) with which she loses skill and has to sell
is higher. The following lemma thus holds.

                                                                                           B
LEMMA 2: Given Assumption 1b and the remaining payment D1 , it follows that

                                                                                           
             −θ  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε                                 if D1B > B1E , B ( γ )
                                               
                                                                                                        
              E ,B
    ( )
∆1B D1B    = θ B1 ( γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B ( γ ) − ε − D1B                            if B1E , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ   )
                                                                                          
               1 − θ )  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε                          if D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ ) .
             (
             

                                                    B
                 ( )
Moreover, ∆1B D1B ≥ 0 if and only if D1 ≤ D=
                                           1
                                             θ B1 (γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1 (γ ) − ε .
                                                             B ,PayIC           E ,B                     E ,B




                                                                    18
                                                                                         B
                                                Figure 3.       ( ) as a function of D
                                                            ∆1B D1B                       1      .

                                                                B         
           In Figure 3, we plot ∆1B D1B      ( ) against D        1                        ( )
                                                                      . For D1B ≤ B1E , B γ , debt repayment is not

increased by higher pledgeability because of the low value of outstanding debt. Instead, higher
pledgeability only increases outside bids, which is beneficial when the incumbent loses ability and sells
                                                                                                                                       
the asset. The benefits of high pledgeability are capped at (1 − θ )  B1
                                                                                   
                                                                                          E ,B
                                                                                                     (γ ) − B1E , B ( γ ) − ε . As   D1B
             B , PayIC
rises to D1              , the incumbent has to pay more in expectation to debt holders when she raises
                                
                                ( )
pledgeability, so ∆1B D1B falls to zero and then turns negative as the face value of debt increases
                       B
further. When D1 > B1
                                 E ,B
                                        ( γ ) , the incumbent has to pay the entire increment in sale price from
increasing pledgeability to debt holders when she loses ability – she gets nothing from increasing

pledgeability under those circumstances – while she has to pay B1
                                                                                   E ,B
                                                                                          (γ ) instead of B1E , B ( γ ) if she
retains ability. Hence, there is no benefit but only cost to the incumbent by increasing pledgeability, and

the cost is capped at θ  B1 ( γ ) − B1
                            E ,B
                                
                                       E ,B
                                            γ  −ε .    ( )
                                                B
           Given ∆1G D1G  ( ) and ∆ ( D ) , we can check the incumbent’s incentives to choose pledgeability
                                            B
                                            1       1

for any D1 . Recall that the incumbent will choose high pledgeability if and only if

       (           )
q∆1 D1 − γ 1C1 + (1 − q ) ∆1 D1
   G                                B
                                        ( ) ≥ 0 . Since there is never any incentive to increase pledgeability coming
                                                                                   G
                                                        ( )
from the future liquid state G, that is, ∆1G D1G ≡ −ε ≈ 0 for any D1 , the constraint therefore depends on
the incumbent’s incentive in state B. We thus have the following result.

                                                                                                                    IC
PROPOSITION 1: Given Assumptions 1a and 1b, there exists a unique threshold D1 such that the
incumbent manager sets high pledgeability if and only if D1 < D1 . Moreover, as
                                                                                   IC
                                                                                                                  ε →0 ,
D1IC → D1B , PayIC .

                                                                      19
Proof: Follows directly from Lemma 1 and 2.                                                                                               ■

The Debt Level That Raises the Most Up Front
              B , PayIC
Note that D1              can be written as

D1B , PayIC = θ min {ω1E , B + γ C2 , C2 } + (1 − θ ) min {ω1E , B + γ C2 , C2 } − ε . Under Assumption 1b, D1B , PayIC

is well below   γ 1C1 + C2 , the most that can be paid in state G. As a result, D1IC , the highest level of debt
that provides incentives for high pledgeability, keeping in mind both future states, may not be the face
value that allows the incumbent to raise the most up front. This is most easily seen when liquidity is
plentiful, as in state G with no potential underpricing. In this case, the incumbent can issue debt with face

value   γ 1C1 + B1E ,G (γ ) =
                            γ 1C1 + C2 , which she will repay in full in state G, but she will repay only

B1E , B (γ ) in state B, because the high face value induces low pledgeability. Even with low pledgeability

choice, the incumbent is able to raise q ( C2 + γ 1C1 ) + (1 − q ) B1                        (γ ) at date 0. In contrast, to incentivize
                                                                                      E ,B



high pledgeability, the promised payment cannot exceed D1 = D1
                                                                                 IC           B , PayIC                       B , PayIC
                                                                                                          , which will raise D1           up

front. If the difference between γ 1C1 + C2 and D1
                                                                  B , PayIC
                                                                              is large and if the probability of the good state q

is sufficiently high, the incumbent could raise more by setting =
                                                                D1                               γ 1C1 + C2 . The broader point is that
the prospect of a highly liquid future state not only makes greater promised payments feasible, but these
payments also eliminate incentives to increase pledgeability that arise only from the low-liquidity state.
To restore those incentives, debt may have to be set so low that funds raised are greatly reduced –
something the incumbent will not want to do if she is bidding at date 0 for the firm. Note that this can
happen even if the probability of the low state is significant, and even if the direct cost                              ε of enhancing
pledgeability is infinitesimal. Proposition 2 summarizes these results.

PROPOSITION 2: Given Assumptions 1a and 1b and                           ε → 0 , and given D1Max is the face value of the
debt that raises the maximum amount at date 0,


         a. If q ( C2 + γ 1C1 ) + (1 − q ) B1             (γ ) > D1B , PayIC , then D1=   γ 1C1 + C2 . For any promised
                                                   E ,B                               Max




              payment D1
                              B , PayIC
                                          < D1 ≤ D1Max , γ 2 = γ . For any promised payment D1 ≤ D1B , PayIC , γ 2 = γ .

         b. If q ( C2 + γ 1C1 ) + (1 − q ) B1             (γ ) ≤ D1B , PayIC , then D1Max = D1IC = D1B , PayIC . For any
                                                   E ,B



              promised payment D1 ≤ D1                    , γ2 = γ .
                                                   Max




                                                                    20
       Interestingly, high debt will not be renegotiated before, or after, the state s1 is realized, even if

renegotiation is feasible – it will not be renegotiated before because the level of debt is set to raise the
maximum amount possible even if it will result in low pledgeability, and it will not be renegotiated after,
because relevant parties will not write down their claims given that pledgeability γ 2 has already been

set. 5 Both the fixed promised debt payments across states and the act of choosing pledgeability before the
state is known have the effect of causing a spillover between anticipated states. An analysis of non-
renegotiable debt when pledgeability choice is made after the state is realized is available in the Internet
Appendix 6. The results are similar to those in this section.

                           A.2. Discussion: The Liquidity Leverage Pledgeability Nexus

       We have introduced the first important result in the paper. If prosperity is likely to continue, liquidity
will be high and the credit market will allow high debt. When borrowers finance with high debt, however,
they do not have incentives to set pledgeability high, even if the direct costs of doing so are zero and the
probability of a low-liquidity state nonnegligible. Pledgeability is neglected, which nevertheless will be
acceptable to lenders who anticipate a high probability of continued high liquidity. Liquidity, asset prices
(bids in the auction), and leverage follow each other up, while pledgeability falls. If prosperity does not
continue, and liquidity falls, access to finance will drop significantly. The underinvestment in
pledgeability resulting from liquidity-induced leverage cannot be renegotiated away – in competitive
markets for assets, the highest bids for the assets when future liquidity is anticipated to be high entail
substantial borrowing. Higher anticipated liquidity is therefore not an unmitigated blessing, and can
worsen ex-post outcomes in less liquid states. Moreover, as we will see shortly, it can reduce the overall
amount raised up front. To the extent that government or central bank policies create anticipation of
liquidity, these are concerns that have to be kept in mind.




5
    If the incumbent chooses low pledgeability, then debt repayment will be         B1E , B (γ ) in state B since the incumbent
defaults and there will be an auction. An interesting issue is, knowing this, would the incumbent not have the
incentive to set pledgeability high since   B1E , B (γ ) < D1B , PayIC ?   The answer is no. Suppose the incumbent sets
pledgeability high with outstanding debt face value =
                                                    D1            γ 1C1 + C2 . Then if state B occurs, creditors will not
agree to renegotiate D1 to any level below B      1
                                                   E ,B
                                                          (γ ) . Anticipating this, the incumbent would not have incentives
to set pledgeability high ex ante. In this case, the incumbent will have an incentive to set pledgeability high only if
creditors can commit to renegotiate the debt payment in state B down to some level            D1 ≤ D1B , PayIC , which is
tantamount to being able to set state-contingent payments, which we have ruled out.
6
  The Internet Appendix is available in the online version of the article on The Journal of Finance website.

                                                                 21
     Another way of thinking about anticipated situations of high liquidity is that the prospect of repaying
the high level of debt in full is high enough that both borrowers and lenders neglect the loss given default.
This can be much more severe than if initial debt were lower, because of neglected pledgeability. As a
related aside, when the B state is realized, and debt capacity turns out to be low because of low liquidity
and low pledgeability, it might seem as if the incumbent neglected the possibility of that state occurring
(see, for example, Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015)). In reality, however, the high level of debt,
which is optimally taken on in full knowledge of the prospective states, may crowd out pledgeability.
There is thus a spillover between states caused by debt, which may subsequently appear as if particular
states were neglected.

                                             A.3. Low-Ability Incumbent Manager

         The analysis so far has assumed that a high-ability incumbent manager was in place at date 0.
Now consider the bid of a low-ability manager (or equivalently a financier) for the firm at date 0. Clearly,
the low-ability manager is always a seller at date 1 (since he cannot produce in period 2), so he sets

pledgeability high ( γ 2 = γ ) to maximize the amount that he can sell the firm for. As a result, he sells the

firm for C2 in state G and B1
                                     E ,B
                                            (γ )   in state B. With slightly abuse of notation, we also use D1
                                                                                                                 Max
                                                                                                                       to

denote the face value of the debt that enables a low-ability manager to raise the maximum amount at date
0.

PROPOSITION 3: If a low-ability manager bids at date 0 and if                 ε → 0 , then D1Max → C2 . For any
D1 < D1Max , γ 2 = γ .

                                                        A.4. Date-0 Auction

     Finally, we compare the bids made by high- and low-ability managers during the date-0 auction and
determine who will acquire control of the firm. According to Proposition 2, a high-ability manager can

borrow up to    max {q ( γ 1C1 + C2 ) + (1 − q) B1E , B (γ ), D1B , PayIC } . Together with cash ω0E , a high-ability

                                              {                                             }
manager bids B0E ( γ 1 ) = ω0E + max q ( γ 1C1 + C2 ) + (1 − q ) B1E , B (γ ), D1B , PayIC , provided this is less than

qC1 + C2 , the full expected value of the asset. This is assured if ω0E is sufficiently small, say, ω0E = 0 ,

since both B1
               E ,B
                      (γ ) and D1B=
                                  , PayIC
                                          θ B1E , B (γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B ( γ ) − ε are strictly less than C2 . As a
result, a high-ability manager always gets rents upon acquiring control, and being constrained in bidding
by the amount of liquidity she has, she will always lever up fully at date 0.

                                                                 22
    A low-ability manager can borrow up to B0 = qC2 + (1 − q ) B1            (γ ) − ε , which is also what he will
                                                   L                  E ,B


bid. Unlike high-ability bidders, he will never augment his bid using his personal wealth since, in
expectation, he cannot resell the firm for more than he can borrow. A simple comparison between

B0E ( γ 1 ) and B0L shows that a low-ability bidder may win the initial auction when an expert has low

initial liquidity ω0 with which to bid, there is a low probability q of high industry liquidity at date 1 so
                   E



the expert bidder knows that setting debt high is dominated,     γ 1C1 is low so the expert repays little from
the additional cash flows she generates relative to the outsider, and   θ is high so the moral hazard in
setting pledgeability severely restricts the incentive-compatible amount she can borrow at date 0. Note
that a high-ability manager’s moral hazard over pledgeability arises because she has the ability to produce
– she wants to keep the firm for herself when she retains ability, and hence is likely to be a buyer. In
contrast, the low-ability manager is always a seller and does not suffer from such moral hazard.

    Acquisition by a low-ability manager is reminiscent of leveraged buyout transactions (see, for
example, Jensen (1997)), where firms in stable industries (for which moral hazard over pledgeability is
high) are taken over and the revamped management team, which is motivated by the prospect of selling
the asset by going public soon, focuses on finding and blocking tunnels -- free cash flow that has been
eaten up through inefficiency or that has been misappropriated by staff (the proverbial company jet). The
management team does not really make fundamental changes to the firm’s earning prospects in the time
the firm is private, and may not be particularly good at managing the firm, but significantly enhances the
pledgeability of future cash flows and thus increases bids for the firm when it goes public. Our model thus
suggests that a leveraged buyout is a means to check moral hazard at a time of moderate to low industry
liquidity, when pledgeability has been low (poor governance) so that outright takeovers by industry
experts are difficult. Furthermore, our model suggests that debt alone is not sufficient, but rather an
explicit commitment to sell is important for management to have the right incentives to set pledgeability
high. Outright takeovers of such firms are more likely when industry liquidity is higher (voluntary
mergers would occur only when there is no underpricing, because our model has no synergies). This is
consistent with Harford (2005), who showed that merger waves are more likely after high industry
valuations.

Numerical Example (Continued)
   The parameters in Example 2 reflect this case when the industry has experienced a period of
prosperity. In state G, experts are able to bid C2 =1 under both high and low pledgeability. We intuited
       B , PayIC
that D1            was 0.45. This can also be obtained by using the formula

                                                        23
D1B=
   , PayIC
           θ B1E , B (γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B ( γ ) − ε , where we substitute B1E , B (γ ) =0.3, B1E , B ( γ ) =0.6, and θ

=0.5. In this case, an expert is able to borrow q ( C2 + γ 1C1 ) + (1 − q ) B1                  (γ ) =0.86 by setting debt face
                                                                                         E ,B


                                   B , PayIC                                                B , PayIC
value at D1 =1, but only D1                    =0.45 if the face value is set at D1 = D1                . Therefore, high

anticipated liquidity in state G enhances leverage, which crowds out pledgeability. Interestingly, a low-

ability manager can borrow B0 = qC2 + (1 − q ) B1                      (γ ) − ε =0.92. If the date-0 wealth of experts is
                                       L                        E ,B


below 0.06, then a low-type bidder wins the initial auction.

B. Case 2: Normal Times (as in Example 1)

                                           B.1. Assumption and Equilibrium Outcome

    In Section III.A, we studied the industry after a period of prosperity and hence high liquidity. In this
subsection, we study the industry during more normal times. We show that under certain conditions, the
borrower raises the most by limiting promised debt payment to the level that is consistent with incentives
for setting pledgeability high. We impose the following parametric assumptions to replace Assumptions
1a and 1b.

ASSUMPTION 2:

    a. ω1           + γ C2 < C2 and ω1I ,G ≥ ω1E ,G ;
             E ,G



    b. ω1
             E ,B
                    + γ C2 < C2 and ω1I , B ≥ ω1E , B .

    Assumptions 2a and 2b ensure that in both states, increased pledgeability always improves experts’
date-1 bids. Furthermore, the incumbent has more liquidity and will outbid experts in an auction in either
state.

    Now consider the highest level of debt that is consistent with high pledgeability, which we denote by

D1IC . Clearly, D1IC will lie between γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC , the incentive-compatible level assuming that the G
                                    B , PayIC
state occurs for sure, and D1                   , the incentive-compatible level assuming that the B state occurs for

sure. Moreover, because the net benefit from higher pledgeability is decreasing in leverage (see Figure 3),
there will be net incumbent benefits from increasing pledgeability under state G (because

D1IC < γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC ) and net incumbent costs under state B (because D1IC > D1B , PayIC ).




                                                                  24
    In the Appendix, we derive necessary and sufficient conditions for the maximum up-front borrowing
by the winning bidder to be incentive-compatible. Proposition 4 summarizes the two conditions.

PROPOSITION 4: Under Assumptions 2a and 2b and               ε → 0 , D1Max = D1IC if one of the following two
                                                             1−θ
                                 (                )
conditions hold: i) q < θ and γ 1C1 + ω1E ,G − ω1E , B ≤
                                                             1− q
                                                                  (γ − γ ) C2 , and ii) q ≥ θ .

Proof: See the Appendix.

    Under the first condition, which requires that liquidity in the two states not be too far apart,

D1IC → q ( γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC ) + (1 − q ) D1B , PayIC , the weighted average of the incentive-compatible debt
                                                                 IC
levels. In this case, by setting promised debt higher than D1 , the borrower will repay strictly less in both

states (since she will set pledgeability low) and thus raise less up front.

    The second sufficient condition requires the probability of the good state q to be higher than the
probability of the incumbent keeping her ability θ , and effectively limits the moral hazard associated
with pledgeability. Intuitively, the benefit of high pledgeability in the good state is realized when the

incumbent loses ability, which occurs with unconditional probability q (1 − θ ) , whereas the cost in the

bad state is realized when the incumbent keeps her ability, which occurs with probability (1 − q ) θ . If

q (1 − θ ) > (1 − q ) θ , so that the benefit in the good state dominates the cost in the bad state, the
incumbent would never want to violate the pledgeability constraint by taking on too much debt.

Numerical Example (Continued)
       The parameters for Example 1 reflect normal times. We can follow the same steps to calculate

D1G , PayIC =0.65. In this case, D1IC =0.6125 is the maximum debt level that still incentivizes high
pledgeability, and is also the payment level that allows the incumbent to raise the most up front. She can
repay 0.6125 in the G state and 0.6 in the B state, so she raises 0.61 since the probability of the G state is
0.8. In contrast, any debt level above 0.6125 will induce low pledgeability, so the incumbent will default
strategically in both state G and state B, only repaying the amount that experts bid (0.5 in G and 0.3 in B).
As a result, she can only raise 0.46 at date 0.




                                                        25
               B.2. The Effect of Anticipated Liquidity on Pledgeability and Access to Finance

        The assumptions in Section III.A and in this subsection differ in the amount of liquidity assumed

in the future states ω1         and ω1
                         E ,G          E ,B
                                              . We now combine the results from both subsections with the above

parameters to see how optimal leverage, pledgeability, and up front borrowing vary as ω1
                                                                                                             E ,G
                                                                                                                    increases

from a low level. An increase in the amount of industry liquidity in the G state can eventually reduce both
the level of debt consistent with incentives to increase pledgeability and the amount that the incumbent

can raise from financiers. We continue to assume that the incumbent’s liquidity ( ω1
                                                                                                    I ,G
                                                                                                           =0.8) always

(weakly) exceeds the expert’s liquidity.




                                          Figure 4. The effect of anticipated liquidity.

                                                , γ 2 , and maximum up-front borrowing vary with anticipated
                                  IC      Max
In Figure 4, we plot how D1 , D1

liquidity ω1       . Initially, when ω1         is low ( ω1
            E ,G                         E ,G               E ,G
                                                                   <0.4), the maximum debt level that still incentivizes

high pledgeability, D1 , increases with ω1
                          IC                         E ,G
                                                            (with slope q =0.8). Intuitively, when there is underpricing

in states G and B even with high pledgeability, an increase in pledgeability increases the committed


                                                                    26
                                                          (      )
payout in future states G and B by the same amount γ − γ C2 . In this case, a small increase in future

industry liquidity, for example, in state G, always increases incentive-compatible leverage and the amount
raised up front but does not affect pledgeability.

        However, once industry liquidity in state G exceeds the level at which, with high pledgeability,
bidders can bid full value for the asset (i.e., Assumption 2a no longer holds), high pledgeability increases

                               (      )
bids by less than the amount γ − γ C2 and increased industry liquidity reduces the benefit of high

pledgeability in state G without changing the cost to the incumbent of high pledgeability in state B. As a

result, D1 still increases with ω1        but the slope is flatter. As ω1
          IC                       E ,G                                 E ,G
                                                                               continues to increase, the benefit of

high pledgeability in state G falls further. When the benefit gets sufficiently low ( ω1
                                                                                                E ,G
                                                                                                       increases from
                                                 IC
0.62 to 0.63 under the given parameters), D1 has to drop discontinuously to reduce the cost that arises

under state B, given the low benefit in the G state, so as to encourage high pledgeability. Consequently,

the incentive-compatible face value of the debt must drop discontinuously, so D1 decreases with ω1
                                                                                         IC                          E ,G
                                                                                                                            .

Interestingly, the debt level that raises the most up front is no longer incentive-compatible ( D1
                                                                                                            Max
                                                                                                                  > D1IC ).
By choosing a high debt level and pledging out more in the good state, the borrower is able to borrow
more even though pledgeability is disincentivized. Also, because of the higher level of moral hazard, the
increase in anticipated liquidity from 0.62 to 0.63 actually reduces the up-front amount raised as the
bottom right panel shows. So at a high level of liquidity, the face value of debt rises with industry

liquidity, but the amount raised falls, raising the effective spread. Finally, as ω1
                                                                                        E ,G
                                                                                               increases above 0.7,

there is no potential underpricing of the firm in state G, and no incentive to raise pledgeability can come
from that state.

        Higher industry liquidity in booms can make highly levered nonincentive-compatible capital
structures dominate less leveraged incentive-compatible capital structures, which can reduce the amount
that a borrower can raise from financiers. All of this assumes that conditions are good enough that the
liquidity of incumbents exceeds that of experts, in which case only variation in industry liquidity is
relevant. In the next subsection we show what happens if, in a period of distress, incumbents have less
liquidity than experts.




                                                         27
    C. Case 3: The Industry After a Period of Distress
           Consider now the final case in which states G and B follow a period of distress, and hence there is
    less liquidity all around. If the incumbent has less liquidity than experts, as is likely after sustained hard
    times, the moral hazard problem may be much alleviated.

           We make the following parametric assumptions for this case..

    ASSUMPTION 3:


           a.   ω1E ,G + γ C2 < C2 and ω1I ,G ≥ ω1E ,G ;

           b.   ω1E , B + γ C2 < C2 and ω1I , B < ω1E , B .

           We assume in Assumptions 3a and 3b that industry liquidity is low enough in both states that bidders
    underprice the firm if pledgeability is set low. Furthermore, in state G, the incumbent (if capable) always
    retains control by outbidding experts, while in state B, the incumbent is outbid. The idea is that when
    good states follow bad ones, industry liquidity is moderate and the incumbent, with one period of strong
    production, has more liquidity than experts, while when a bad state follows a bad state, the incumbent is
    in more distress than are the experts.

                                                                                                                          
           Under Assumption 3a, D1
                                         G , PayIC
                                                      = θ B1E ,G (γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E ,G (γ ) − ε . Next, we describe ∆1B ( D1B ) . Under
    Assumption 3b, experts can always outbid the incumbent for any level of pledgeability. 7 Therefore, if the
                                          
                                 B
    promised remaining payment D1 exceeds the incumbent’s bid B1
                                                                                        I ,B
                                                                                               (γ 2 ) , the incumbent can never retain
    control of the firm and therefore becomes a seller. She sets pledgeability high as long as the proceeds
    from selling recoups the cost of setting pledgeability. In other words, her payoff is
                                                                 
          (         )         {                          }
    V1B D1B , γ 2 = max B1E , B ( γ 2 ) − D1B , 0 − ε ⋅1{γ >γ } if D1B > B1I , B ( γ 2 ) . By setting remaining payments
                                                          2

                  B , Max
    at or below= D1        B1E , B (γ ) − ε , the incumbent will have incentives to increase next period’s
    pledgeability to γ . Lemma 3 formalizes these results.


    7
        Strictly speaking, there is one more case because we break ties in favor of the incumbent. If
=C2 B=
     1
      E ,B
           (γ ) B1I , B (γ ) and B1
                                               E ,B
                                                      (γ ) > B1I , B (γ ) , the incumbent retains control if she chooses high
    pledgeability and retains ability, because she is able to pay the full value of the asset C2 and experts will not outbid

    her. By contrast, if she chooses low pledgeability and debt is above            B1I , B (γ ) , she loses control because the high
    promised remaining payment is enforceable and higher than what she can pay. The maximum level of debt is as in
    this case.

                                                                        28
                                                               B                                             
                                               ( )
                                      0 if D1 = B1
LEMMA 3: Under Assumption 2b, ∆1B D1B =
                                                                             E ,B
                                                                                    (γ ) − ε . Moreover, ∆1B ( D1B ) ≥ −ε .

                                                                                                          
Proof: See the Appendix, where we also lay out the full expression for ∆1B D1B .                         ( )




                                                                                            B
                                          Figure 5.       ( ) as a function of D
                                                      ∆1B D1B                                1       .


                                                                        B
       In Figure 5, we plot the function ∆1B D1B ( ) against D           1                                             ( )
                                                                              , where we assume that B1E , B γ ≥ B1I , B ( γ              )
                                                                           
                     ( )
(the case B1E , B γ < B1I , B ( γ   )                                                   ( )
                                        is very similar). Importantly, ∆1B D1B > 0 for all levels of debt below
                                                                     
B1E , B ( γ ) − ε . Even if debt exceeds B1E , B ( γ ) − ε , ∆1B ( D1B ) ≥ −ε , that is, the cost of increasing
pledgeability is not significantly negative for any level of debt, unlike in Figure 3. At very low levels of
debt, the incumbent will retain control if she retains ability, but the expected benefit of selling at a higher
price when she loses ability outweighs the cost of higher repayment when she retains it, so she benefits
from setting pledgeability high. At higher levels of debt, since there is potential underpricing and the
incumbent has no hope of retaining control if she enters an auction, the incumbent sees only the upside of
                                                                                       B
increasing pledgeability. Even for very high promised values of D1 —above the most the asset could be

sold for -- the only disadvantage of choosing high pledgeability is its cost,                            ε . The more general point is
that lower incumbent liquidity relative to the industry reduces moral hazard over pledgeability since the
incumbent is more likely to be a seller of the asset.

Pledgeability Choices
           Recall that the incumbent will choose high pledgeability if and only if

       (         )
q∆1 D1 − γ 1C1 + (1 − q ) ∆1 D1
   G                         B
                                 ( ) ≥ 0 . In state B, as we see above, ∆ ( D ) ≥ −ε for any D
                                                                                        1
                                                                                         B
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                  B                    B
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                           . Therefore,

the incentive constraint depends only on the incumbent’s incentive stemming from state G (provided she



                                                                29
recovers cost     ε → 0 ). The incumbent has ex-ante incentives to increase pledgeability whenever there are
                                                          
                                                        ( )
incentives in state G (i.e., whenever ∆1G D1 ≥ 0 ). 8 We thus have the following result.


PROPOSITION 5: Given Assumption 3 and                          ε → 0 , there exists a unique threshold D1IC such that the
incumbent manager sets high pledgeability if and only if D1 ≤ D1 , where D1 → γ 1C1 + D1
                                                                                     IC            IC                     G , PayIC
                                                                                                                                      .

                                                                                    IC
           Finally, in contrast again to the case in Section III.A, D1 is indeed the face value that enables

the incumbent to raise the most at date 0. In this case, she repays γ 1C1 + D1
                                                                                              G , PayIC
                                                                                                          in state G and B1
                                                                                                                                  E ,B
                                                                                                                                          (γ )
                           IC
in state B. Any D1 above D1 will induce low pledgeability, and the incumbent can commit to pay

strictly less: she repays γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ         ( ) in state G and B (γ ) in state B. Any D
                                                                            1
                                                                             E ,B
                                                                                                            1   below D1 will
                                                                                                                             IC



lead to a lower payment in state G, and can never increase the payment in state B. We therefore have the
following result.

PROPOSITION 6: Given Assumption 3 and with                          ε → 0 , the face value that allows the incumbent to
raise the maximum amount at date 0 is D1
                                                         Max
                                                               = D=
                                                                  1
                                                                   IC
                                                                      γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC . In this case, she raises

q ( γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC ) + (1 − q ) B1E , B ( γ   )   at date 0. For any promised payment D1 ≤ D1
                                                                                                                Max
                                                                                                                      , γ2 = γ .


      Moral hazard over pledgeability stems from the incumbent wanting to hold on to assets when they
sell for less than full value (or equivalently, wanting to reduce the threat that experts will outbid her using
the firm’s enhanced borrowing capacity). In state B of Case 3, the incumbent has lower personal liquidity,
so she knows she cannot outbid experts and therefore is resigned to a sale. This reduces moral hazard over
pledgeability and hence increases the debt that she can raise up front, relative to what would be possible if
she had more personal wealth and could have stayed in control (state B of Case 2).

                                                               IV. Robustness

      We discuss the robustness of the basic model in this section.




8
    We implicitly assume that     γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC > B1E , B ( γ ) . Since
                    γ 1C1 + θ min {ω1E ,G + γ C2 , C2 } + (1 − θ ) min {ω1E ,G + γ C2 , C2 } − ε
γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC =                                                                                           and

B1E , B ( γ ) = min {ω1E , B + γ C2 , C2 } , this condition is automatically satisfied if γ 1 = γ and C1 = C2 .

                                                                      30
A. Dynamic Effects
    In Section III.A.4, we show that a low-ability manager can win the initial auction and acquire control
of the firm in illiquid states. In the Internet Appendix, we add one more period and study the dynamic
implications of selling the asset to low types. We show that the prospect of selling to low types actually
increases the level of debt under which high pledgeability is incentive-compatible. The reason is as
follows. The presence of low types in illiquid states increase the sale price of the asset when low
pledgeability has been chosen. As a result, the incremental cost of choosing high pledgeability over low
pledgeability in the illiquid state is reduced, so that higher debt can be sustained without violating the
pledgeability constraint. The presence of low types can therefore improve the choice of pledgeability and
increase incentive-compatible leverage. As a result, when the illiquid state is realized, pledgeability may
still be high and misallocation to low types is avoided. Somewhat paradoxically, the potential presence of
outsider bidders can improve pledgeability incentives and reduce their actual use in managing firms.
Nevertheless, similar to Section III.A.4, in our model outsiders will sometimes take over the firm in states
of low liquidity and they will typically be drafted to enhance pledgeability.

B. Different Assumptions on Ability Loss
    We have seen that the moral hazard over pledgeability is mitigated by low firm stability -- because if
the incumbent loses ability with high probability, in which case she will have to sell, she has incentives to
choose high pledgeability. What if she could lose some ability but not all? As we show in the Internet
Appendix, if she can retain control even after choosing low pledgeability and losing some ability, this
increases the moral hazard over pledgeability. Specifically, given sufficient ability to stay in control, the
more ability she retains, the lower is the incentive-compatible level of debt. The intuition is
straightforward. When she loses some ability but not all, there is more of a chance she can stay in control
and earn rents from underpriced assets, rather than sell. Given that she is more likely to be a buyer than if
she lost all ability, she has lower incentives to increase pledgeability.

        This also means that there is an additional source of allocative inefficiency in this case, when the
incumbent is entrenched and refuses to sell the firm even when she loses ability vis-a-vis experts. Low
pledgeability reduces what she has to pay to stay on, thus increasing her rents from doing so, and can
outweigh any loss in production from her relative disability.

C. Setting Current Pledgeability
    We have assumed that the incumbent only affects future pledgeability. What if she could also affect
current pledgeability? Because current-period debt is already in place, the incumbent manager has no
incentives to increase current-period pledgeability. If she could reduce it, she always would do so,


                                                      31
because current-period debt is already contracted and her action will have no effect on the interest rate
charged. So we could allow the incumbent manager to reduce currently set pledgeability somewhat, so as
to reduce committed payment and increase her wealth, but our analysis would again focus on her choice
of future pledgeability, where the range she chooses from, [γ , γ ] , is computed as the pledgeability she can

set for the future, net of the maximum amount the future incumbent can push inherited pledgeability
down by.

D. Financing Need with Probability    (1 − θ )
    An alternative to the incumbent’s loss of ability as a reason for her to be a seller of the firm is the
need to raise funds. Suppose the incumbent does not lose ability, but rather with probability 1 − θ the
firm faces a liquidity shock that requires that the firm raise L units of capital by the beginning of the next
period to produce cash flows during the next period (a shock similar to that in Holmstrom and Tirole
(1998)). This requirement of L does not change the cash flows in the future-- it simply reduces their net
present value by L . We assume that if cash flows were fully pledgeable, it would make sense to raise and
invest L , but L cannot be raised if pledgeability is low. An alternative narrative for this situation would
define the shock as an investment opportunity that needs funding that is not financeable if the firm’s
assets have low pledgeability.

        It turns out that the need to raise financing has similar effects as the loss of ability – it converts
the incumbent into a seller of (part of) the firm, and gives her incentives to increase pledgeability. While
the details of the analysis obviously differ from what we present above (see the Internet Appendix), the
main conclusions from such an analysis are qualitatively similar.

        An interesting extension would be to consider state-contingent investment opportunities. If there
are fewer funding requirements in bad states, while the industry is very liquid in good states when
financing is needed, the incentives to increase pledgeability would be even lower than what we analyze in
our model.

E. Long-Term Debt Contracts
    We have assumed short-term debt contracts, where the borrower must pay each period to retain
control, as opposed to long-term contracts, where large date-2 payments are specified and only small (or
zero) date-1 payments are promised. An initial bidder at date 0 who borrows long-term debt with no
required payment on date 1 has similar incentives in choosing pledgeability as low types. If she acquires
control of the firm, no payments will be due at date 1, so she always prefers high pledgeability,
conditional on potential underpricing in at least one of the two states. Therefore, she can credibly commit

                                                       32
to repay γ C2 at date 2 and hence can borrow γ C2 up front. Interestingly, this is clearly dominated by

the amount that low types can borrow, so long as the level of date-1 industry liquidity is positive in at
least one of the two states. Intuitively, short-term debt enables low types to sell the asset at a price that
incorporates both the high pledged cash flows in period 2 and experts’ liquidity at date 1. So long-term
debt would not improve on outcomes.

    In general, if the incumbent could dilute the value of old debt (issued at date 0), long-term debt with a
coupon promised on date 1 can never raise more than short-term debt. Such dilution can happen due to
new debt issued at date 1, in which case no long-term debt will be honored. Even if the debt issued on
date 1 is restrained to be junior to existing long-term debt, the incumbent will have incentives to
strategically default and accelerate all claims to date 1, followed by an auction with a new capital
structure (as would happen in a bankruptcy). Intuitively, accelerating claims transfers payments across
periods, and the total amount that the incumbent can repay is capped by experts’ bids. Therefore, payment
acceleration will always lead to (weakly) lower payment overall. With all claims accelerated, long-term
debt essentially becomes short term. Therefore, if the goal is to raise the maximum up-front proceeds, it is
without loss of generality to assume that initial bidders only borrow short-term debt. The Appendix
contains the formal analysis.

F. Public Equity Contracts
    With debt contracts, the firm is auctioned off only if the incumbent misses a payment. We have
assumed that no equity takeover threats can displace the incumbent. Suppose instead that there is a
takeover threat with given probability each period and there is potential underpricing so that takeover bids
are increased by an increase in pledgeability. If the probability of a takeover bid is sufficiently high and
outside shareholders own a sufficient fraction of equity, then the incumbent’s incentives in setting
pledgeability are similar to those with short-term debt: if the incumbent is likely to be a buyer (i.e., she
has the potential to outbid others in a takeover), she will have little incentive to increase pledgeability,
whereas if she is likely to be a seller (i.e., lose her skill or need to raise future funding), she will have
incentives to increase pledgeability. This would suggest that young firms with large future funding needs
or a possible need to sell out will maintain high pledgeability even if they only issue outside equity. As
with our analysis with debt contracts, higher anticipated liquidity in some states will crowd out incentives
to increase pledgeability. The disincentive to raise pledgeability will be more if the incumbent retains a
smaller stake in the firm, which is analogous to having too much debt.




                                                        33
G. State-Contingent Contracts
    What aspects of our analysis hold when we consider state-contingent contracts instead of debt
contracts? It turns out that much of our analysis is preserved, including the sale of the firm to outsiders
because moral hazard over pledgeability limits how much experts can raise for their bids. The focus on
state-contingent contracts also allows us to consider the comparative statics in more detail (see the
                                                                                                         s , Max
Internet Appendix). We can show that the maximum credible payment in state s1, D1                                   , decreases

(weakly) with incumbent wealth ω1                       , because higher ω1
                                               I , s1                     I , s1
                                                                                   means that the incumbent is more likely to

be a buyer, which increases moral hazard over pledgeability. An increase in stability,                       θ , reduces the
maximum feasible payment for similar reasons. Finally, an increase in industry liquidity ω1
                                                                                                                      E , s1
                                                                                                                               always
              s , Max
increases D1             . There are two channels at work here. An increase in industry liquidity pushes up the

amount that experts can pay, B1 (γ 2 ) , for any level of pledgeability, and it expands the parameter
                                        E ,s


ranges in which there is no potential underpricing or the incumbent cannot retain control. Consequently,
again, the maximum pledgeable payment increases.

        What does not carry over to state-contingent contracts is the spillover between future states that is
induced by debt contracts. High liquidity in one future state will not necessarily induce low pledgeability
in other states. This is why we emphasize debt, though the concept of pledgeability applies more
generally.

                                   V. Empirical Implications and Related Literature

A. Empirical Implications

    What are the empirical implications of our work? Our primary novel implication is that in addition to
the positive correlation between liquidity and leverage that other papers predict is an adverse effect on
pledgeability. In general, leverage levels are set to encourage an increase of pledgeability, but in times of
great liquidity, pledgeability might be sacrificed for greater borrowing. At such times, we should observe
a negative correlation between measures of liquidity and proxies for pledgeability.

    A second implication is that in a downturn following a period of great liquidity, we should find
required debt payments to be “excessive” given the availability of liquidity. Not only is debt set to be
repayable in the highly liquid state when added pledgeability is not needed, but given neglected
pledgeability, even levels of expert borrowing against the firm’s assets that are ordinarily consistent with
the reduced liquidity are unsupportable. Therefore, corporate asset sale prices will have a larger-than-
usual discount, and the process of de-leveraging will tend to overshoot on the downside, giving scope for

                                                                     34
re-leveraging once pledgeability is restored. Debt will thus tend to have more amplified cycles than
liquidity.

    Turning to the cross-sectional implications, in growing industries firms are likely to be cash-
constrained. These are firms that would want to enhance pledgeability. At the same time, these are likely
to be young firms without much of a governance record. The empirical implication is that, ceteris paribus,
firms with greater growth opportunities in need of funding are likely to have higher pledgeability.

    Finally, outsiders, including financiers and government entities (like the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation during the Depression), play a useful role after episodes of high liquidity and associated
leverage, not just in preventing fire-sale prices for assets, but also in restoring pledgeability. Firms might
need to be managed at such times, both to maximize cash flows and to improve governance. There may
be a trade-off between the two in that those best positioned to maximize firm cash flows may not have the
incentives to improve governance. Commitments to sell eventually (as with bankruptcy administrators or
leveraged buyout teams) may be important to improve incentives for management to improve governance.

B. Proxies for Pledgeability and Evidence

    When a firm anticipates that it will need to raise financing, it will want to have in place high-quality
auditors who report accounting earnings accurately, which is a form of pledgeability. Our model then
predicts that in booms that are likely to continue, the firm will not have incentives for highly reliable
accounting, whereas in normal times with limited industry liquidity, it will.

    We are not aware of studies that explicitly test for the cyclical demand for ex-ante auditor quality, but
there is evidence of cyclical audit quality, with quality lower during industry booms. Lisowsky, Minnis,
and Sutherland (2017) examine the construction sector over the financing cycle. Specifically, they study
the housing boom-bust cycle over the 2002 to 2011 period and find that banks required, on average, fewer
high-quality, audited financial statements from construction firms (relative to other firms) before lending
to them during the housing boom than prior to 2008. This trend was reversed, however, during the
subsequent downturn between 2008 and 2011. Interestingly, during the downturn, banks that collected
fewer high-quality financial reports also experienced larger loan losses. This pattern is consistent with our
theory of the financing cycle whereby high industry liquidity induces low pledgeability, which leads to a
larger loss-given-default if a downturn occurs.

    Consider another suggestive bit of evidence. Our model predicts that low-reliability accounting will
be chosen (and subsequently unearthed) when liquidity is anticipated to be plentiful at the time of choice.
Compustat reports the auditor's opinion of the effectiveness of the company's internal controls over


                                                      35
financial reporting while auditing a company's financial statements, an opinion that is mandated by
Section 404 of the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of
deficiencies, in internal controls over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a
material misstatement of the company's annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or
detected on a timely basis. When an auditor indicates a material weakness, it signals a previously
undetected choice to degrade accounting reliability, and thus can serve as a measure of a previous choice
of low pledgeability.       Figure 6 shows that the percentage of Compustat firms with a material weakness
with respect to internal controls fell sharply during the crisis, and started to increase again as central
banks around the world maintained extremely liquid conditions in financial markets.




                                             Figure 6. Weakness of internal control.

This figure plots the series of percentage of firms that were reported as having weak internal controls. The data are obtained as
the variable AUOPIC from the Compustat Annual database. This dummy variable is set to one for firms reporting an internal
control deficiency, that is a material weakness in the client’s internal control systems, in the restatement year and/or the two
subsequent years, otherwise it is set to zero.

     Loan contracts with few covenants could also be a proxy for the choice of low pledgeability. While
such a loan contract does not prevent subsequent potential acquirers from issuing debt with strong
covenants, it does allow the firm to violate conditions that would typically be written into strong
covenants – such as capital ratios or minimum liquidity and quick asset ratios. As a result, a subsequent
would-be acquirer may find that the firm simply cannot issue debt with strong and detailed covenants – it
would be in violation immediately. More generally, covenant-lite loans may reflect a general disdain for
cash flow pledgeability, given that abundant liquidity makes it easy to raise loans.


                                                                36
    If so, in bad to normal times we should see many covenants and relatively low levels of leverage
when fresh capital structures are chosen (such as when the firm comes out of bankruptcy). In contrast,
during booms we should see higher leverage and greater use of covenant-lite loans (i.e., loans without
maintenance covenants such as maximum payout ratios or minimum liquid asset ratios). Boom periods
could also see an increase in the fraction of unmonitored market finance (bonds or covenant lite loans)
relative to intermediated finance (covenant-intensive bank debt). Indeed, in Figure 7 we see that the
pattern in the use of covenant-lite loans mirrors the weakness in internal controls depicted in Figure 6 –
there is an increase in the use of covenant-lite loans in the 2006 to 2007 period of extremely high
liquidity, followed by a fall, then an increase as central banks instituted extremely accommodative
conditions. Becker and Ivashina (2016) show that before 2004, covenant-lite leveraged loans were
extremely rare, except for higher levels between 1% and 5% during the 1997 to 1999 period, the liquid
period of the dot-com boom.




                          Figure 7. Covenant-lite loans and as fraction of leveraged loans.

        Finally, the fluctuation in debt capacity over the cycle may be larger if the range over which
pledgeability can fluctuate is larger. To the extent that financial infrastructure such as accounting


                                                         37
standards or collateral registries as well as contract enforcement are at levels high enough to ensure high
minimum pledgeability over the cycle, they prevent large fluctuations in asset pledgeability and hence
credit. Countries with more developed financial infrastructure should have more muted financial cycles
stemming from variation in pledgeability.

C. Related Literature

    Our paper builds on Shleifer and Vishny (1992), where the high net worth of industry participants
allows assets to sell for their fundamental value because the best user of an asset can outbid less efficient
users. This leads to efficient reallocation in good times (also see Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014)).
Shleifer and Vishny (1992) argue that debt set to curb overinvestment in a boom can prove problematic in
a downturn, as reallocation to inefficient users takes place because experts are less liquid than outsiders.
The key difference in our paper is the source of managerial moral hazard -- not overinvestment but
pledgeability. The interesting results in our model emerge because as liquidity increases leverage, it also
depresses pledgeability. Higher anticipated liquidity would not be problematic in Shleifer and Vishny
(1992) if debt were renegotiable ex post, unlike in our model where its effects can be transmitted through
lower pledgeability into worse allocations ex post and lower funding ex ante.

    Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008) develop a theory in which asset reallocation is more efficient in good
times. Good times increase required cash compensation to managers because reservation managerial
wages become elevated. As a result, high-ability managers will accept lower wages in return for the
benefit of managing more assets. They use the differential compensation to bribe low-ability managers to
give up their assets. In bad times, managerial compensation is lower and even if high-ability managers
accepted zero cash compensation, it would not be sufficient to bribe low-ability managers to give up their
assets. This leads to a more efficient reallocation of capital (high compensation and therefore high
manager liquidity) in good times and less in bad.

    In both Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2008), adjusting for current conditions
(such as industry net worth or compensation), past actions do not affect financial capacity or the
efficiency of asset reallocation today. In contrast, in our model history matters over and above the effects
of leverage because of pledgeability, which allows us to explain prolonged downturns following booms
and to sketch the possibility of financing cycles.

    Our notion of pledgeability relates to Dow, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2005), who present a model
in which debt essentially serves the function of high pledgeability by forcing payouts. In contrast, we
distinguish between debt and pledgeability. Thus, while Dow, Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2005) would
predict high pledgeability in booms (which accords with our prediction on debt), our model predicts low

                                                     38
pledgeability (in the sense of poorer governance). 9 Holmstrom and Tirole’s (1997, 1998) notion of
pledgeability differs from ours in that they define it to be the amount that can be paid to outsiders taking
into account moral hazard stemming from outside claims (similar to Diamond (1991), Section IX). Thus,
in their model pledgeability is an outcome of capital structure choices and the environment, whereas in
our paper it is a direct choice variable that constrains tunneling.

    Acharya and Viswanathan (2011) also predict that an anticipated boom that does not materialize can
lead to a more severe downturn because it encourages more entry heterogeneity. 10 An increase in
liquidity will always increase ex-ante financing in their paper, but not ours. Rampini and Viswanathan
(2010) present a dynamic model that gives rise to an endogenous state-contingent collateral constraint and
predicts a less efficient allocation of capital in bad times; more productive firms will use their net worth to
invest and will hedge less, giving them less future net worth in future recessions. Our paper assumes away
contingent contracting (when we study debt contracts) but endogenizes the pledgeability choice ( θ in
their paper, for example). By doing so, we are able to discuss the implications of high industry liquidity
(as opposed to the firm’s own net worth) on pledgeability, leverage, and alternative financing methods.

    Our paper also bears some resemblance to papers where a small probability of a regime change is
irrationally (Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015)) or rationally (Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2012))
neglected, though our results on the effect of anticipated liquidity on leverage and pledgeability hold even
if the probability of the seemingly neglected state is not small. Our point is that the low pledgeability set
in good times cannot be reversed immediately in bad times, unlike expectations of outcomes or
information acquisition or even leverage, because pledgeability takes time to reset. Therefore, not only is
there a collapse in access to finance, but a restoration of access takes time. Our result resembles papers by
Geanakoplos (for instance, Geanakoplos (2010)) that show how belief heterogeneity generates leverage
cycles—which are analogous to our financing cycles. Our model instead assumes that all agents have the
same beliefs about the future and that high leverage pushes them to rationally neglect to prepare (by
neglecting pledgeability) for less liquid states.




9
  Phillipon (2006) presents a model in which firms vary in the quality of their corporate governance and overinvest
in the absence of good governance. In a boom that raises the productivity of all firms, those firms with poor
governance face less outside restrictions on investment and are able to raise more funding. This leads to greater
fluctuations in productivity and investment than in an economy with good corporate governance in all firms. Our
paper focuses more on changes in governance over the cycle but is similar to Phillipon (2006) in that effective
governance is lower in a boom.
10
   This is also related to Dell’Arriccia and Marquez (2006), who show that high credit demand reduces the degree of
adverse selection in the market and thus causes banks to suspend screening. See Hu (2018) for a dynamic extension
with borrowers’ endogenous entry.

                                                        39
                                               VI. Conclusion

    In good times, bidders have plentiful liquidity and do not need cash flow pledgeability to make high
bids. Firms can issue enforceable debt contracts without maintaining cash flow pledgeability. This
alternative source of commitment seems unnecessary when times largely promise to be good, and
incentives to maintain high pledgeability are further reduced by the high leverage that is induced by
liquidity.

    When bad times hit, financing capacity plunges, and outsiders who have better ability to take on
leverage may outbid experts. Cash flow pledgeability now becomes key to debt capacity, and industry
outsiders have incentives to increase it even in the face of high debt – it is precisely their ineffectiveness
in managing the asset that makes them immune from moral hazard over pledgeability. As cash flow
pledgeability increases and industry cash flows recover somewhat, experts can once again bid large
amounts and return to controlling firms. As liquidity among experts increases further, incentives to
maintain cash flow pledgeability wane once again, and the cycle resumes.

    In this paper we focus on the choice of pledgeability, assuming that both the incumbent and experts
have access to the same sources of pledgeability. However, incumbent pledgeability could be different
from the pledgeability that experts can employ – the incumbent may be able to borrow more from
relationship banks than can an industry expert who does not know the bankers. The gap between
incumbent pledgeability and industry pledgeability, especially over the cycle, deserves study.

        The existence of institutions that support pledgeability may also change over the financing cycle.
When there is a prolonged aggregate boom (with a good probability of continuing), there will be little
demand for increased pledgeability. The institutions and professions that reinforce pledgeability will
atrophy, and those with related skills (such as forensic accountants) will depart these professions. This
would make it more difficult to increase pledgeability when other firms do not value such an increase. We
plan to explore more of these implications in future work.

        In this paper we also assume that the industry’s net worth, which are the source of liquidity, is
independent of the availability of finance. In practice, the latter will determine investment, which will
drive cash flows and net worth. A more comprehensive model that analyzes interactions between the two
is left to future work.

        Finally, in ongoing work, we recognize that pledgeability may be jointly determined by firm
managers and a lender, say, by the latter monitoring more closely and insisting on a variety of conditional
control rights through covenants. Since such lenders-- typically financial intermediaries-- will need to


                                                      40
raise money themselves, and will have to bind themselves to do the right thing by preserving sufficient
“skin in the game” through capital, we can get implications for the effects of liquidity on intermediary
capital ratios (see Diamond, Hu, and Rajan (2019) for an initial effort). The model, therefore, offers rich
prospects for future work.




                                                     41
                                             REFERENCES

Acharya, Viral V., and S. Viswanathan, 2011, Leverage, moral hazard, and liquidity, Journal of Finance
66, 99-138.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2010, Liquidity and leverage, Journal of Financial Intermediation
19, 418-437.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2016, Covenant-light contracts and creditor coordination, Working
paper, Stockholm School of Economics.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman, 2011, Bankruptcy and the collateral channel, Journal of
Finance 66, 337-378.

Borio, Claudio, 2014, The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt? Journal of Banking
and Finance 45, 182-198.

Borio, Claudio, and Philip Lowe, 2002, Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the
nexus, Bank for International Settlements working paper 114.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector,
American Economic Review 104, 379-421.

Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets, Journal of
Financial Economics 86, 479-512.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, 2012, Ignorance, debt and financial crises, Working
paper, Yale University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Dell’Arricia, Giovanni, and Robert Marquez, 2006, Lending booms and lending standards, Journal of
Finance 61, 2511-2546.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1991, Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk, Quarterly Journal of Economics
106, 709-737

Diamond, Douglas W., Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2019, Liquidity and the Structure of
Intermediation, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Dow, James, Gary B. Gorton, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2005, Equilibrium investment and asset prices
under imperfect corporate control, American Economic Review 95, 659-681.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini, 2006, Capital reallocation and liquidity, Journal of
Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini, 2008, Managerial incentives, capital reallocation, and the
business cycle, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 177–199.

Geanakoplos, John, 2010, The leverage cycle, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24, 1-66.



                                                    42
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2015, Neglected risks: The psychology of
financial crises, American Economic Review 105, 310-314.

Harford, Jarrad, 2005, What drives merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77, 529-560.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human capital,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1995, Debt and seniority: An analysis of the role of hard claims in
constraining management, American Economic Review 85, 567-585.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1998, Private and public supply of liquidity, Journal of Political
Economy 106, 1-40.

Hu, Yunzhi, 2018, A dynamic theory of bank lending, firm entry, and investment fluctuations, Working
paper, University of North Carolina.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency cost of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American
Economic Review 76, 323-329

Jensen, Michael C., 1997, Eclipse of the public corporation, Harvard Business Review (Sept.-Oct. 1989),
revised.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105, 211-248.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir, 2017, How credit cycles across a financial crisis, Working paper,
Stanford Graduate School of Business.

Lisowsky, Petro, Michael Minnis, and Andrew Sutherland, 2017, Economic growth and financial
statement verification, Journal of Accounting Research 55, 745-794.

López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2017, Credit-market sentiment and the
business cycle, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1373-1426.

Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-
175.

Philippon, Thomas, 2006, Corporate governance over the business cycle, Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 30, 2117–2141

Rajan, Raghuram G., 2012, Presidential address: The corporation in finance, Journal of Finance 67,
1173-1217.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Rodney Ramcharan, 2015, The anatomy of a credit crisis: The boom and bust in
farm land prices in the United States in the 1920s, American Economic Review 105, 1439-1477.



                                                   43
Rampini, Adriano A., and S. Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the distribution of
debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293-2322.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2011, Fire sales in finance and macroeconomics, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 25, 29-48




                                                  44
                                                                          Appendix
A. Proof of Proposition 4
         We can define D=
                        G , PayIC
                        1                              ( )
                                  θ B1E ,G γ + (1 − θ ) B1E ,G ( γ ) − ε and

D=
 1
  B , PayIC
            θ B1E , B ( γ ) + (1 − θ ) B1E , B ( γ ) − ε such that the benefits from choosing high versus low

                                  (
pledgeability satisfy ∆1G D1G , PayIC =         )            (                   )
                                                      0 . Since ∆1s ( Dˆ1s ) decreases (weakly) monotonically
                                      ∆1B D1B , PayIC =

in Dˆ1s , there exists a D1 ∈  D1B , PayIC , γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC  that satisfies

q∆1G ( D1 − γ 1C1 ) + (1 − q ) ∆1B ( D1 ) =
                                          0. Let D1IC be that D1 , or the maximum such D1 if not unique.11
             IC
Then D1 will be such that the incumbent sees an expected positive benefit from raising pledgeability in

the G state (because D1 < γ 1C1 + D1
                                  IC                   G , PayIC
                                                                   ) and an equal expected negative benefit (or cost) from doing

so in the B state (because D1 > D1
                                          IC         B , PayIC
                                                                 ). The net benefit of setting high pledgeability in either state is

summarized by Lemma 2. Note that the (expected) benefit in state G is capped at

q (1 − θ )  B1E ,G ( γ ) − B1E ,G ( γ )  , and the (expected) cost in state B is at most

− (1 − q ) θ  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  .

                                                                 IC
         By setting the face value of debt to D1 , the incumbent is able to raise

qD1IC + (1 − q ) min { D1IC , B1E , B ( γ           )} at date 0. If         D1IC ≥ γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) , the incentive-compatible level
of debt is what enables the incumbent to raise the most up front. Otherwise, if γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ > D1IC , we                 ()
                                                          D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ
have to check if the incumbent can borrow more by setting =                                                    ( ) and raising
     (                      )
q γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) + (1 − q ) B1E , B ( γ ) up front. Let D1Max be the face value of debt that raises the
maximum amount at date 0.

         Before we derive conditions for high pledgeability choices, let us explain the expected gains and
                                                                                                   ( )
losses in both states. Note that the face value, if set at γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ , is strictly below γ 1C1 + D1
                                                                                                                                      G , PayIC
                                                                                                                                                  .
Thus, in state G, the incumbent would always prefer high pledgeability. The size of the gain from
choosing high pledgeability is ∆1 = (1 − θ )  B1
                                                G
                                                                      
                                                                          E ,G
                                                                                 (γ ) − B1E ,G ( γ ) − ε . Intuitively, if the incumbent


11
     Note that                                                                            (1 − q )θ  B1E , B (γ ) − B1E , B ( γ ) . If
                  D1IC is not unique only if q (1 − θ )  B1E ,G ( γ ) − B1E ,G ( γ )  =
so, we can pick the highest            D1IC .

                                                                                     45
                                      D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ
keeps her ability, she needs to repay =                            ( ) no matter what pledgeability choice she
makes. If she loses her ability, which occurs with probability 1 − θ , the incumbent can sell the asset for
additional value of  B1 ( γ ) − B1
                       
                        E ,G       E ,G
                                             ( )
                                        γ  with high pledgeability. Therefore, the overall benefit is

(1 − θ )  B1E ,G (γ ) − B1E ,G ( γ ) − ε . Next, we examine the net loss if she chooses high pledgeability in
state B when =                         ( )
             D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ . Note that the net loss −∆1B is at most −θ  B1              
                                                                                                     E ,B
                                                                                                            (γ ) − B1E , B ( γ ) − ε .
                                                                              ( )
                                            D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ ≥ B1E , B ( γ ) . Intuitively, if the
This maximum net loss arises if and only if =
incumbent loses ability, she does not receive anything from the sale of assets after repaying debt,
whatever level of pledgeability she chooses. If she keeps her ability, which occurs with probability θ , she
needs to make additional payments if she chooses high pledgeability, which amounts to
B1E ,B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ ) . Hence, the net loss from choosing high pledgeability.

    For the remainder of the proof, we will derive both sufficient and necessary conditions for
D1Max = D1IC . Depending on parameters, we will analyze two different cases.

                            ( )
    1. If γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ ≤ B1E , B ( γ ) , so that the liquidity in state G is not far from liquidity in state B.

             a. If q (1 − θ ) ≥ (1 − q ) θ , or equivalently q ≥ θ , then at =
                                                                             D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ , the            ( )
                 maximum expected gains in state G is attained, whereas the expected losses in state B is
                 strictly below its maximum. Therefore, a sufficient condition for the gains to dominate
                 the losses is

                   {                                           }               {                                         }
                  q (1 − θ )  B1E ,G ( γ ) − B1E ,G ( γ )  − ε ≥ (1 − q ) −θ  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε . Given
                 the assumption that the asset is underpriced even with high pledgeability (so that

                   B1 ( γ ) − B1 ( γ )  =
                  =  E ,G         E ,G
                                            B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  ( γ − γ ) C2 ), this is equivalent to
                                                                            
                  q (1 − θ ) ≥ (1 − q ) θ when ε → 0 , or equivalently, q ≥ θ . Therefore, under conditions

                                                   ( )
                 in this case, γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ < D1IC and high pledgeability is always guaranteed.


             b. If q < θ ,
                           i. Comparing the incremental expected benefit from raising pledgeability when
                             D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) , it is easy to see that
                             =

                                   (           )               (              )
                              q∆1G B1E ,G ( γ ) > (1 − q )∆1B γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) if

                              q (1 − θ ) ( γ − γ ) C ≥ (1 − q ) {γ C + B ( γ )  − D
                                                    2                 1   1     1
                                                                                 E ,G
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                B , PayIC
                                                                                                            } . Then
                              γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) < D1IC and high pledgeability is always guaranteed. The



                                                             46
                                                         (         )                            {
                                 condition q (1 − θ ) γ − γ C2 ≥ (1 − q ) γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ  − D1B , PayIC can be
                                                                                                                           ( )                 }
                                                                                                                               1−θ
                                                                                    (
                                 expressed in terms of primitives: γ 1C1 + ω1E ,G − ω1E , B ≤                )                 1− q
                                                                                                                                    ( γ − γ ) C2 .
                                               (        )                      {                           ( )
                           ii. If q (1 − θ ) γ − γ C2 < (1 − q ) γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ  − D1B , PayIC , then following                  }
                                 the previous bullet point, q∆1 B1
                                                                        G
                                                                            (        E ,G
                                                                                            (γ ) ) < (1 − q)∆ (γ C + B (γ ) ) so that
                                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                         1     1 1       1
                                                                                                                                          E ,G



                                 D1IC < γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) . In this case, we can derive the explicit expression
                                                            q (1 − θ )
                                 D1IC → D1B , PayIC +
                                                              1− q
                                                                       (γ − γ ) C2 as ε → 0 . In this case, high
                                 pledgeability is chosen if and only if
                                 D1IC > q γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ )  + (1 − q ) B1E , B ( γ ) .

                                ( )
    2. If γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ > B1E , B ( γ ) ,

                                                                   ( )
              a. If q ≥ θ , then D1IC > γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ ≥ B1E , B ( γ                              )    and high pledgeability is always
                       guaranteed. The proof follows case 1a, with the minor difference that at
                       D1 γ 1C1 + B1E ,G ( γ ) , both the maximum expected gains in state G and the maximum
                       =
                       expected losses in state B are attained.
                                                            ( )
              b. If q < θ , then γ 1C1 + B1E ,G γ ≥ B1E , B ( γ ) > D1IC . Similarly, we can derive the explicit

                                                               q (1 − θ )
                       expression D1 → D1
                                    IC   B , PayIC
                                                   +
                                                                 1− q
                                                                          (γ − γ ) C2 as ε → 0 . In this case, high
                       pledgeability is chosen if and only if D1 > q γ 1C1 + B1
                                                                            IC
                                                                                            
                                                                                                                 E ,G
                                                                                                                        (γ ) + (1 − q ) B (γ ) .
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                              E ,B




        To summarize, by combining case 1a, 1bi, and 2a, a set of sufficient conditions for high
                                                                                                                                   1−θ
pledgeability is i) q ≥ θ (case 1a and 2a), or ii) q < θ and γ 1C1 + ω1E ,G − ω1E , B ≤ (                         )                1− q
                                                                                                                                        ( γ − γ ) C2
(case 1bi).

B. Proof of Lemma 3
                                                                               B
        Under Assumption 2b, V1I , B D1B , γ    (        ) and V ( D , γ ) are given as follows:
                                                                   1
                                                                    I ,B
                                                                                 1


                                                                                                            
                              −ε                                                                       if D1B > B1E , B ( γ )
                      B     E , B        B                                                                            
        V1I , B   (   D1=,γ ) B1 ( γ ) − D1 − ε
                                                          B
                                                                                                        if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                 )
                             
                             θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1 ( γ ) − D1 − ε                                         if D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ )
                                                 E ,B




                                                                       47
                                                                                         
                             −ε                                                     if D1B > B1E , B ( γ )
                                         B                                                          
                             E ,B
        V1I , B   (      ,γ
                      D1B=  )
                             B1 ( γ ) − D1 − ε                                      if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ )
                                                        B                              
                            θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1 ( γ ) − D1 − ε                      if D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ )
                                                E ,B




        The first and second case in both value functions are explained in the main body of the paper. In
the third case, the promised payment levels are below the incumbent’s bid B1
                                                                                                    I ,B
                                                                                                            (γ 2 ) , so she is able to
                             B
stay in control by repaying D1 . She chooses to do so if she keeps her ability, whereas she sells the firm if
                                                                                       B
she loses ability. The continuation value in this case is θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1 ( γ 2 ) − D1 − ε ⋅1{γ ≥γ } .
                                                                            E ,B
                                                                                                                          2


                                                                                                      
                                                             ( )            (
                                                      V1I , B D1B , γ − V1I , B D1B , γ
        Taking the difference, the results on ∆ B D1B =                                  )          (           )   naturally follow.


                      ( )
       If B1E , B γ <B1I , B ( γ ) , then

                                                                                       
                   −ε                                                              if D1B > B1E , B ( γ )
                    B E ,B γ − D     B                                                               
                     1    (   )       1 −ε                                         if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ )
              B                                                                                     
        ∆B   ( )
              D1 = θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1E , B ( γ ) − D1B − ε                          if B1E , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ )
                                                                                                      
                   θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1 ( γ ) − B1 ( γ ) − ε                         if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ )
                                           E ,B             E ,B

                                                                                       
                    1 − θ )  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε                if D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ ) .
                   (

                      ( )
       If B1E , B γ ≥ B1I , B ( γ ) , then

                          −ε                                                            
                                                                                     if D1B > B1E , B ( γ )
                          
                           B E , B ( γ ) − D B − ε                                                    
                                                                                     if B1E , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ )
                           1                  1
                                                                                                     
             ( )
        ∆ B D1B         =   B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε                 if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1E , B ( γ )
                                                                                                      
                          θ C2 + (1 − θ ) B1 ( γ ) − B1 ( γ ) − ε                  if B1I , B ( γ ) <D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ )
                                                    E ,B            E ,B

                                                                                       
                           1 − θ )  B1E , B ( γ ) − B1E , B ( γ )  − ε           if D1B ≤ B1I , B ( γ ) .
                          (                                          



C. Long-Term Contracts
        Suppose an initial bidder borrows long-term debt with D2 due at date 2 and nothing due at date 1.

During period 1, she knows that if she keeps her ability, she receives C2 − D2 . If she loses ability,

however, she needs to sell the firm. At date 1, experts in the industry will bid

                                                                   48
   B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , D2 ) = min {ω1E , s1 + max ( γ 2C2 − D2 , 0 ) , C2 − D2 } , assuming that all new debt they issue is

  junior to the original long-term debt (if it were senior, then they would fully dilute it and the incumbent

  could borrow nothing at date 0). The first term,            ω1E , s + max ( γ 2C2 − D2 , 0 ) , is industry liquidity and the
                                                                     1




  amount that can still be borrowed with junior debt after D2 gets repaid. The second term, C2 − D2 , is

  the value of the firm to acquirers because they need to pay off the debt D2 at date 2. Therefore, the

  incumbent’s expected payoff after acquiring control of the firm is

   θ ( C2 − D2 ) + (1 − θ )  qB1E ,G ( γ 2 , D2 ) + (1 − q ) B1E , B ( γ 2 , D2 )  . Clearly, the payoff increases weakly

  with γ 2 and high pledgeability γ 2 = γ is chosen if D2 ≤ γ C2 . Therefore, the maximum date-2 payment

  from debt (and therefore the maximum upfront borrowing amount) is D2 = γ C2 . However, a low-ability

  manager (or equivalently a financier) can borrow qB1
                                                                         E ,G
                                                                                (γ ) + (1 − q ) B1E , B (γ ) , which clearly dominates
   γ C2 . Therefore, if initial bidders can only borrow long-term debt without a date-1 payment, a financier
  can always raise more than a high-ability manager at the initial date 0. Note that long-term debt without a
  date-1 payment may enable the expert to raise more than the case when she could only borrow one-
  period, short-term debt. For example, consider the parameters in Section III.B and further assume that the

                                                             ω0 ω=
  borrower has no initial liquidity and state B is realized: =   1
                                                                                 E      E ,B
                                                                   0 . In this case, an expert who

  borrows one-period short-term debt borrows up to B0
                                                                         E
                                                                             (γ 1 ) = D1B, PayIC as q → 0 . Since ω1E , B = 0 ,
B0E ( γ 1 ) D1B , PayIC = θγ + (1 − θ ) γ  C2 , which falls below γ C2 , the amount that an expert can raise
=
  with long-term debt.

            Next, note that long-term debt with positive payments on dates 1 and 2 could possibly raise more
  for experts than both short-term debt alone and a financier’ bids. One such example is if q → 1 , the

  initial bidder sets D1 = ω1
                                   E ,G
                                          + γ 1C1 (assuming ω1E ,G < (1 − γ ) C2 ) and D2 = γ C2 . This debt structure, if
  not renegotiated or accelerated (see below), circumvents the moral hazard issues in pledgeability choices
  (by locking up all future value and preventing increased pledgeability from increasing bids on date 1) and

  therefore raises ω1
                        E ,G
                               + γ 1C1 + γ C2 , exceeding both low types bids ω1E ,G + γ C2 and the amount that high

  types can raise using short-term debt only ( ω1
                                                           E ,G
                                                                  + γ 1C1 + D1G , PayIC in the case ω1I ,G ≥ ω1E ,G and

   ω1E ,G + γ 1C1 + γ C2 in the case ω1I ,G < ω1E ,G ).



                                                                     49
               However, we now show that whenever the initial expert can raise more by using long-term debt
with payments on both dates, she has incentives to default strategically and accelerate all the claims to
date 1. To proceed, we assume D2 ≤ γ C2 without loss of generality. We will show that the incumbent

always prefers to strategically default on any contract that raises more than short-term debt, accelerating
all claims to date 1, regardless of whether she retains her ability or not. Let us first examine the
incumbent’s payoff when she retains her ability. If she does not default strategically, her payoff is
                                                                  
                {                           }                                         {                   }
C2 − min D1s1 , B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , D2 ) − D2 -- she needs to pay min D1s1 , B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , D2 ) to retain control of the

firm and pay D2 at date 2 in exchange for the asset’s continuation cash flow C2 . If she defaults
                                                        s
strategically, she receives C2 − min D1 1 + D2 , B1 {              E , s1
                                                                             (γ 2 , 0 )} . Clearly,
                                                    
                {                               }              {                              }
C2 − min D1s1 + D2 , B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , 0 ) ≥ C2 − min D1s1 , B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , D2 ) − D2 , so the incumbent would

always accelerate the payment and pay (weakly) less overall. This inequality is strict if D2 > γ 2C2 and
                         
ω1E , s < min {C2 − D2 , D1s } . Intuitively, if the incumbent accelerates the payments, the total amount that
       1                               1




she can repay at date 1 is capped by the bids from experts.

               Next, we examine the incumbent’s payoff if she loses ability. This payoff is equivalent to one that
delivers if she cannot outbid experts even if she keeps her ability. If she does not accelerate the payments,
                                                    
her payoff is max B1      {   E , s1
                                       (γ 2 , D2 ) − D1s , 0} . If she accelerates, her payoff is
                                                        1



                           
           {                                    }
max B1E , s1 ( γ 2 , 0 ) − D1s1 − D2 , 0 . We show that these two payoffs are always identical to each other in
the relevant cases. Note that

                            s1                                                               
           {
max B1E , s1 ( γ=
                2 , D2 ) − D1 , 0         { {
                                           }
                                  max min ω1E , s1 + max ( γ 2C2 − D2 , 0 ) − D1s1 , C2 − D2 − D1s1 , 0 and             } }
                                                                                                            
           {
max B1E , s1          2   ) − D − D , 0} max {min {ω
                    (γ , 0=     1
                                 s1
                                           2                       1
                                                                    E , s1
                                                                                                                  } }
                                                                              + γ 2C2 − D2 − D1s1 , C2 − D2 − D1s1 , 0 . If

D2 < γ 2C2 , these two payoffs are clearly identical. This is the case if γ 2 = γ has been chosen.

Therefore, the only case in which the incumbent might not accelerate debt payments is γ C2 < D2 < γ C2

and low pledgeability γ 2 = γ has been chosen. 12 In this case, the incumbent could overpromise the



12
     In general, the initial incumbent could overpromise payments at date 2, D2 > γ C2 , which would help her
commit not to accelerate payments if she loses her ability and needs to sell the firm. We exclude this possibility as it
is public information that the payments due at date 2 can never exceed γ C2 .

                                                                        50
payments at date 2 to commit not to accelerate the debt ( D2 > γ C2 ). But if so, neither the incumbent nor

experts can borrow against the output in period 2. The maximal amount that can be raised ex ante is

q ( γ 1C1 + ω1E ,G ) + (1 − q ) ω1E , B + γ C2 , which is dominated by the amount that can be raised by using

short-term debt alone (see Sections III.B, III.C, III.D). Therefore, it can never be optimal to set up such a
debt structure in the first place.




                                                       51
