                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TARGETED REMEDIAL EDUCATION:
                         EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM PERU

                                       Juan Saavedra
                                    Emma Näslund-Hadley
                                      Mariana Alfonso

                                      Working Paper 23050
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23050


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




Saavedra (corresponding author): University of Southern California Dornsife Center for
Economic and Social Research, and National Bureau of Economic Research, juansaav@usc.edu;
Näslund-Hadley: Inter-American Development Bank; Alfonso: Inter-American Development
Bank. We thank Richard Murnane and Anna Saavedra for helpful comments. We also thank the
Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) Peru team, especially Andrea Cornejo and Adam Kemmis
Betty, for their invaluable support on the field. We acknowledge financial support from the Japan
Poverty Fund of the Inter-American Development Bank. The research activities reported in this
study have approval from the USC and IPA institutional review boards. This field trial was pre-
registered with the American Economic Association’s RCT Registry Number
AEARCTR-0000379, www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/379. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Juan Saavedra, Emma Näslund-Hadley, and Mariana Alfonso. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Targeted Remedial Education: Experimental Evidence from Peru
Juan Saavedra, Emma Näslund-Hadley, and Mariana Alfonso
NBER Working Paper No. 23050
January 2017
JEL No. I21,I25,O15,O54

                                           ABSTRACT

An outstanding challenge in education is improving learning among low-achieving students. We
present results from the first randomized experiment of an inquiry-based remedial science-
education program for low-performing elementary students in the setting of a developing country.
At 48 low-income public elementary schools in Lima, Peru and surrounding areas, third-grade
students scoring in the bottom half of their science classes were selected at random to receive up
to 16 remedial sessions of 90 minutes each during the school year. Control-group compliance
with assignment (no extra tutoring) was close to perfect. Treatment-group compliance was
roughly 40 percent, or five to six remedial sessions—a 4 to 5 percent increase in total science
instruction time over the school year. Despite the low-intensity treatment, students assigned to the
remedial sessions scored 0.12 standard deviations higher on a science endline test. But all
improvements were concentrated among boys, for whom gains were 0.22 standard deviations.
Remedial education does not produce within-student spillovers to math, or spillovers on other
students.

Juan Saavedra                                                   Mariana Alfonso
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research                Inter American Development Bank
University of Southern California                               1300 New York Avenue, N.W.
635 Downey Way                                                  Washington, D.C. 20577
Los Angeles, CA 90089                                           marianaa@iadb.org
and NBER
juansaav@usc.edu

Emma Näslund-Hadley
Inter American Development Bank
1300 New York Avenue N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20577
EMMAN@iadb.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/379
1. Introduction


   An outstanding challenge in education is improving learning among low-achieving students.

Many developing countries—including most in Latin America—have centralized educational

systems with standardized curricula and textbooks. Teachers typically teach the curriculum,

rarely setting aside the time to assist struggling students (e.g., Banerjee, et al. 2007). Teachers

also may fail to address all students’ needs by teaching the same content at different skill levels

(Duflo, et al. 2011).

   Some argue that poor academic performance on international assessments may be the result

of many students falling behind the national curriculum (e.g., Glewwe, et al. 2009). In Peru, for

example, only 27 percent of grade-2 students meet the grade-specific proficiency level in math

(MINEDU 2015). In comparative international assessments, Peruvian students typically score at

the bottom. Of 65 nations participating in the 2012 application of the PISA test, Peru ranked last

in both in math and natural science. Seventy-five percent of Peruvian students were low

achievers in math as compared to 23 percent of OECD students (OECD 2013). In the 2013

TERCE regional study, close to 40 percent of sixth-grade Peruvian students scored at the lowest

level of achievement in science (LLECE, 2015).

   To address these dismal results, the government of Peru piloted two programs, in 2010 and

2012, to improve science performance in third grade, which is when students first receive

dedicated science instruction. These programs, based on the 2008 national curricular standards

for science, mostly consisted of training teachers to use student-centered methodologies.

Consistent with the idea of many students falling behind the national curriculum, a randomized




                                                                                                 2
evaluation concluded that the 2010 pilot program only improved the achievement of third-grade

students who already had above-average baseline performances (Beuermann, et al. 2013).1

    Remedial education, by which students receive targeted, self-paced teaching, shows promise

at improving short- and medium-term academic performance of low-achieving students in a

variety of contexts. However, evidence on remedial education mostly is limited to improving

basic math and literacy skills.2 The evidence on such education suggests direct instruction may

be an effective pedagogical model for low-achieving students (e.g., Houtveen and van de Grift

2007, 2012; Kaiser, et al. 1989; Linan-Thompson and Vaughn 2007). But research on whole-

class science instruction suggests that inquiry-based instruction—in which students engage in

hands-on practical work with different degrees of teacher guidance— improves learning more

than traditional classroom practices (e.g., Brickman, et al. 2009; Ergül, et al. 2011; Hmelo-Silver

2004; Harris, et al. 2014).

    It is unclear whether inquiry-based instruction is effective for low-achieving, early-grade

students (e.g., Hmelo-Silver 2004). We present experimental evidence on an inquiry-based

remedial science-education program targeting low-achieving third-grade students in 48 low-

income public elementary schools in Lima, Peru and surrounding areas—those same students left

1
 These results are consistent, for instance, with evidence from Kenya that textbook provision only raised the
academic performance of high achievers at baseline (Glewwe, Kremer and Moulin 2009)

  In the US, for example, a meta-analysis of 31 elementary school tutoring programs for students at risk of reading
2

failure concludes that tutoring raises reading achievement by .67 standard deviations (Elbaum et al. 2000). Another
US meta-analysis of 35 math and reading tutoring interventions for at risk elementary students concludes that
remedial education appears to be equally effective at improving learning in both subject areas (Lauer et al. 2006).
However, a meta-analysis of randomized experiments of elementary education volunteer tutors concluded that
tutoring improves reading, but has no effect on math skills (Ritter et al. 2009). In India, remedial tutoring targeting
the bottom third of students raises student achievement, particularly in math (Banerjee et al. 2007). Evidence also
suggests that trained teachers are more effective tutors than non-teachers. A systematic review of 97 tutoring
interventions reveals that the impact on student achievement is greater with teacher tutors as opposed to volunteers
and paraprofessionals (Slavin et al. 2011). In terms of duration, a meta-analysis of 35 math and reading tutoring
programs concludes that programs of moderate duration (45–85 hours) have greater effect on both reading and math
achievement than programs of longer duration. The effects are similar whether tutoring took place in the afternoon,
on Saturdays or during the summer (Lauer et al. 2006).



                                                                                                                     3
behind by the previous pilot programs to improve science achievement among third graders. To

our knowledge, this is the first rigorous study documenting impacts of an inquiry-based remedial

science-education program targeted at early grades.

   Students scoring in the bottom half of their classes on a science test administered in 2014

were assigned at random to receive throughout the school year up to 16 science remedial

sessions of 90 minutes each, or to not receive any remedial support (control group). Remedial

sessions followed an inquiry-based format and took place in schools—typically in the

afternoon—in groups of nine students, on average. Tutors were public-sector elementary school

teachers selected among volunteer candidates. Prior to the start of the program, selected tutors

received content knowledge and pedagogical training, as well as detailed and highly structured

materials that included flipcharts with activities for each session and formative evaluation

rubrics.

   Control-group compliance with assignment was close to perfect. On the other hand,

treatment-group compliance was roughly 40 percent, equivalent to 5 to 6 remedial sessions—a 4

to 5 percent increase in total science instruction time over the school year. Despite the very low

intensity of treatment, students assigned to remedial tutoring scored 0.12 SD higher on a science

endline test. These results are striking because they were accomplished among a group of

students whose achievement was not improved at all by prior universal interventions aimed at

raising the quality of teaching and instruction. However, while the benefits of the remedial

science program were widespread through the baseline achievement distribution of low-

performing students, the program was ineffective at improving the achievement of the lowest 10

percent of students.




                                                                                                4
   Moreover, all the achievement gains were concentrated among boys, for whom gains were

0.22 SD. The differing improvements between boys and girls are not explained by gender

differences in treatment compliance. Our observation of remedial sessions indicates, however,

that the concentration of advances entirely among boys have may stemmed from the preferential

treatment given them by tutors, with whom we observed they engaged more proactively than

with girls—even though the overwhelming majority of tutors in our study were women. While

we cannot rule out that boys behaved more proactively than girls in these small-group tutorials,

our observation of preferential treatment for boys is consistent with prior evidence documenting

how stereotypical ideas held by teachers, and differential teacher attention and effort devoted to

boys versus girls, perpetuate gender gaps in beliefs and competence in scientific endeavors

(Fenema, et al. 1990; Mendick 2006). Our findings suggest gender gaps in science arise early,

and leave open the possibility that student gender-grouping may be more relevant than

instructor-student gender-matching in order to help overcome STEM achievement gender gaps

(cf. Carrell, Page and West 2010).

   We found no evidence of spillovers on science achievement onto students from the same

classrooms who did not receive the remedial education. We also found no evidence that inquiry-

based remedial science tutoring had within-student spillovers on achievement in math. However,

we could not rule out small within-student spillovers on reading achievement.

   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The second section discusses previous

efforts in Peru to identify an effective primary-education science model and the inquiry-based

remedial science education we designed and evaluated; the third section describes the sample

and experimental design; the fourth section describes the data and analytical approach; the fifth




                                                                                                5
section reports our main findings; and the concluding sixth section discusses the results’

limitations and possible implications.


2. Background and Program Description


    In this section, we describe classroom practices and recent efforts to boost science skills in

Peru that motivated the present study (subsection 2.1), and the program we evaluated (subsection

2.2).

2.1 Scientific learning classroom practices and efforts to boost science skills among Peruvian

students

    Peruvian students have poor overall performance in international assessments. In a recent

application of the PISA test, for example, among the 65 participating nations Peru ranked last in

math and natural science (OECD 2013). One-third of Peruvian students placed in the lowest

proficiency level of science, which means that they did not master even the most basic skills. The

PISA assessment indicated Peruvian students lacked critical reasoning skills, as well as the

abilities to analyze and synthesize information, and apply new knowledge in real-life settings.

    Lack of adequate teaching skills may help explain Peruvian students’ poor performance in

comparative science and math assessments. Teachers typically teach the curriculum without

setting aside time for struggling students. In addition, teachers overemphasize the least

cognitively-demanding topics, pose learning tasks that are not cognitively challenging, rarely

provide students with feedback and when they do, it is often erroneous (Cueto, et al. 2006).

Moreover, half of math teachers nationwide cannot perform basic math calculations (Alfonso, et

al. 2012).

    In Peru, scientific learning typically follows an explicit teacher-instruction model (e.g., Clark

2012; Kirschner 2006). Lectures take up most class time, while practical work is limited. To the


                                                                                                   6
extent that teachers conduct practical work they do so themselves, reducing students’

opportunities for hands-on learning (Loera, et al. 2013; Näslund-Hadley, et al. 2014).

    To address some of the country’s educational challenges in math and science, Peru’s

government in 2010 piloted a program aimed at promoting critical-thinking and scientific-

reasoning skills in third grade, which is when students first receive dedicated scientific

instruction. This program, based on the 2008 national curriculum, included fields of study such

as the physical world, the human body, living beings and the environment. A key component of

the pilot science program was teacher training, with a focus on mastering the structure and

content of inquiry-based learning approaches (e.g., Tutwiler and Grotzer 2013).3

    A school-level, randomized evaluation of the pilot teacher-training model in 62 districts of

the state of Lima concluded the 2010 pilot only improved science scores among boys in urban

areas and among students who already had above-average baseline performance (Beuermann, et

al. 2013). In a 2012 follow-up, remedial-session working groups were separated by gender for

some activities to ensure girls got hands-on experience; in addition, rural teachers received

additional mentoring. While these adjustments helped close the gender and urban-rural

achievement gaps, the program still had no impact among students in the bottom half of the

baseline score distribution (IPA 2014). As a consequence, the science achievement gap between

high and low performers widened. 4 These earlier results motivated the present study, which




3
  Inquiry-based methods demand new teaching approaches and greater content knowledge on the part of the teacher,
which may be challenging in some contexts (Clark et al. 2012; Mayer 2004; Kirschner et al. 2006). Among inquiry-
based methods, a wide range of pedagogical approaches exists, ranging from structured inquiry to completely open
inquiry (Colburn 2000). A meta-analysis of 37 experimental and non-experimental studies of inquiry-based
instruction concludes that learning is optimized when teachers guide inquiry rather than students engaging in
completely open inquiry (Furtak et al. 2012).
4
 These results are consistent, for instance, with evidence from Kenya that textbook provision only raised the
academic performance of high achievers at baseline (Glewwe, Kremer and Moulin 2009)



                                                                                                              7
investigated whether remedial sessions targeted to the lowest-performing students would reduce

science achievement gaps between high and low performers.


2.2 Program Description: The targeted remedial science program


   The targeted remedial science program aims to help low-performing students master

scientific theoretical and practical knowledge through inquiry-based methods. The goal is for

students, when confronted with an unfamiliar situation, to develop relevant answers through

critical thinking and collaborative work. As a byproduct, the program seeks to promote healthy

study habits, academic motivation and a love of learning.

   Universidad Cayetano Heredia in Lima developed the program’s structure and contents. The

program has four components: a) development of pedagogical materials, b) selection and training

of tutors, c) selection of students, and d) implementation of remedial sessions in schools.

a. Pedagogical materials

   Universidad Cayetano Heredia employed two local pedagogy specialists to develop materials

for the remedial program: a specialist in primary education and another in science education. The

materials’ content is based on the 2008 national curricular standards for teaching science to third-

graders.

   To bridge gaps in tutors’ knowledge, the specialists developed detailed and highly structured

materials that included flipcharts with activities for each session and formative evaluation

rubrics. That is, the materials combined elements of explicit instruction with inquiry-based

activities. In this approach, remedial sessions began with a challenge/question. For example, as

part of a weather module, students explored why Lima often is shrouded in fog. The tutor guided

them in the formulation of hypotheses, design of experiments and discussion of their findings as

the students made their own fog in jars. Students then were encouraged to formulate preliminary


                                                                                                  8
answers based on prior knowledge, acquire new information through experimentation and

reading, re-structure prior knowledge, establish conclusions and apply the new knowledge to

unfamiliar situations.

b. Selection and training of tutors

   Universidad Cayetano Heredia selected 16 tutors for the program – 15 of whom were

women, just as are most public school teachers in Peru. Universidad Cayetano Heredia chose a

male tutor for students in schools located in high-crime areas. Tutor selection took place between

March and May 2014. Selection criteria included: i) at least two years experience teaching

primary school, ii) a positive attitude towards the teaching and learning of science, iii) assertive

communication and class-management skills, and iv) the ability to create respectful, empathetic

and tolerant relationships with children.

   Tutors were local primary or secondary public-school teachers, although not necessarily in

the schools where they provided remedial science sessions. Tutors were paid a wage of US$10

per hour, including transportation – less than what primary education teachers earn on average

(US$14 per hour). Tutors were assigned to participating schools based on geographic proximity

to their residences.

   Once selected, tutors participated in a Universidad Cayetano Heredia-organized training

workshop led by the two education specialists. The workshop took place before the start of the

2014 school year and lasted 20 hours, split over six days. The goal of the workshop was to train

tutors in the pedagogical and didactical foundations of inquiry-based learning. As such, tutors

were encouraged to apply in each session seven principles: i) learning builds on prior knowledge,

ii) learning is a restructuring of prior knowledge, iii) learning takes place in the interaction with

the object of study, iv) learning requires language and communication, v) emotions affect




                                                                                                   9
learning, vi) learning is a social process as well as a psychological process, and vii) learning

requires self-regulation (meta-cognition).

   Tutors were instructed on possible approaches in applying these foundational principles to

the tutoring activities to best engage students. Some of these approaches include encouraging and

discussing different points of view, sequencing contents to follow the children’s logic and

viewing unfamiliar situations from new perspectives. In the workshop, the specialists and tutors

also reviewed each of the 16 remedial science sessions’ principles, pedagogical approaches,

content and activities. Finally, throughout the school year during which remedial sessions took

place, the two specialists provided ongoing support to tutors.

c. Selection of students

   The program targeted low-performing third-grade science students in 48 public elementary

schools in Lima and surrounding areas (sample selection details below). Baseline performance

was assessed through a written test administered during class in May 2014 (two months after the

start of the school year, which begins in March). Within each school, the program targeted the

bottom half of scorers. Eligibility for participation then was determined using a lottery (details

below).

d. Implementation of remedial sessions

   Remedial sessions took place in each of the 48 participating schools, in a total of 70 groups

of students. There were more groups than schools because some of the schools have large third-

grade classes or more than one third-grade section. Each tutor was assigned, on average, to five

tutoring groups (tutors had as few as three and as many as seven). Mean group size was nine

students.




                                                                                               10
   The 16 weekly, 90-minute remedial sessions began in July 2014, four months after the start

of the school year, and finished in November with the school year. In total, students in the

program had the opportunity to receive 24 hours of remedial education, a 14 percent increase in

instructional time relative to the in-class science lessons. Based on evidence from math and

reading tutoring programs, programs of moderate duration have greater impact on achievement

than programs of longer duration (Lauer, et al. 2006).

   Tutoring sessions took place at each school’s premises. Most tutoring sessions were

scheduled in the afternoon, at the end of the school day. In a few cases, for students attending

school in the afternoon, sessions were scheduled in the morning or on Saturday. In the first

session, students received a workbook, Making and Learning Science, which describes various

scientific inquiry activities students could pursue independently.

   Each tutor was responsible for coordinating and scheduling sessions with each group. Tutors

approached school principals and third-grade teachers to explain program details and seek

support in promoting attendance of eligible students. Tutors also were responsible for inviting

parents of eligible students to information sessions explaining the goals of the remedial science

program, the approach and expected benefits.

   Parental attendance to the information sessions was low. To ensure all parents were informed

about the availability of the remedial science program, students were asked to bring home an

information sheet to be signed by a parent and returned. Some tutors visited students’ homes to

contact parents. In total, about 50 percent of the parents signed and returned these forms. This

suggests that at least 50 percent of parents knew about the availability of the program for their

children. The take-up rate at the student level is discussed below.




                                                                                              11
3. Evaluation Sample, Experimental Design and Randomization Balance

3.1 Evaluation sample


   To determine students’ eligibility for the program, in May 2014 we collected test scores from

third-graders in 51 Lima-area public elementary schools. Out of these schools, three were not

selected for this study: Two had fewer than eight third-graders, and we did not want to risk

stigmatizing eligible students; at the other, we could not contact tutoring-eligible children. Of the

remaining 48 schools, 39 participated in the 2012 pilot science education program – so we

choose them to facilitate access to the tutors, as the administrators and faculty members there had

prior contact with the training staff from Universidad Cayetano Heredia. The remaining nine

schools had been chosen at random among comparable schools in the poorest localities of the

Lima area.

   The typical school in the evaluation sample had two third-grade sections and 51 third-grade

students. Principals of these schools had, on average, 6.3 years of experience in that position;

teachers had an average of 5.6 years of experience, all but one year at their current schools.

About 14 percent of the teachers participated in the 2012 pilot program. Of the students, about 55

percent were boys and the average age was just over 8 years old.


3.2 Experimental design

   In May 2014, we collected baseline science test-score data from 2,399 third-grade students in

the 48 schools of the evaluation sample. The test was a simplified version of the exam

administered as part of the 2010 and 2012 science pilot programs implemented in Lima. That

earlier test, and others covering math and Spanish, measured third-grade skills based on Peru’s

new (2008) basic education curriculum and national study plan. In science, the curriculum




                                                                                                  12
includes the physical world, preservation of the environment, the human body and health, and

animals and their environment.

   Test questions address a mixture of content and critical-thinking skills. Content questions

ask, for example, how different food groups can help us stay healthy, and the identification of

Peruvian animals. As an example of a critical-thinking question, students are asked why a snow

cone turned into red water when a little girl left it on a bench while playing. Students

individually in writing complete the tests, administered and timed by a supervisor.

   The bottom half of scorers in the baseline test within each school were targeted for the

remedial science program—1,219 students in total. Among them, we randomly assigned

participation eligibility, stratifying by school and gender. In practice, we only conducted 95

lotteries ([48 x 2] – 1) because in one school only boys scored in the bottom half of the test-score

distribution. In the final evaluation sample, we assigned to treatment 609 students (331 boys and

278 girls). Meanwhile, the other 610 students (337 boys and 273 girls) were assigned to control

conditions—that is, they did not receive remedial science education.

3.3 Randomization balance


   Randomization balanced characteristics across students assigned to treatment and control

(Table 1). These characteristics included gender, age, school shift (morning or afternoon),

whether the student spoke Spanish, the number of adults in the household, whether the father of

the student was present in the household and baseline test scores (Panel A, Table 1). At baseline,

boys and girls scored at comparable levels in science, math and reading. The only statistically

significant (at the 10 percent) baseline difference in means in favor of the treatment group was

math scores among boys (Panel B, Table 1).




                                                                                                 13
4. Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1 Data

    We employed three data sources, the first being the baseline test and socio-demographic

questionnaire collected from third-grade students in the sample’s 48 schools.5 The second source

was data on student attendance to the tutoring sessions, collected by the tutors (i.e., compliance

with treatment assignment). These were collected for 12 out of 16 tutoring sessions; for the first

four sessions, tutors did not take attendance. We measured student attendance three different

ways: i) number of tutoring sessions attended, ii) fraction of tutoring sessions attended and iii)

total additional minutes spent in tutoring. The final data source was endline test and student

survey data, collected at the end of the school year in November 2014—about five months after

the start of the remedial sessions.

    Endline attrition was low, uncorrelated with either treatment status or the demographic

composition of randomization groups (Table 2). More than 90 percent of students assigned to

control took the endline test (bottom of Column 1, Table 2). Students assigned to treatment were

1 percentage point more likely to take the test – but the difference was not statistically

significant, with or without baseline controls (Columns 1-3, Table 2). Column 4 of Table 2

shows that the demographic composition of randomization groups at endline also was balanced,

as the F-statistic of the joint test of interactions between baseline characteristics and treatment

assignment is 1.50 (p-value= 0.19).

4.2 Empirical strategy




5
 The questionnaire was designed and validated for use among elementary students. For example, it did not include
questions about income, but rather about dwelling characteristics and assets.



                                                                                                            14
   In all tables, we begin by showing unadjusted mean differences in outcomes between

students assigned to remedial science tutoring and to the control group. Our preferred models,

however, are test-score value-added specifications of the following form:



where        is the endline score for student i in school s and subject j;   is tutoring assignment

status, which equals one if student i is assigned to treatment and zero if not;               is the

baseline score for student i in school s and subject j;            are student socio-demographic

characteristics measured at baseline described in Table 1;      are school fixed effects to account

for the stratified randomization design, and        are error terms that we allow to arbitrarily co-

vary within schools. The key coefficient of interest is , which captures the impact of being

assigned to receive remedial science tutoring on test scores; in other words, an Intent-to-treat

effect. In all tables, we sequentially added the control variables to document the stability of

estimates of to alternative sets of control variables. We also explored heterogeneity by gender

in the estimates of .


5. Results


   We discuss results on compliance with treatment assignment (subsection 5.1), endline

science achievement (subsection 5.2), endline math and reading achievement (subsection 5.3),

heterogeneity by gender (subsection 5.4) and spillovers to non-treated students in the treatment

schools (subsection 5.5).


5.1 Compliance with treatment assignment: Attendance to remedial science education sessions


   Compliance with treatment assignment among students assigned to control was very high, so

control group contamination was negligible. On average, students assigned to control conditions


                                                                                                 15
attended 0.04 tutoring sessions (Panel A, Table 3), receiving three additional minutes of tutoring

time (Panel C, Table 3).

    However, compliance among students assigned to the remedial treatment was low. In the 12

remedial sessions for which we collected attendance data, the average student assigned to

treatment attended 4.7 sessions (Panel A, Table 3). This represents a compliance rate among

treatment-eligible students of 39 percent (Panel B, Table 3). Students assigned to remedial

sessions received, on average, 430 minutes of additional science education relative to total

instruction time over the school year (Panel C, Table 3). This implies that rather than the

intended additional 14 percent of science instruction time, the average student received an

additional 4 percent of science instruction time.

    Since we did not take attendance in the first four remedial sessions, these estimates represent

a lower bound on actual attendance rates. Assuming similar attendance in the first four sessions

as in the 12 remedial sessions observed, the average student assigned to treatment likely attended

6.3 remedial sessions, receiving 573 additional minutes of tutoring – a 5.3 percent increase in

science instructional time over the school year.6

    Baseline science scores and students’ gender were uncorrelated with tutoring attendance

(Columns 2-4, Table 3). The low attendance was the result of a combination of factors, including

failure to effectively promote the program and its benefits. In addition, students may have had

time conflicts with other responsibilities, as 43 percent of Peru’s 5 to 17 year olds are

economically active, generally combining school with work. Although child labor is 40 percent

more prevalent in rural areas, children in urban areas also are economically active, mainly as


6
  One can obviously construct a different upper bound by assuming all students assigned to treatment attended all
initial four sessions. This upper bound is unrealistic, however, given that only 50 percent of parents knew about the
availability of the remedial education program for their children.



                                                                                                                 16
street vendors (ILO, 2009). The prevalence of child labor increases with age, which would be

consistent with our finding that younger students were more likely to attend remedial sessions

(Column 4, Table 3). Moreover, in the afternoon or during weekends, children might have been

helping at home by taking care of younger siblings while their parents were working.


5.2 Endline science test scores

   Remedial tutoring increased endline science scores. When measured in percentiles of the test

score distribution, the estimate of treatment’s impact is between 3 and 4 percentiles. The ITT

estimates were robust to the inclusion of alternative sets of control variables (Columns 1-4, Table

4). When measured in standard-deviation units, the estimate of treatment assignment is between

0.12 and 0.14 SD (Columns 5-8, Table 4).

   ITT impact estimates of remedial tutoring were substantial in magnitude once we accounted

for the intensity of treatment among students assigned to tutoring. For example, the 39 percent

difference in compliance rates between students assigned to tutoring or control (Panel B, Table

3) would imply estimates for the treatment on the treated of 0.30-0.36 SD. We could not,

however, give a causal interpretation to this Wald estimate because doing so would require

assuming that tutoring only affected student outcomes through participation in remedial sessions.

This assumption may be challenged if, for example, non-participants benefited indirectly through

improved regular classroom learning as a result of fewer underperforming students delaying the

pace of learning. We explore the empirical support for these potential spillover effects in

subsection 5.5.

   The gains of tutoring on endline science achievement accrued to students who scored at

baseline between negative one standard deviation and average (Figure 1). In the sample, this

corresponded roughly to students at or above the 10th percentile. This result suggests that while



                                                                                                17
the benefits of remedial science tutoring were widespread among low-performing students, the

program was ineffective at improving the achievement of the lowest 10 percent of students.


5.3 Endline test scores on other subjects: Math and Reading

   Remedial tutoring in science appeared to shift the distribution of math and, particularly,

reading scores for students in the middle of the low-scorers distribution (Figure 2). However,

point estimates of the effect of remedial tutoring on endline math achievement tests were often

negative, always small in magnitude compared to those on the science test and never statistically

significant (Panel A, Table 5). For reading, impact estimates were positive, although small.

Nevertheless, we cannot reject the hypothesis they are comparable in magnitude to those on the

science test (Panel B, Table 5). While this evidence is consistent with the possibility that the

inquiry-based approach used in the targeted remedial science program has portability to other

literacy skills, the effect may be small.


5.4 Heterogeneity by gender


   The effects of the targeted remedial science program on endline science achievement were

entirely driven by gains among boys. Tutoring assignment increased science scores for boys by

about 5 percentiles (Columns 1-4, Table 6), about 0.22 SD (Columns 5-8, Table 6). For girls,

tutoring impacts were negligible. Coefficients on the interaction term were about -4.5 percentiles

or -0.21 SD. Estimates of coefficient on the interaction term generally were statistically

significant at the 10 percent level (5 percent with full controls with the dependent variable

expressed in standard deviations, Column 8, Table 6).

   One possible explanation to the gender gap is differences in treatment intensity (compliance)

between boys and girls. We did not find empirical support for this conjecture. Boys and girls




                                                                                               18
were equally likely to attend tutoring sessions; the coefficients on the interaction term were

always small, relative to the main treatment effect, and never statistically significant (Table 7).

   Our observation of remedial sessions indicates, however, that the concentration of gains

entirely among boys may have stemmed from the preferential treatment given boys by tutors,

who we saw engaging more proactively with boys than girls—even though the overwhelming

majority of tutors in our study were women. We cannot rule out, however, that boys behaved

more proactively than girls in these small-group tutorials.

   Our observation of preferential treatment for boys is consistent with prior evidence

documenting how stereotypical ideas held by teachers, and differential teacher attention and

effort devoted to boys versus girls, perpetuate gender gaps in beliefs and competence in scientific

endeavors (Fenema, et al. 1990; Mendick 2006)


5.5 Spillovers


   Because we randomized at the student level within schools, it was possible that tutoring

generated spillovers on students who were ineligible to participate. For example, non-

participants may have benefited indirectly through improved regular classroom learning because

there were fewer underperforming students to delay the pace.

   While we cannot use purely experimental variation to test for the presence of spillovers on

other students, our research design created variation within classrooms in the fraction of students

receiving treatment. This is so because our randomization stratified treatment assignment by

school and gender – but not by classroom. For schools with more than one third-grade section,

this design therefore generated variation in the fraction of students assigned to remedial tutoring

within a classroom.




                                                                                                      19
   Figure 3 shows this variation was considerable. In some sections, no students received

remedial tutoring, while there were several sections in which anywhere between 20 and 60

percent of students were assigned to tutoring. In one section, all students were assigned.

   We took advantage of this variation to estimate learning spillovers of tutoring onto other

students. Specifically, under a linear-in-means peer-effects model, if (positive) spillovers existed,

student achievement should have been be higher in sections with a higher fraction of students

assigned to remedial tutoring. To test this hypothesis, we used the following regression model:



where     is the section-level fraction of students eligible for remedial tutoring and         is the

same-subject average baseline performance of section c in school s. In this specification, we

included baseline section-average performance; without it,           is mechanically (negatively)

correlated with the outcome variable. This is so because tutoring targeted low-performing

students, meaning a high fraction of students assigned to tutoring in a section implies a high

fraction of low-performing students in the section. By including the section-average baseline

performance and school-fixed effects, the thought experiment we had in mind asked whether

among two sections of the same school with similar baseline composition, students in the section

with a higher number of students receiving tutoring would perform better than students in the

section with fewer tutoring-assigned students. As before, we also allowed error terms to

arbitrarily co-vary within schools.

   We found no evidence of tutoring-related learning spillovers among other students in the

same section. Without controls, the fraction of students assigned to tutoring in a section

negatively correlated with endline science achievement (Column 1, Table 8). Including the

section average and baseline individual achievement flipped the sign (Column 2, Table 8).



                                                                                                  20
However, estimates in Column 2 also rely on across-school variation in section composition,

which is problematic. When we included school-fixed effects and full demographic controls, the

coefficient on the fraction of students assigned to tutoring in a section was small, negative and

not statistically significant (Columns 3 and 4, Table 8).


6. Conclusion


   Many developing countries—including most in Latin America—have centralized educational

systems with standardized curricula and textbooks, but struggling students often fall behind the

national curriculum at an early age. The evidence to date on remedial math and literacy

education suggests direct instruction may be an effective pedagogical model to improve the

performance of low-achieving students in these subjects. However, research on whole-class

science instruction suggests that inquiry-based teaching—in which students engage in hands-on

practical work with different degrees of instructor guidance—improves learning more than

traditional classroom practices. It is unclear whether inquiry-based instruction is an effective

educational approach for remedial education targeting low-achieving, early-grade students.

   Our study is the first that rigorously evaluates an inquiry-based remedial science education

program targeted at lower-performing students in early grades. Also, it is the first randomized

experiment of a science-tutoring program for small groups of lower-performing students in Latin

America.

   Our experimental results suggest struggling students’ achievement can be improved through

low-intensity, inquiry-based targeted remedial science education. The benefits of the remedial

science program were widespread through the baseline achievement distribution of low-

performing students, although the program was ineffective at improving the achievement of the

lowest 10 percent of students. These results are striking because they were accomplished among


                                                                                              21
a group of students whose achievement was not improved at all by prior universal interventions

aimed at raising the quality of teaching and instruction.

   The findings suggest low-performing students can learn through inquiry-based pedagogical

approaches. The targeted remedial science education model could easily be expanded to provide

intensive academic support at a large scale for students who fall behind. The project would be

straightforward to replicate because the tutors are local and the training is short.

   However, we identified two important qualifiers to keep in mind when thinking about

bringing this remedial science education model to scale. First, the inquiry-based remedial

science-education program did not significantly improve achievement among girls. A challenge

remains to identify instructional models that help mitigate instructor and student stereotypes and

attitudes with regards to gender and science. Second, the overall effectiveness of the remedial

education model was achieved despite a very low compliance rate. The effect could potentially

be increased with greater compliance, and the compliance rate may improve by more clearly

disseminating the program and promoting its benefits among parents and students. Because

many students are either economically active or providing help at home by taking care of

younger siblings, what may help improve attendance is a more flexible schedule or the provision

of snacks to facilitate an extended school day.




                                                                                                  22
References

         Alfonso, Mariana, et al. 2012. “Panorama General de la Educación en América Latina y

el Caribe.” Educación para la Transformación, Marcelo Cabrol y Miguel Szekely (Eds.). IDB.

Washington, DC.


         Banerjee Abhijit, et al. 2007. “Remedying education: evidence from two randomized

experiments in India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122:1235–64


         Beuermann, Diether, et al. 2013. “The Pedagogy of Science and Environment:

Experimental evidence from Peru.” The Journal of Development Studies. 49(5): 719-736.

         Brickman, Peggy, et al. 2009. “Effects of inquiry-based learning on students’ science

literacy skills and confidence.” International Journal of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning,

3(2): Article 16.

         Carrell, Scott E., et al. 2010. “Sex and Science: How professor Gender Perpetuates the

Gender Gap.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1101-1144.

         Clark, Richard E., et al. 2012. “Putting Students on the Path to Learning: The Case for

Fully Guided Instruction.” American Educator, Spring 2012, Washington, DC: AFT.

         Colburn, Alan. 2000. “An Inquiry Primer.” Science Scope, 23(6): 42-44.

         Cueto, Santiago, et al. 2006. “Opportunities to Learn and Achievement in Mathematics in

a Sample of Sixth Grade Students in Lima, Peru.” Educational Studies in Mathematics 62 (1):

25–55.

         Duflo, Esther, et al. 2011. “Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and the Impact of Tracking:

Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya.” American Economic Review, 101(5):1739-

74.




                                                                                                23
       Elbaum, Batya, et al. 2000. “How effective are one-to-one tutoring programs in reading

for elementary students at risk for reading failure? A meta-analysis of the intervention research.”

Journal of Educational Psychology, (92): 605-619.

       Ergül, Remziye, et al. 2011. “The Effects of Inquiry-based Science Teaching on

Elementary School Students’ Science Process Skills and Science Attitudes.” Bulgarian Journal

of Science and Education Policy, Volume 5(1): 48-68.

       Fenema, Elizabeth, et al. 1990. “Teachers' attributions and beliefs about girls, boys, and

mathematics.” Educational Studies in Mathematics, 21: 55-69.

       Furtak, Erin M., et al. 2012. “Experimental and quasi-experimental studies of inquiry-

based science teaching: A meta-analysis.” Review of Educational Research, 82 (3), 300–329.

       Glewwe, Paul, et al. 2009. “Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and Test Scores in

Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1): 112-35.

       Harris, Christopher J., et al. (2014). “Curriculum materials make a difference for next

generation science learning: Results from year 1 of a randomized controlled trial.” Menlo Park,

CA: SRI International.

       Hmelo-Silver, Cindy E. 2004. “Problem-Based Learning: What and How Do Students

Learn?” Educational Psychology Review, 16 (3).

       Houtveen, Thoni and Wim van de W. Grift. 2007. “Reading Instruction for Struggling

Learners.” Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk. 12(4), 405-424.

       Houtveen, Thoni and Wim van de W. Grift. 2012. “Improving Reading Achievements of

Struggling Learners.” School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 23(1): 71-93.

       IPA (Innovations for Poverty Action). 2014. “Educación de Ciencias II: Evaluación

experimental del Programa Piloto de mejora de la Educación de Ciencias de la Universidad




                                                                                                24
Cayetano Heredia en el Departamento de Lima, Perú.” IDB Unpublished Consultancy Report,

Lima: Peru.

       ILO (International Labor Organization). 2009. “Trabajo Infantil en el Perú: Magnitud y

perfiles vulnerables. Informe Nacional 2007-2008.” Peru.

       Kaiser, S., et al. 1989. “The Effects of Direct Instruction with Rural Remedial Students:

A brief report.” Reading Improvement (26) 88-93.

       Kirschner, Paul. A., et al. 2006. “Why minimal guidance during instruction does not

work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and

inquiry-based teaching.” Educational Psychologist, 41, 75–86.

       Lauer, Patricia A., et al. 2006. “Out-of-school time programs: A meta-analysis of effects

of at-risk students.” Review of Educational Research (76): 275–313.

       Linan-Thompson, Sylvia and Sharon Vaughn. 2007. “Research-based Methods of

Reading Instruction for English Language Learners.” Alexandria, VA: Association for

Supervision and Curriculum Development.

       LLECE (Laboratorio Latinoamericano de Evaluación de la Calidad de la Educación).

2015. “Informe de Resultados Tercer Estudio Regional Comparativo: Factores Asociados.”

Santiago: UNESCO.

       Loera, Armando, et al. (2013). “El desempeño pedagógico de docentes en Nuevo Leon:

Hallazgos de un estudio basado en videos de lecciones de matemáticas y ciencias.” Revista

Latinoamericano de Estudios Educativos. Vol. XLIII, No. 2, 11–41.

       Mayer, Richard E. 2004. “Should there be a three-strikes rule against pure discovery

learning? The case for guided methods of instruction.” American Psychologist. 59, 14–19.




                                                                                             25
       Mendick, Heather. 2006. “Masculinities in Mathematics.” Maidenhead: Open University

Press McGraw-Hill Education.

       MINEDU 2015. “Informe Nacional, Evaluación Censal de Estudiantes.” Lima, Peru:

Ministry of Education.

       Näslund-Hadley, Emma, et al. 2014. “What goes on inside Latin American Math and

Science Classrooms: A video study of teaching practices.” Global Education Review. 1(3): 110-

128.

       OECD (Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development). 2013. OECD Fact

Book 2013: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics. OECD Publishing, Paris.

       Ritter, Gary W., et al. 2009. “The effectiveness of volunteer tutoring programs for

elementary and middle school students: A meta-analysis.” Review of Educational Research,

79(1): 3-38.

       Slavin, Robert E., et al. 2011. “Effective programs for struggling readers: A best

evidence synthesis.” Educational Research Review, 6(1): 1-26.

       Tutwiler, M. Shane, and Tina Grotzer. 2013. “Why immersive, interactive simulation

belongs in the pedagogical toolkit of Next Generation science: Facilitating student understanding

of complex causal dynamics.” In I. Saleh (Ed.) Italic/Approaches and Strategies in Next

Generation Science Learning, Hershey, PA: IGI Global.




                                                                                              26
Tables and Figures

Table 1. Randomization Balance


                                       Assigned
                                                                                           t-statistic
                                           to      Assigned Difference
                                                                                           (absolute
                                       Remedial to Control         T/C
                                                                                             value)
                                        Tutoring
                             A. Socio-demographic Characteristics
 Female                                   0.46       0.45         0.01                        0.31
 Age                                      8.20       8.19         0.01                        0.32
 Morning shift                            0.90       0.91         -0.01                       0.68
 Spanish-speaking                         0.88       0.89         -0.01                       0.54
 Number of Adults in
                                     2.39         2.37          0.03                          0.36
 Household
 Father Present                      0.83         0.83          0.00                          0.22
                 B. Baseline Scores (Raw percent of correct answers)
 B.1. Full Sample
 Science                             0.51         0.51          0.00                          0.02
 Math                                0.63         0.61          0.02                          1.18
 Reading                             0.77         0.78          0.00                          0.22
 B.2. Boys
 Science                             0.50         0.50          0.00                          0.39
 Math                                0.63         0.60          0.03                         1.67*
 Reading                             0.76         0.75          0.01                          0.51
 B.3 Girls
 Science                             0.52         0.52          0.00                          0.38
 Math                                0.63         0.63          0.00                          0.04
 Reading                             0.79         0.81         -0.02                          1.01

 Observations                                 609             610
Notes: Table shows results of raw mean comparisons (i.e., not adjusting for the stratified research design) across
students assigned to remedial tutoring and to control conditions. Sample is 1,219 third-grade students who scored in
the bottom half of the baseline science test administered in May 2014 in 48 Lima-area public elementary schools.




                                                                                                                27
Table 2. Endline Attrition Analysis

                                                    Dependent Variable is 1 if Student Took Endline
                                                                    Test; 0 if Not
                                                      (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
Assigned to Remedial Tutoring                        0.011       0.011       0.012         0.329
                                                    (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.015)        (0.180)
Baseline Science Score (s.d.)                                    0.016       0.014          0.02
                                                               (0.007)*    (0.008)        (0.013)
Female                                                                      -0.017         -0.032
                                                                           (0.014)        (0.025)
Age                                                                         -0.053          -0.04
                                                                          (0.010)**     (0.014)**
Morning shift                                                               -0.041         -0.046
                                                                           (0.031)        (0.030)
Spanish Speaking                                                            -0.021         -0.021
                                                                           (0.019)        (0.028)
Number of Adults in Household                                               -0.001         0.002
                                                                           (0.006)        (0.008)
Father present                                                               0.022          0.07
                                                                           (0.025)        (0.039)
Female*Assigned                                                                            0.034
                                                                                          (0.035)
Age*Assigned                                                                               -0.029
                                                                                          (0.021)
Morning Shift*Assigned                                                                     0.010
                                                                                          (0.074)
Spanish Speaking*Assigned                                                                  0.000
                                                                                          (0.042)
Number of Adults*Assigned                                                                  -0.007
                                                                                          (0.015)
Father Present*Assigned                                                                    -0.105
                                                                                         (0.049)*
Baseline Science Score*Assigned                                                            -0.012
                                                                                          (0.015)
Control Group Mean                                   0.921
F-stat of joint hypothesis that interaction terms
                                                                                           1.50
are all zero
p-value of F-stat                                                                          0.19
N                                                    1,219       1,219      1,219         1,219
 Notes: Table shows attrition analysis across students assigned to remedial science tutoring and to control
conditions. Sample is 1,219 third-grade students who scored in the bottom half of the baseline science test


                                                                                                       28
administered in May 2014 in 48 Lima-area public elementary schools.* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

Table 3. Compliance with Treatment Assignment: Student Attendance to Remedial Tutoring


                                         (1)                (2)            (3)                                  (4)
                               A. Number of Tutoring Sessions Attended
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring          4.741              4.74           4.751                                4.76
                                     (0.447)***        (0.447)***      (0.462)***                           (0.458)***
 Baseline Science Score
                                                          0.001          -0.003                               -0.004
 (Percentile)
                                                         (0.009)         (0.004)                              (0.004)
 Female                                                                                                       -0.023
                                                                                                              (0.119)
 Age                                                                                                          -0.354
                                                                                                            (0.102)***
 Control Group Mean                      0.036
                               B. Percent of Tutoring Sessions Attended
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring          38.848            38.842          38.932                              38.993
                                      (3.590)***        (3.592)***      (3.717)***                          (3.684)***
 Baseline Science Score
                                                           0.018          -0.023                               -0.03
 (Percentile)
                                                          (0.076)         (0.033)                             (0.033)
 Female                                                                                                        0.066
                                                                                                              (0.961)
 Age                                                                                                          -2.625
                                                                                                            (0.797)***
 Control Group Mean                             0.301
                                       C. Additional Tutoring Time (Minutes)
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring                430.406           430.346         432.87                       433.726
                                            (49.457)***       (49.494)***    (51.186)***                   (50.811)***
 Baseline Science Score
                                                                       0.161              -0.501              -0.604
 (Percentile)
                                                                      (0.965)            (0.401)              (0.410)
 Female                                                                                                        2.167
                                                                                                             (10.888)
 Age                                                                                                          -29.651
                                                                                                            (9.765)***
 Control Group Mean                               3.241
 N                                                1,219                1,219              1,219                1,219
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. (1) No controls; (2) controls for baseline science
scores (percentile); (3) controls for baseline science scores and school fixed effects; (4) controls for baseline scores,
school-fixed effects and other student socio-demographic characteristics not shown in the table including school
shift, Spanish speaking, adults in household and father present in household. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.



                                                                                                                       29
Table 4. Remedial Tutoring Impacts on Endline Science Test Scores

                                      Dependent Variable is Test Score Percentiles               Dependent Variable is Test Score Standard Deviations
                                     (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)                 (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)
 Assigned to Remedial
                                   3.708           3.612           3.265            3.357           0.132           0.139           0.121            0.124
 Tutoring
                                (1.190)***      (1.203)***       (1.236)**        (1.256)**       (0.050)**      (0.051)***       (0.052)**        (0.053)**
 Baseline Science Score                            0.641           0.555             0.550                          0.449           0.389            0.383
                                                (0.071)***      (0.052)***       (0.054)***                      (0.049)***      (0.036)***       (0.035)***
 Female                                                                             -0.316                                                           0.009
                                                                                   (1.371)                                                          (0.055)
 Age                                                                                -1.922                                                           -0.09
                                                                                  (0.851)**                                                       (0.032)***
 Control Group Mean                34.66                                                            0.000
                                (1.873)***                                                         (0.076)
 N                                 1129            1129             1129            1129            1129            1129             1129            1129
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Table shows science endline impact results. In columns (1)-(4), outcome variable and lagged
test-score regressor are expressed in percentiles. In columns (5)-(8), outcome variable and lagged test-score regressor are expressed in standard-deviation units.
(1) and (4) no controls; (2) and (5) controls for baseline science score; (3) and (6) controls for baseline science scores and school-fixed effects; (4) and (8)
controls for baseline scores, school-fixed effects and other student socio-demographic characteristics not shown in the table including school shift, Spanish
speaking, adults in household and father present in household. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                               30
Table 5. Remedial Tutoring Impacts on Endline Math and Reading Test Scores

                                    Dependent Variable is Test Score Percentiles                Dependent Variable is Test Score Standard Deviations
                                   (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)                 (5)          (6)             (7)            (8)
                                                                                           A. Math
 Assigned to Remedial
                                  0.531          -0.764          -0.798           -0.68           0.01          -0.028            -0.027           -0.023
 Tutoring
                                 (1.311)        (1.108)         (1.152)          (1.182)        (0.051)         (0.040)          (0.041)          (0.043)
 Baseline Math Score                             0.434           0.402            0.401                          0.426            0.394            0.393
                                              (0.032)***      (0.038)***       (0.035)***                     (0.037)***       (0.037)***       (0.033)***
 Female                                                                           0.361                                                            0.044
                                                                                 (1.141)                                                          (0.048)
 Age                                                                               -1.3                                                           -0.052
                                                                                 (0.986)                                                          (0.039)
 Control Group Mean              38.769                                                          0.000
                               (1.654)***                                                       (0.065)
                                                                                          B. Reading
 Assigned to Remedial
                                  1.724          1.033           0.905            0.959          0.047           0.046            0.038            0.038
 Tutoring
                                 (1.438)        (1.436)         (1.458)          (1.497)        (0.059)         (0.058)          (0.059)          (0.060)
 Baseline Reading Score                          0.558           0.471             0.452                          0.52            0.443            0.428
                                              (0.032)***      (0.028)***       (0.029)***                     (0.037)***       (0.030)***       (0.031)***
 Female                                                                            4.006                                                           0.155
                                                                               (1.234)***                                                       (0.048)***
 Age                                                                              -1.869                                                          -0.116
                                                                                (0.791)**                                                       (0.042)***
 Control Group Mean              36.698                                                          0.000
                               (2.124)***                                                       (0.079)

 N                                1129           1129            1129             1129           1129            1129              1129             1129
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Table shows math and reading endline impact results. In columns (1)-(4), outcome variable



                                                                                                                                                            31
and lagged test-score regressor are expressed in percentiles. In columns (5)-(8), outcome variable and lagged test-score regressor are expressed in standard-
deviation units; (1) and (4) no controls; (2) and (5) controls for baseline same-subject score; (3) and (6) controls for baseline scores and school-fixed effects; (4)
and (8) controls for baseline scores, school-fixed effects and other student socio-demographic characteristics not shown in the table including school shift,
Spanish speaking, adults in household and father present in household. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.


Table 6. Heterogeneity of Tutoring Impacts on Science Achievement by Gender

                                    Dependent Variable is Test Score Percentiles                         Dependent Variable is Test Score Standard Deviations
                                (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)                      (5)           (6)              (7)            (8)
 Female                     4.045           1.935             2.137            2.016                    0.191         0.115            0.127          0.118
                            (2.163)*        (2.080)           (2.143)          (2.117)                  (0.084)**     (0.081)          (0.084)        (0.081)
 Assigned to
                            5.697              5.45                5.154             5.44               0.223             0.226              0.213             0.222
 Remedial Tutoring
                            (1.409)***         (1.361)***          (1.357)***        (1.430)***         (0.067)***        (0.066)***         (0.067)***        (0.069)***
 Female * Assigned          -4.505             -4.089              -4.213            -4.635             -0.207            -0.196             -0.206            -0.218
                            (2.565)*           (2.496)             (2.547)           (2.489)*           (0.105)*          (0.105)*           (0.108)*          (0.106)**
 Baseline Score                                0.641               0.556             0.551                                0.448              0.389             0.384
                                               (0.073)***          (0.053)***        (0.054)***                           (0.050)***         (0.037)***        (0.035)***
 Age                                                                                 -1.895                                                                    -0.089
                                                                                     (0.860)**                                                                 (0.032)***
 Control Group
                            32.883                                                                      -0.084
 Mean
                            (2.508)***                                                                  (0.101)
 N                            1,129               1,129              1,129             1,129              1,129             1,129             1,129              1,129
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Table shows heterogeneity in science endline impact results by gender. In columns (1)-(4),
outcome variable and lagged test-score regressor are expressed in percentiles. In columns (5)-(8), outcome variable and lagged test-score regressor are expressed
in standard deviation units. (1) and (4) no controls; (2) and (5) controls for baseline science score; (3) and (6) controls for baseline science scores and school-
fixed effects; (4) and (8) controls for baseline scores, school-fixed effects and other student socio-demographic characteristics not shown in the table including
school shift, Spanish speaking, adults in household and father present in household. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                  32
Table 7. Heterogeneity of Tutoring Intensity by Gender

                                        (1)              (2)             (3)                            (4)
                             A. Number of Tutoring Sessions Attended
 Female                             -0.006           -0.009          -0.008                         -0.049
                                    (0.021)          (0.027)         (0.110)                        (0.108)
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring      4.741            4.741           4.734                          4.736
                                    (0.464)***       (0.464)***      (0.479)***                     (0.471)***
 Female * Assigned                  0.000            -0.002          0.038                          0.052
                                    (0.264)          (0.262)         (0.276)                        (0.268)
 Baseline Score (Percentile)                         0.001           -0.003                         -0.004
                                                     (0.009)         (0.004)                        (0.004)
 Control Group Mean                 0.039
                                    (0.017)**
                             B. Percent of Tutoring Sessions Attended
 Female                             -0.047           -0.094          0.075                          -0.234
                                    (0.173)          (0.224)         (0.808)                        (0.788)
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring      38.702           38.703          38.697                         38.722
                                    (3.659)***       (3.663)***      (3.801)***                     (3.738)***
 Female * Assigned                  0.322            0.305           0.517                          0.599
                                    (2.100)          (2.085)         (2.168)                        (2.101)
 Baseline Score (Percentile)                         0.018           -0.025                         -0.03
                                                     (0.076)         (0.033)                        (0.033)
 Control Group Mean                 0.321
                                    (0.138)**
                               C. Additional Tutoring Time (Minutes)
 Female                             -1.55            -1.974          3.676                          -0.355
                                    (2.581)          (3.230)         (10.958)                       (10.969)
 Assigned to Remedial Tutoring      428.86           428.875         430.911                        431.445
                                          (48.546)***        (48.590)***        (50.151)***         (49.343)***
 Female * Assigned                        3.417              3.261              4.277               5.045
                                          (25.218)           (25.028)           (26.514)            (26.400)
 Baseline Score (Percentile)                                 0.161              -0.52               -0.606
                                                             (0.965)            (0.402)             (0.410)
 Control Group Mean                       3.935
                                          (1.972)*
 N                                        1,219              1,219              1,219               1,219
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Table shows heterogeneity in tutoring intensity.
(1) no controls; (2) controls for baseline science scores (percentile); (3) controls for baseline science scores and
school-fixed effects; (4) controls for baseline scores, school-fixed effects and other student socio-demographic
characteristics not shown in the table including age, school shift, Spanish speaking, adults in household and father
present in household. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                 33
Table 8. Spillovers of Tutoring on Science Endline Performance

                                                   Dependent Variable is Test Score Standard Deviations
                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
Section Fraction Assigned to Tutoring             -1.287     0.327       -0.074      -0.022      -0.112
                                                (0.382)**   (0.396)      (0.412)     (0.431)     (0.363)
Section Average Baseline Science                              0.18        0.042       0.043       0.045
Scores
                                                              (0.070)*  (0.101)   (0.095)               (0.096)
Baseline Science Score                                          0.502     0.501     0.497                 0.497
                                                             (0.021)** (0.021)** (0.021)**             (0.021)**
Female                                                                   -0.078    -0.075                -0.119
                                                                       (0.019)** (0.019)**              (0.120)
Age                                                                      -0.061    -0.064                -0.075
                                                                        (0.034)   (0.034)              (0.019)**
Section Fraction Assigned to Tutoring *                                                                   0.219
Female
                                                                                                         (0.491)

N                                                 2,246         2,246         2,246        2,246          2,246
Notes: Standard Errors clustered at the school level in parentheses. Table shows spillover effects of tutoring on
endline science scores. Regression results in columns (3) also include school-fixed effects in addition to the reported
coefficients. Regression results in columns (4) and (5) include school-fixed effects and controls for school shift,
Spanish speaking, adults in household and father present in household in addition to the reported coefficients. *
p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                   34
Figure 1. Distribution of Endline Science Test Score Impacts by Treatment Assignment Status




Notes: Figure shows kernel density plots of endline science scores in standard-deviation units for students assigned
to tutoring treatment and control. Sample is the same as that for Table 4.
Figure 2. Distribution of Endline Math and Reading Test Score Impacts by Treatment
Assignment Status




Notes: Figure shows kernel density plots of endline math and reading scores in standard-deviation units for students
assigned to tutoring treatment and control. Sample is the same as that for Table 5.




                                                                                                                36
Figure 3. Variation in the Fraction of Students in a Section Assigned to Remedial Tutoring




Notes: Figure shows the fraction of students assigned to remedial science tutoring in the third-grade sections of the
48 schools in the evaluation sample.




                                                                                                                 37
