                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EFFECTS OF MATERNAL WORK INCENTIVES ON YOUTH CRIME

                                        Hope Corman
                                        Dhaval Dave
                                         Ariel Kalil
                                      Nancy E. Reichman

                                      Working Paper 23054
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23054


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




The authors are grateful to Laura Argys, Randi Hjalmarsson, Michael Leeds, and Jody Sindelar
for helpful comments and to Dhiman Das for compiling the crime data and Farzana Razack for
excellent research assistance. Research reported in this publication was supported by the Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development of the National
Institutes of Health under Award Number R01HD086223. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of
Health. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Hope Corman, Dhaval Dave, Ariel Kalil, and Nancy E. Reichman. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Maternal Work Incentives on Youth Crime
Hope Corman, Dhaval Dave, Ariel Kalil, and Nancy E. Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 23054
January 2017
JEL No. I3,J22,J48,K4

                                         ABSTRACT

This study exploits differences in the implementation of welfare reform across states and over
time to identify causal effects of maternal work incentives, and by inference employment, on
youth arrests between 1990 and 2005, the period during which welfare reform unfolded. We
consider both serious and minor crimes as classified by the FBI, investigate the extent to which
effects were stronger in states with more stringent work incentive policies and larger welfare
caseload declines, and use a number of different model specifications to assess robustness and
patterns. We find that welfare reform led to reduced youth arrests for minor crimes, by 7-9 %,
with similar estimates for males and females, but that it did not affect youth arrests for serious
crimes. The results from this study add to the scant literature on the effects of maternal
employment on adolescent behavior by exploiting a large-scale social experiment that is still in
effect to this day, and provide some support for the widely-embraced argument that welfare
reform would discourage undesirable social behavior, not only of mothers, but also of the next
generation.

Hope Corman                                     Ariel Kalil
Department of Economics                         Harris School of Public Policy
Rider University                                University of Chicago
2083 Lawrenceville Road                         1155 E. 60th Street
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                         Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        a-kalil@uchicago.edu
corman@rider.edu
                                                Nancy E. Reichman
Dhaval Dave                                     Rutgers University
Bentley University                              Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Department of Economics                         Department of Pediatrics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                      Child Health Institute of New Jersey
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                          89 French St., Room 1348
and NBER                                        New Brunswick, NJ 08903
ddave@bentley.edu                               reichmne@rutgers.edu
       The 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA)

and the waivers that preceded it (collectively referred to as welfare reform), provide an

unprecedented opportunity to study the effects of maternal work incentives on the behaviors of

low-income teenage children. Despite successful expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit

(EITC) over the decades leading up to welfare reform that increased the labor supply of single

mothers (Eissa & Liebman 1996), many mothers on welfare had not transitioned to work as of

the early 1990s. The key strategy under welfare reform for reducing dependence of this group

was to aggressively encourage maternal employment (which would allow them to qualify for the

EITC), by imposing work requirements and time limits as conditions for receipt of cash

assistance. The basic argument was that labor force participation would break a culture of

dependence by increasing self-sufficiency and reconnecting members of an increasingly

marginalized underclass to the mainstream ideals of a strong work ethic and civic responsibility

(Katz 2001). Employment rates of low-skilled mothers rose dramatically after the

implementation of welfare reform, including the pre-PRWORA waivers (Ziliak 2006), and there

is strong consensus that welfare reform played a major role (Schoeni & Blank 2000). Recent

research found that welfare reform decreased women’s substance abuse (Corman et al. 2013) and

crime (Corman, Dave & Reichman 2014), providing support for the “mainstreaming” argument.

       An implicit assumption underlying welfare reform was that the work-focused regime

would abort an assumed transmission of welfare dependence to the next generation by putting

mothers to work (which can increase family resources or lead mothers to model mainstream

behavior), changing youths’ expectations about welfare as a long term option, and requiring

teenage mothers to stay in school (a feature of the legislation). That is, the new regime was

expected to mainstream not only poor mothers, but also their children. Studies have found that



                                                                                                   3
welfare reform reduced high school dropout and teen fertility (Dave, Corman & Reichman 2012,

Kaestner, Korenman & O’Neill 2003; Koball 2007; Lopoo & Deleire 2006; Miller & Zhang

2012; Offner 2005), providing some support for this argument. However, few studies have

considered how the new regime has affected teens more broadly. Crime and delinquency are of

particular relevance, as studies have found links between female-headed households and youth

crime (Glaser and Sacerdote 1999; Cobb-Clark & Tekin 2011; Cormanor & Phillips 2002;

Antecol & Bedard 2007), teens and young adults have the highest propensity to commit crimes

(e.g., Ulmer & Steffensmeier 2014), and criminal records and incarceration greatly hamper

human capital acquisition and upward socioeconomic mobility (e.g., Western 2002).

       In this paper, we exploit differences in the implementation of welfare reform across states

and over time to identify causal effects of the “work first” regime on youth arrests between 1990

and 2005, the period during which welfare reform unfolded. We consider both serious and minor

crimes as classified by the FBI, differential effects by gender, and the extent to which effects are

stronger in states with more stringent work incentive policies and larger caseload declines, as

economic theory would predict. This study makes an important contribution to the relatively

small literature on the effects of maternal employment on teen well-being, as well as to the

literature on the economics of youth crime, by exploring the role of broad-based work incentives

in a policy-relevant and contemporary context.

Background

Empirical studies of effects of welfare or employment on teenage behavior

       As far as we know, there exist relatively few population-based or quasi-experimental

studies of the effects of welfare transitions, welfare reform, or employment on teen delinquent or

criminal behavior. Syntheses based on three pre-PRWORA welfare reform experiments



                                                                                                   4
(“waivers”), some of which included features such as work requirements and time limits that

later were included in the PRWORA legislation (see Data section) did not find consistent

evidence that work incentives had a significant impact on adolescents having trouble with the

police or being suspended or expelled from school (Gennetian et al. 2002, 2004). Grogger and

Karoly (2005), reviewing a broader set of waiver programs, concluded that there may have been

adverse effects of welfare reform on outcomes generally for youths age 10 years and over.

However, when considering outcomes directly related to youth behavior—being suspended or

expelled from school and being involved in delinquent or criminal behavior—the number of

relevant studies was small and the results from those were quite variable, precluding inferences

about existence or direction of effects.

       Using data from the Three-Cities Study, several studies found that transitions into (off of)

welfare appear to adversely (favorably) affect teens’ delinquent behaviors including substance

use, while transitions into/out of work appear to operate in the opposite direction (Chase-

Lansdale et al. 2003; Chase-Lansdale et al. 2011; Coley et al. 2007; Lohman et al. 2004).

However, also using data from the Three-Cities Study, Mahatmya and Lohman (2011) found no

associations between welfare transitions, employment transitions, or stable employment on teen

delinquency.

       Aughinbaugh and Gittleman (2004) estimated the effects of maternal work in the past 3

years on teen substance use (alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana) using data from the NLSY-CS in

family fixed effects models and found no significant effects, even for a subsample of unmarried

mother households. Vander Ven et al. (2001), also using the NLSY-CS, found no associations

between mothers’ hours of work and delinquent behavior (including illegal activities and alcohol




                                                                                                   5
abuse) of their teenage children, although the authors did not look at a subsample of low-income

households.

       Corman et al. (2017) exploited differences in the implementation of welfare reform in the

U.S. across states and over time in the attempt to identify causal effects of welfare reform on

youth arrests for drug-related crimes using arrest data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation

merged with implementation dates of welfare reform in each state. The authors considered

differential effects by gender, short-run effects for teens exposed to welfare reform as well as

longer-term effects for young adults who came of age when welfare reform was implemented,

and the extent to which effects appeared to be stronger in states with more stringent work

incentive policies, larger welfare caseload declines, and larger employment increases among

low-educated unmarried mothers. Overall, the authors found no evidence that welfare reform led

to decreases in arrests for drug offenses (and, by inference, decreases in drug use) among youth

and may actually have led to increases in such arrests. However, the authors cautioned that the

latter finding was preliminary, not fully robust, and should be further explored.

       Altogether, the most relevant existing studies have not provided convincing evidence

about the effects (existence or direction) of welfare reform or employment on teen delinquent or

criminal behavior. The waiver experiments were conducted in very specific contexts, did not

always have sufficiently large samples of adolescents, and often did not measure adolescent

behavioral outcomes. The studies using data from the Three-Cities study did not address

selection into welfare or employment transitions, and it has been shown that women who have a

difficult time securing and maintaining employment and staying off welfare have fewer human

capital resources (e.g., education, physical health, and mental health) than those who are more

successful at transitioning from welfare to employment (Danziger, Kalil & Anderson 2000). In



                                                                                                   6
addition, results from three cities may not be generalizable to the nation, and the research design

of those studies does not allow for welfare reform to affect behaviors through channels other

than changes in welfare participation and/or work. Aughinbaugh and Gittleman focused more on

substance use than crime and acknowledged that their estimated effects of maternal employment

were imprecise and cautioned that not too much should be read into their null results, and Vander

Ven et al. did not address the potential endogeneity of maternal employment. Finally, the results

from the Corman et al. study were sensitive to model specification and thus inconclusive.

Expected effects

       Economic theory suggests that the work incentives under welfare reform may increase

household income (if earnings from work after transportation and childcare expenses exceed

previous welfare income), which could lead to increased resources, such as employer-sponsored

private insurance, which could in turn increase access to mental healthcare and improve teens’

behaviors. However, maternal employment could lead to a net increase in constraints (e.g., by

decreasing time available for investments in one’s children in the realms of supervision,

provision of high-quality health inputs, or nurturing), which could lead to undesirable effects on

teens’ behaviors. Welfare reform could also have more broad-based effects through changes in

the normative climate, by leading mothers to model mainstream behaviors and making reliance

on welfare less of an option for the future for their children. Finally, welfare reform could

potentially improve teen behaviors through one of the explicit goals of PRWORA—to encourage

marriage though initiatives such as marriage promotion programs, which could result in

increased household income and fewer time constraints. The net result will depend on the

combined effects of the various pathways. Below, we highlight salient findings from the loose

patchwork of relevant studies to get a sense of the plausibility of various pathways.



                                                                                                     7
Income

         Akee et al. (2010) investigated the effects of a positive income shock (the establishment

of ongoing cash distributions to Native Americans from casino revenues in a certain area, which

were not available to non-Native Americans in the same area) on the delinquent behavior of

teens and young adults and found that increases in income were associated with lower levels of

drug dealing and minor crimes. One way increased income, generally, may improve teen

behavior is by allowing or inducing mothers to move to neighborhoods with fewer peers who

may influence teens to engage in delinquency. Damm and Dustmann (2014) investigated effects

of assignment of refugees to a variety of counties and municipalities in Denmark and found that

youth assigned to areas with higher rates of youth violence were more likely to engage in violent

crime. Kling et al. (2005) examined data from the Moving to Opportunity randomized

experiment, in which some families received housing vouchers to move to lower poverty

neighborhoods, and found reduced violence on the part of both boys and girls whose families

received vouchers compared to those in the control group. Surprisingly, they found some

positive effects of the treatment on property arrests for boys, but concluded that the positive

social benefits of the declines in violence outweighed the negative social effects of the observed

increase in property crime among boys.

Supervision

         Heiland, Price and Wilson (2014), using data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics

and American Time Use Survey (ATUS), found that mothers who work full-time spend less time

(and less quality time) with their teenage children compared to mothers who do not work.

Kalenkoski, Ribar and Stratton (2009), using data from the ATUS, found that teens aged 15–18

in single-parent households, particularly boys, spend more time in unsupervised activities



                                                                                                     8
compared to teens with working fathers and homemaker mothers. Han and Waldfogel (2007),

using NLSY-CS data for children aged 10–14, found that night, rotating, and irregular maternal

work hours were associated with an adult being present after school and that mothers with

rotating and irregular hours were more likely to know who their children were with when they

were not in school.

       Aizer (2004) used data from the NLSY Child Supplement (CS) for youth aged 10–14 to

estimate the effects of after-school supervision on three youth delinquent behaviors—getting

drunk or high, hurting someone, and stealing. Estimating both single-equation and family fixed

effects models, she found robust favorable effects of parental after-school supervision on all

three behaviors. Vander Ven et al. (2001), discussed earlier, also used the NLSY CS for youth

aged 12–14 and found that increased supervision (measured as whether the mother knows who

the youth is with) is associated with decreased delinquency (on a scale constructed from 9 items).

Averett, Argys and Rees (2011), using Add Health Data for youth aged 12–19, found some

evidence that having an older sibling was associated with reduced parental supervision, that

parental supervision before school was associated with less drug selling, and that parental

supervision after school was associated with a reduction in marijuana use, other illegal drug use,

and stealing. Mahatmya and Lohman (2001), referred to above, found that students involved in

after-school activities exhibited less delinquent behavior. Akee et al. (2010), also referred to

above, found that exogenous increases in income led both mothers and fathers to spend more

time supervising their teen children and reduced the likelihood that the teen children engaged in

drug dealing and minor crime. See (2016), using data from the PSID, found no associations

between maternal supervision time and their teen children’s smoking, alcohol use, and marijuana




                                                                                                    9
use; however, the authors used a sample of adolescents living with both biological parents, who

are not at high risk for welfare reliance.

        Overall, these studies provide evidence that full-time employment and standard work

schedules are associated with less supervision of teenage children in single-parent households

and that maternal supervision reduces at-risk teens’ delinquent behavior.

Parental Modeling

        Case and Katz (1991) found that not only do neighborhoods and peers matter, but that

parents’ behaviors also affect teen behaviors. Using data from youths in low-income Boston

neighborhoods in 1989, the authors found that having a family member in jail or with substance

use problems increases the likelihood that a teen commits a crime. Recent research indicates that

welfare reform led to decreases in both crime (Corman, Dave & Reichman 2014) and substance

abuse (Corman et al. 2013) among women at risk for welfare reliance, which in concert with the

Case and Katz findings suggests that it may also have decreased criminal behavior of their

children.

Welfare no longer a long-term option

        For forward-thinking low-income teenage females, knowing that time limits preclude

long-term welfare reliance might lead them to invest more in their ability to be self-sufficient as

adults. In addition, welfare rules do not allow minor mothers to receive welfare if they move

away from their family home and are not in school. As indicated earlier, welfare reform reduced

high school dropout, and the effects were stronger for girls than for boys (Dave, Corman &

Reichman 2012; Koball 2007; Offner 2005). Since having a criminal background is a deterrent to

getting a job in the legal sector, and since schooling can be a substitute for illegal behavior, it is

plausible that welfare reform would lead to decreases in crime, particularly among girls.



                                                                                                     10
Family structure

       Although marriage promotion was an explicit goal of the PRWORA legislation, a large

literature on the effects of welfare reform on marriage and a smaller one on cohabitation reveal

mixed findings, and the literature on non-marital childbearing and female headship indicates

slightly negative but inconsistent effects of welfare reform (Blank 2002, Moffitt 1992, 1995,

1998, Grogger & Karoly 2005, Gennetian & Knox 2003, Peters, Plotnick & Jeong 2003,

Ratcliffe et al. 2002). These inconsistent results suggest that family structure vis-à-vis two parent

families is not an important pathway by which welfare reform would change teen behavior,

despite the fact that youth crime is higher in female-headed households, as mentioned earlier.

Gender Differences

       A large literature on criminal behavior indicates that females are less likely than males to

commit crime and that factors that affect criminal behavior generally have less of an effect for

females than for males (e.g., Levitt & Lochner 2001). Some of the studies reviewed above reveal

gender differences vis-à-vis supervision, income-related factors, and mother’s employment,

although most did not consider gender differences at all. Kalenkoski et al. (2009) found that boys

with single mothers spent more time unsupervised than did girls with single mothers, while

Cobb-Clark and Tekin (2011) found that the presence of fathers had a greater effect on reducing

risky behaviors for boys than for girls. Damm and Dustmann (2014) found that being assigned to

a relatively high violence area resulted in greater rates of violence for boys than girls, while

Kling et al. (2005) found that girls responded to moves to lower poverty neighborhoods by

reducing their violent behavior more than boys did, and that males who moved to higher-income

neighborhoods were more likely to commit property crimes into their 20s while the same move

had no effect for females. Finally, the time-limited nature of cash assistance under reform,



                                                                                                   11
making welfare much less of a long-term option, would likely affect the behavior of girls more

than boys, as discussed earlier.

Recap

        There is little past literature directly relevant to our focus on the effects of welfare reform

on teenage crime, and existing studies do not provide convincing evidence in this regard.

However, studies of effects of income and low-income neighborhoods on teen delinquent

behavior, maternal work on supervision of teenage children, supervision on teen delinquent

behavior, and parent modeling of mainstream behavior support hypothesized pathways. Finally,

both the broader literature and the few studies directly tied to our research question suggest that

it is important to investigate gender differences.

Data

        The two main sources of data for this study are: (1) Uniform Crime Reporting Program

arrests from the Monthly Master Files from the U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of

Investigation (FBI) for 1990 through 2005, which provide the number of arrests by age and

gender for each month/offense category/reporting agency; and (2) implementation dates of

welfare reform at the state level during the same time period. The former is used to create

measures of arrests and the latter is used to characterize welfare reform, as described below.

Measures of Arrests

        Virtually all studies of crime in the economics literature use measures of reported crime

rates or actual arrests as proxies for crime. The age of the person committing the crime is not

available for the former, so for our analyses of the effects of welfare reform on youth crime we

rely on the latter. For purposes of this analysis, we focus on minors—individuals less than 18

years old. Specifically, we aggregate monthly data on arrests by age, sex, reporting agency, and



                                                                                                    12
type of offense from the FBI crime reports to construct month/year/state/age/sex/offense

measures of arrests. Although individual level surveys that ask about crime commission include

more detailed characteristics of perpetrators and may include crimes not reported to the police or

that do not result in arrests, crimes are likely to be underreported, information is rarely available

for different offense types, and criminal activity in large geographic areas over time cannot be

covered in that mode. Comprehensive reviews have found that Uniform Crime Reports are valid

indicators of serious crimes (Gove, Hughes & Geerken 1985) and that both aggregate and

individual level studies of crime often lead to similar conclusions—e.g., that criminal justice

sanctions deter crime (Nagin 1998).

        The FBI data include a record for each criminal justice agency in the U.S. for each

month. Each agency’s monthly record includes the number of arrests by crime category, age

category, and sex. To obtain reasonably representative information, we limited our sample to

agencies that cover at least 50,000 individuals. In 1996, the year that PRWORA was enacted,

agencies with populations of 50,000 or more people covered approximately 55% of the total U.S.

population (147 million/268 million, calculated by the authors from the FBI and U.S. Census

data). From these agency-based observations, we aggregated the data to the state and month/year

level. Even among large criminal justice agencies, not all agencies report in all months. For

example, in 1996, of the total 147 million people in the U.S. residing under the jurisdiction of

agencies of 50,000 people or more, about 106 million people (about 72%) were covered by

agencies that reported arrests to the FBI in all 12 months.1 We include both the total population

in all agencies covering populations of at least 50,000 in the given state/ month/year and the total

state population on the right-hand side in our models. These population measures account for

1
 We also dropped state/month observations for which fewer than 50% of the state’s population (residing in agencies
of 50,000 or more people) was represented. This resulted in a loss of about 450 state/month observations, or about
7% of all relevant state/month cells.

                                                                                                               13
differences in the size of the underlying population that is represented or covered by the FBI

reports.

           The FBI reports total arrests for 29 separate categories (see Appendix Table A-1 for a list

of the crime categories and their codes), and also classifies crimes as “serious” (categories 1

through 19) or “other” (categories 20 through 29). We use this same classification, referring to

“other” crimes as minor. Serious crimes are murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary,

larceny, motor vehicle theft, other assault, arson, forgery and counterfeiting, fraud,

embezzlement, stolen property crimes, vandalism, weapons offenses, prostitution, other sex

offenses, drug abuse violations, and gambling. Minor crimes are offenses against family and

children, driving under the influence, liquor law violations, drunkenness, disorderly conduct,

vagrancy, suspicion, curfew violations and loitering, runaways, and all other crimes except

traffic violations.

           Figure 1 presents arrest rates by age and gender for serious crimes, excluding those for

drug abuse violations, during 1990 and 1991—the two year period before any welfare reform

was implemented. We exclude arrests for drug abuse violations because a recent study

comprehensively explored the effects of welfare reform on drug-related arrests (Corman et al.

2017).2 For each month/year, we imputed the total number of arrests in the U.S. as a whole by

inflating the number of arrests in our data by the fraction of population covered in our data. We

then calculated the mean of the annual arrest rates across the 2 years of pre-welfare reform data

(see figure notes for additional detail). The cohorts of interest in our analysis are two groups of

minors, those ages 10–14 and 15–17 years. For comparison, we present arrest rates for adult

teens (18–19 years old), as well as for two cohorts in their 20s. The data in Figure 1 are

consistent with national reports indicating that crime and arrest rates peak in the mid-to late-teen
2
    However, in supplementary analyses, we include drug crimes in the category of serious crimes.

                                                                                                      14
years and are generally three to five times higher for males than females (Loeber, Farrington &

Petechuck 2013; Snyder 2012). Figure 2 presents comparable rates for minor offenses, which

reveal similar patterns.

       Figure 3 shows trends in average arrest rates per 100,000 population (from our data) from

1990 to 2005 for our focal cohorts (males and females ages 10–14 and 15–17 years) and a

comparison cohort (males 25–29 years) for serious crimes. The comparison cohort is young

enough to have many active crime participants but far less likely than the focal cohorts to have

been affected by welfare reform. During the 1990s, arrest rates were high through the middle of

the decade and then declined, for all 5 cohorts. This trend is consistent with that described by

Blumstein and Wallman (2006), Goldberger and Rosenfeld (2008), and Zimring (2007), who

explored why crime rates dramatically, unexpectedly, and systematically plunged in all areas of

the U.S. in the late 1990s. The bottom line from this body of work is that there is no one reason

for the dramatic shift, but key factors appear to be the decline in crack cocaine use, better

policing, increased imprisonment, demographic shifts, legalized abortion in the 1970s, and

economic expansion. The sharp decline in crime during the 1990s presents a methodological

challenge for our study, as it occurred at the same time welfare reform was unfolding, making it

important to disentangle the effects of welfare reform from other trends related to arrests.

       Figure 4, which shows arrest rates for minor crimes for each of the 5 cohorts from 1990

to 2005, reveals a somewhat different pattern than that shown in Figure 3 for serious crimes. For

males age 25–29 years, arrest rates declined throughout the period, whereas for the 4 minor

cohorts, arrest rates increased until the latter part of the 1990s and then declined.

Characterizing welfare reform




                                                                                                   15
       Welfare reform was implemented in two general phases. The first phase consisted of pre-

PRWORA waivers. Although not federally mandated, pre-PRWORA waivers were implemented

in the majority of states by the time the federal PRWORA was enacted in 1996 (Schoeni &

Blank 2000). The second phase of welfare reform came with the enactment of PRWORA. States

were required to submit plans for and—once approved, implement—TANF programs subject to

federal guidelines and have been required to submit changes to their programs to the U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services. States implemented their approved TANF programs

between September 1996 (Massachusetts, Michigan, and Vermont) and January 1998

(California) (USDHHS 1999).

       Table 1 presents the implementation dates for both AFDC waivers and TANF for all

states in the U.S. The waivers were introduced in 29 states over a period of 53 months, and

TANF was implemented in all states over a period of 17 months. Combining both waivers and

TANF, states implemented any welfare reform over a period of 64 months, spanning from

October 1992 (MI and NJ being the earliest states to implement waivers) through January 1998

(CA being the last state to implement TANF).

       Following the convention in the welfare reform literature (reviewed in Blank 2002), we

exploit differences in the timing of both AFDC waivers and TANF implementation across states.

In some models, we use separate measures for AFDC waiver and TANF implementation. For

waivers, we consider whether, in a given year and month, a given state had a statewide AFDC

waiver in place that substantially altered the nature of AFDC with regard to time limits, work

requirements, earnings disregards, sanctions, and/or family caps. For TANF, we consider

whether, in a given year and month, the state had implemented TANF post-PRWORA. Most

studies consider AFDC waivers and TANF separately, since they represent distinctly different



                                                                                                 16
phases of welfare reform. In other specifications, we include a single indicator for any welfare

reform (AFDC waiver or TANF).3 In order to account for time lags between behaviors and

arrests as well as to allow for time for the new policies to take effect, our welfare reform

variables build in a lag. Specifically, in our main models, welfare reform (any, AFDC, or TANF)

is coded as “yes” for a given year if it had been in effect for at least 12 months. We also

explicitly explore the timing of effects relative to the timing of welfare reform implementation in

alternate models described later.

Methods

         We employ a quasi-experimental DD research design, which exploits variation in the

timing of the implementation of welfare reform across states and over time, to estimate the

following baseline model which relates changes in arrests to welfare reform:

(1)      Ln Astm = α + Welfarestm-12 Π + Zst β + States Ω + Yeart * Monthm Ψ + (States *

         MonthsPrest) Φ + εstm

This is a quasi-reduced form crime production function, which directly relates the natural log of

arrests for individuals under the age of 18 to welfare policy measures and a vector of covariates.4

         In Equation 1, youth arrests (Ln A), measured for broad offense categories in state s

during month m and year t, are a function of welfare policy (Welfare), characterized separately

by the implementation of AFDC waivers and TANF in the given state with a 12-month lag, or

alternatively, as any welfare reform (AFDC waiver or TANF) with a 12-month lag. As noted

earlier, we model the policy response with a lag in order to allow for any delayed effects between


3
  We acknowledge that differences across state welfare programs are more nuanced and dynamic than what is
captured by our measures. However, the current approach represents a broad first look at the effects of welfare
reform on youth crime and is consistent with the literature on the effects of welfare reform on other outcomes.
4
  The log transformation adjusts for the skewness of the distribution of state-level youth arrests, and also facilitates
comparison of the estimates across models and outcomes in terms of relative percent changes in arrests. All models
control for various measures of the relevant population base, thus allowing the coefficient of population to be
unrestricted.

                                                                                                                      17
adoption of welfare reform, mothers’ employment, children’s criminal behavior, and ultimately

arrests. We also present estimates for contemporaneous effects and for other lag structures.

        Arrests are also a function of a vector of time-varying state-specific factors (Z),

including measures of the state’s economy and labor market conditions, relevant population base,

and enforcement. The parameter  represents a state-time error term. In all specifications, we

include state fixed effects (State), which account for all unobserved time-invariant state specific

factors and time (Year*Month) fixed effects, which account non-parametrically for national

trends in criminal activity and the arrest rate, other concurrent national trends, and seasonality.

The parameters of interest are the vector Π, which represents the “reduced form” or total effect

of welfare reform on crime, operating through a variety of potential (and possibly competing)

mechanisms discussed earlier.

       Ideally, we would estimate models of the effects of welfare reform on crime using data

on the population of youth most likely to reside in welfare-receiving households — those with

low-educated unmarried mothers. However, the FBI arrest data do not allow us to identify

educational attainment, marital status, or other characteristics of arrestees’ mothers, as the only

available demographics are sex and age of the perpetrator. This is less of a limitation than it may

seem because: (1) we would not want to restrict the sample to youth whose mothers are current

welfare recipients, since potential welfare recipients are shown to behave strategically in their

use of welfare benefits when faced with time limits and other regulatory constraints (DeLeire et

al. 2006; Grogger 2004); (2) our sample consists exclusively of youth who have been arrested,

and youth arrestees are typically from disadvantaged families with single mothers (e.g. Harper &

McLanahan 2004), a group at high risk of former, current, and future welfare participation. Data

from the National Household Survey of Drug Abuse show that in 1992 (the onset of welfare



                                                                                                      18
reform), 14% of teens who had been arrested came from households currently receiving welfare,

though this figure does not take into consideration households with previous recipients who may

have transitioned into employment because of welfare reform or with potential recipients who

may have contemplated going on welfare in the future. Nevertheless, only a subset of the arrestee

population would be affected by welfare reform, which would limit statistical power in our

analyses. We interpret the plausibility of our estimates and effect magnitudes and make

inferences accordingly.

           Identification in the DD framework comes from comparing changes in youth arrests

within states that have implemented welfare reform to changes in states that have not yet done

so, with the implicit assumption being that the latter are a valid counterfactual for the former.

Given the general noisiness of the arrest data and the multitude of state factors that may affect

arrests, the “control” states which have not yet instituted welfare reform may not completely

account for omitted variables. For instance, one particularly salient policy confounder is the

Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, which was advertised as the largest

crime bill in the history of the United States (U.S. Justice Department Fact Sheet 1994) and

which provided for increased federal funding to states to fight crime.5 We address the specter of

potentially confounding effects from unobserved factors, including those from the 1994 crime

bill, in a number of ways.

           First, all models control parametrically for unobserved state-specific linear trends pre-

welfare reform (States * MonthsPrest). This relaxes the parallel trends assumption and allow for

differential trends in youth crime across states prior to the implementation of welfare reform. We

also further consider potential time lags between the implementation of welfare reform and

behavioral responses that result in arrests. Lagged policy effects are quite plausible; for example,
5
    See: https://www.ncjrs.gov/txtfiles/billfs.txt.

                                                                                                       19
it could take some time for youth to understand the implications of the new regime and it may

take a number of crimes over months for an individual to be caught and arrested. We assess and

test for these possibilities by estimating models that decompose the timing of the effects.

        Second, we explicitly control for a large vector of concurrent state-specific time-varying

factors (Z) that may impact youth arrest rates, including the maximum age of juvenile court

jurisdiction, measures of the state’s economy (real personal income per capita, poverty rate),

labor market conditions (unemployment rate, minimum wage), and the relevant population base

(total state population; covered population of reporting FBI agencies). The 1994 crime bill,

mentioned above, provided increased funding for police and authorized substantial funding for

prison construction.6 In order to control for these potentially confounding effects, all

specifications further include measures of the state’s criminal justice system, including total

criminal justice-related expenditures and the total number of full-time police officers.

        Third, we address potential policy endogeneity (i.e., state experimentation with welfare

reform through waivers and the timing of TANF implementation may be related to prior

increases in welfare caseloads and prior economic conditions, which may be related to crime

rates) by controlling for lagged state-level economic indicators (state-level unemployment rate

and personal income per capita) and lags of the state’s welfare caseloads.7 Specifications with



6
  Travis, Western & Redburn (2014) found, however, that actual funding for prisons was considerably
less than the funds initially allocated in the bill. In addition, these authors found that the rate of growth in
imprisonment rates had been high since the 1970s and did not seem to increase following the passage of
the 1994 crime bill.
7
  The lagged economic indicators are in addition to the contemporaneous measure of the state’s economy
contained in the vector Z. We do not control for contemporaneous welfare caseloads as these would
comprise an endogenous control being a function of welfare reform. The lagged measures of welfare
caseloads can help account for the possibility that state-specific timing of welfare reform implementation
may be driven by the state’s previous levels and trends in caseloads. However, given the high degree of
correlation in a state’s welfare population over time, the estimates from these models are suggestive and
only intended to gauge the sensitivity of our estimates to additional selection on observed state-specific
factors.

                                                                                                              20
the state-specific pre-welfare reform time trends also help to address the possibility that policy

implementation may be otherwise endogenous to the state’s history and thus mitigate this

concern.8

        Fourth, in our preferred specifications, we control for the natural log of total arrests and

the natural log of arrests related to the specific crime category being studied, among young adult

males (ages 25–29). Males in this age group should be affected minimally, if at all, by shifts in

welfare policy, for two reasons: First, male adults are not eligible for welfare and thus would not

be affected directly by shifts in policy. Second, the majority of males in this age group were

adults when states were implementing welfare reform, and therefore we do not expect lagged

effects through changes in maternal employment or other factors for this group. These controls

may capture confounding effects from the 1994 crime bill since most of the provisions of the

legislation should have had similar impacts on teens and adults. They may also capture overall

shifts in arrests and overall shifts in a particular category of arrests in a given state due to further

time-varying state characteristics such as enforcement and penalties, local economic conditions,

and other unobserved factors. This strategy follows Dave et al. (2011, 2016), which employed

controls for trends in male insurance coverage when estimating insurance rates among pregnant

women, and trends in birth outcomes for a placebo group when estimating minimum wage

effects on infant health.

        Note that there is no restriction in this case that the unobserved factors affect both adult

male and youth crime identically. This is the assumption that is typically made in a DDD

framework if males were used as a direct control group, and older males are not a fully-

8
  We also explored the extent to which the implementation of welfare reform was associated with the
state’s pre-reform history by estimating models directly predicting whether and when a state implemented
an AFDC waiver, and alternately, any welfare reform, as a function of either the lagged level of youth
crime (total arrests) or prior annual trends in youth crime in the state. These specifications did not suggest
any significant or consistent effects, which is validating.

                                                                                                           21
equivalent comparison group for studying youth crime in a DDD context. The use of older males

as a comparison group would assume that, in the absence of welfare reform, for every one-

percentage point change in arrests among older men there would be an equal change in arrests

among youth—an assumption that is not supported by the time trends (Figures 1 and 2) and

(later) explicitly rejected in all of our models. Instead, by controlling for older male arrest rates,

we are able to flexibly control for all common unmeasured factors that may be affecting adult

male and youth crime (even if differentially) as long as the effect is proportional.

           When we find credible reduced-form effects of welfare reform on crime, we conduct

additional analyses. First, we conduct a series of supplemental analyses that explore potential

heterogeneous effects by estimating effects separately for states with relatively strong and

relatively medium or weak work incentives built into their TANF programs, and for states that

had relatively large and smaller declines in their welfare caseloads. Second, we further consider

potential time lags between the implementation of welfare reform and behavioral responses that

result in arrests. It may take time for youth to understand the implications of the new regime for

their ability to make ends meet, or it could take a number of crimes over months for an

individual to be caught and arrested. We explore these possibilities and further check for

differential trends and lead effects by estimating models that decompose the timing of the effects

and estimate an event study. Third, we assess the plausibility of our estimates by conducting

placebo tests using corresponding adult male arrests as the outcome. Given that welfare reform

policies mostly impact women and their children, we do not a priori expect large or significant

effects on adult male crime.9 Any finding to the contrary would indicate that any observed

effects of welfare reform on youth crime are likely confounded by unobserved state-specific

trends.
9
    This assumes that there is no spillover to the market for adult male criminal activity.

                                                                                                     22
       We estimate all models using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and adjust standard errors

on the conservative side to account for arbitrary correlation within state cells over time. The

inclusion of state-specific pre-reform linear trends in our models, along with corresponding

arrest measures for males in all of our models, confines the variation we exploit to yield

plausibly causal estimates. While these strategies reduce statistical power, we draw inferences

from the weight of the evidence generated by our various specifications, patterns across

estimates, and multiple robustness and consistency checks.

       OLS estimates of state-year panels yield treatment effects that ignore population size, and

the resulting estimates are averages over states rather than over individuals. We therefore weight

all models by the state’s population of females ages 21–49 (the potential pool who would be

exposed to welfare reform), which would result in an individual-weighted average causal effect

and may help to increase the precision of the regression estimates (Angrist & Pischke 2009). Our

estimates are not sensitive to weighting.

Results

Main Estimates

       We present our main estimates for arrests relating to serious and minor offenses among

males and females ages 10–14 (models 1–4) and ages 15–17 (models 5–8) years old in Tables 2–

5. All specifications control for state and year-by-month fixed effects as well as pre-welfare

reform state-specific linear trends and the gender-specific natural logarithm of the state

population under 18. As a baseline, we start with a parsimonious model (specifications 1 and 5)

with state covariates, and then progressively add richer controls to account for unobserved state

trends and policy endogeneity. Specifically, models (2) and (3) (correspondingly 6 and 7 for




                                                                                                  23
older youth) add arrests for all offenses and the specific offenses being studied for adult males.10.

The final specification for each youth group (models 4 and 8) further add lagged economic

indicators and welfare caseloads to address policy endogeneity concerns. We estimate the effects

of any welfare reform, measured as the implementation of a major waiver to the state’s AFDC

program or the implementation of TANF, as well as differential effects of the AFDC waivers and

TANF—all coded “yes” in a given year and month if welfare reform had been in effect at all at

least 12 months prior.

          Tables 2 and 3 present estimates for arrests relating to serious offenses for males and

females, respectively. We do not find any evidence that welfare reform significantly impacted

this category of arrests, for either gender, which is not surprising given that it includes arrests for

violent and felony offenses that are not likely to be responsive to changes in maternal

supervision and household income on the margin, at least within the range induced by welfare

reform.

          In Tables 4 and 5, we assess effects for minor offenses which may be more responsive at

the margin to welfare-reform induced shifts in maternal supervision, time constraints, and

household resources. These include offenses such as disorderly conduct, vagrancy, and status

offenses (e.g., curfew and loitering violations).

          Estimates for males (Table 4), for the most basic specification (models 1 and 5), suggest

that welfare reform reduced minor offenses by 4.8% among youth ages 10–14, and by 7.5%

among older youth ages 15–17, though both estimates are imprecise and statistically



10
  The coefficients for measures of the adult male arrest rates are generally positive and statistically significant in all
models, indicating that these controls are addressing important potentially confounding factors within states over
time. The coefficients, however, are significantly and uniformly less than one, suggesting that trends in juvenile
crime and adult male crime do not vary together on a one-for-one basis and underscoring our rationale for not using
adult males ages 25–49 as a direct comparison group for female crime within a DDD framework.


                                                                                                                       24
insignificant. The effect magnitudes are relatively robust to adding the measures of crime for

older males in specifications (2) and (6), and to adding the extended state-level controls in

specifications (4) and (8). Those models suggest declines of 6% among the younger adolescents,

but none of these effects are statistically significant. We therefore interpret these estimates as

suggestive and weak evidence of a decline in minor crimes among youths aged 10–14, though

large standard errors also make it likely that welfare reform has had no major effects on criminal

activity for this age group. For older adolescents however, we find more consistent evidence that

the shift in welfare policy is associated with about a statistically significant 8% reduction in

minor crimes. This robustness is reassuring in that the effects do not seem to be sensitive to

omitted controls for unobserved trends. This is partly due to the controls for pre-reform state-

specific trends, which we include in all specifications, and which to some extent already account

for unobserved state-specific time-varying heterogeneity and policy endogeneity.11 The added

covariates do, however, reduce the sampling variance and improve the precision of the estimates.

When we consider separate effects for AFDC waivers and TANF (model 7 for youths 15–17),

estimates indicate somewhat larger declines associated with TANF (10%) compared to the

waivers (8%) though the relatively large standard errors makes this difference statistically

insignificant. Table 5 presents corresponding estimates for minor offenses among females. These

effects are quite similar to those for males. Generally, welfare reform reduced arrests for minor

offenses among females ages 15–17 by about 9–10%.

        While our conceptual framework is generally agnostic about the direction of the effects

given the multitude of potentially reinforcing or competing pathways discussed earlier, the

pattern of results that we find is ex post validating when contrasted with the unconditional trends


11
  As expected, when we exclude these pre-reform state-specific trends, the estimates become more sensitive to
additional controls.

                                                                                                                25
presented in Figures 3 and 4. Specifically, the youth arrest time trends for both serious and minor

crimes follow more or less similar trajectories in Figures 3 and 4, reaching a local peak around

the mid-1990s and mostly declining over the period that welfare reform was unfolding. If our

models had suggested blanket declines in youth arrests for both serious and minor crimes, this

might cast doubt that we have adequately controlled for such time-varying trends. However, we

find significant results of the effects of welfare reform only on minor crimes, while estimates for

serious crimes (which also exhibited strong unconditional downward trends as welfare reform

was being implemented) are economically and statistically insignificant.

Specification Checks

        We conducted a series of supplemental analyses for minor crimes among youth ages 15–

17, for which it appears that welfare reform had an effect. These are presented in Table 6 and 7.

Models in Table 6 explore the timing of the effects, and those in Table 7 assess heterogeneity

across states and also present some placebo checks.

        The main effects presented above correspond to a 12-month lag with respect to policy

implementation. Models (1) and (5) in Table 6 reproduce these effects (from our preferred

specification 6 in Tables 4 and 5)12 for males and females respectively. In models (2) and (6), we

consider the 6-month lagged effect, and in models (3) and (7) we consider just the one-month

lag. Expectedly, and in a pattern that is validating, the effect magnitudes decline as the lag gets

shorter. For the one-month lagged effect, the estimate is halved and becomes statistically

insignificant. Given the time it may take between the reform to mothers finding employment to




12
  Our preferred specification excludes the extended state-level covariates since these covariates are potentially
endogenous, even though we have lagged these measures by 1–2 years, due to the strong correlation in a state’s
economic conditions and welfare caseloads over time. Our estimates and discussion are not materially changed if we
include the extended state-level covariates in the models in Tables 6 and 7.

                                                                                                               26
criminal activity and arrests, we would not expect strong substantial effects in months

immediately subsequent to the reform.

       In specifications 4 and 8, we estimate an event study, separating out the timing of the

impact of welfare reform into lead effects, contemporaneous effects, and lagged effects. We

include indicators for 37 or more month pre-policy adoption, 25–36 months pre-adoption, 13–24

months pre-adoption, 1–12 months pre-adoption (reference category), 0–11 months post-

adoption (where t=0 indicates the month that the reform was adopted in the particular state), 12–

13 months post-adoption, 24–35 months post-adoption, and 3 or more years post adoption. The

coefficient of each of these indicators represents the effect of welfare reform on arrests for minor

crimes during the specific time window, relative to the year directly prior to the policy adoption.

       The event study fulfills two purposes. First, it allows us to assess the credibility of our

research design. That the lead effects are small and statistically insignificant is validating. In our

preferred specification, which control for adult male arrests, fixed effects at various levels, and

pre-policy linear trends, there do not appear to be any residual differential trends between the

reform and non-reform states. We also find no economically or statistically significant effects of

welfare reform in the year that it was implemented; this is partly validating since if we had found

large negative effects immediately, this would likely just reflect as spurious correlation with any

declining crime trends and cast doubt on a causal interpretation.

       The main effects in Table 4 and 5 suggested a 7–10% decline in minor crimes. These are

average effects realized for the average state over an average post-reform period of about 6

years. Second, the event study more formally decomposes the timing of the policy response. For

both males and females (models 4 and 8 respectively) we find that reforms appeared to start

having a discernible negative effect 12–23 months after it was implemented. Thus, arrests (for



                                                                                                      27
minor crimes) declined by about 5% for males and 7% for females in the second year post-

reform, relative to the year prior to the reform. This decline became stronger over the next 12

months (over 24–35 months relative to the year prior to the reform), suggesting a reduction in

arrests between 12–14%. For males, this decline does not appear to dissipate or cumulate over

the longer term; that is, after the decline three years post-adoption, the coefficient on the

indicator for periods further removed from reform implementation (≥ 3 Years post Welfare

Reform) do not diminish substantially or become progressively more negative. For females, we

find a slight dissipation, from a peak effect of about a 14% decline (months 24–35 post policy) to

an average 11% decline 3 or mores year post reform. It is important to note that these models

potentially capture a combination of exposure and age effects. For example, the effect of 3 years

since welfare reform for a 17-year old would be for an individual who was about 14 years old

when welfare reform was implemented, but for a 13-year old would be for an individual who

was 10 years old when welfare reform was implemented. The estimated effects of 3 years since

welfare reform could reflect lagged or cumulative exposure, but it is also possible that welfare

reform has differential effects at different ages. Due to the perfect correlation between

cumulative exposure and the age at which the individual was first, the effects of time since

welfare reform should be interpreted as a conflation of these two potential effects. Thus, the

pattern noted above for females is suggestive of effects of welfare reform that somewhat got

weaker over the longer-term and/or that welfare reform had somewhat stronger effects for

females who were exposed at relatively older ages.

       In Table 7, we broadly test the work mechanism by first exploiting the extent to which

states encouraged work under their TANF programs, as work-incentive policies (such as benefit

generosity, time limits, earnings disregards, and sanctions for non-compliance) vary considerably



                                                                                                   28
across states. If the observed reduction in minor crime represents a causal effect, we would

expect to see larger effects in states with stronger work incentives than in those with weaker

work incentives. Specifications 1 and 2 in Table 7 test for this potential “dose-response”

association by including an interaction between our welfare reform indicator and another

indicator for whether the state had relatively strong work incentives under its TANF program.13

Indeed, for both male and female youth, we find stronger negative effects of any welfare reform

on minor crime in states with strong work incentives—about 10–13% compared to about 7–8%

in states with weaker work incentives. These estimates are imprecise, however, due to inflated

standard errors and reduced statistical power.

        Second, we implement another dose-response check by assessing whether the declines in

minor crime were stronger in states that experienced larger relative declines in their welfare

caseloads over the period. In specifications 3 and 4, we interact the percent decline in welfare

caseloads with the indicator for any welfare reform. In these specifications, the coefficient of the

main welfare reform indicator is an extrapolation and would capture the effects on crime among

states that had no reductions in welfare caseloads. We therefore expect the coefficient of the

interaction term to be strongly negative, and certainly more negative than the main effect.

Indeed, for both males and females, the interaction effects are strongly negative with much larger

magnitudes than the main effects. These estimates suggest approximately a 10–16 % decline in

minor crime (associated with a 100% reduction in welfare caseload). Given that the average




13
   We used the classification of states as having strong work incentives or not by Blank and Schmidt (2001), wherein
states were considered to have strong work incentives if they had relatively low benefit generosity, high earnings
disregards, strict sanctions, and strict time limits.

                                                                                                                 29
caseload decline was about 70%, these estimates suggest a decrease in arrests for minor crimes

on the order of 7–11%, which is in line with the estimates in Tables 4 and 5.14

         Results from the placebo test modeling arrests for serious and minor crime of adult males

ages 25–29 and ages 25–49 as a function of any welfare reform (specification 5–8 in Table 7)

indicate that welfare reform had an insignificant (and small magnitude) effect, suggesting that

the observed associations between welfare reform and arrests for the affected groups are not

spurious. We note that crime rates for adults males were declining (see Figures 3 and 4) over the

same period as welfare reform unfolded. If our estimates for youth are mostly reflective of a

declining trend in crime, we would have observed significant and large negative effects of adult

males as well.

Additional Robustness Checks

         Finally, in models not shown we confirmed that our results are not sensitive to alternate

functional forms or model specifications that, alternatively: (1) expressed the outcome in level

terms, as the natural log of arrests and controlling for the state’s female population; (2) changed

the outcome to a logistic transformation based on the natural log of the odds of arrest

[ln((Ast/Populationst)/(1-(Ast/Populationst)]; and (3) used non-logged measures of the arrest rate

or total arrests as outcomes. We further assessed sensitivity to how we treated agencies that were

small or had limited coverage. Given that not all criminal justice agencies provide complete

reports on the number of arrests by month and offense type, our main analyses were based on

agencies that covered at least 50,000 in order to minimize measurement error and maximize data

consistency. In additional analyses, we ascertained that our estimates are insensitive to these cut-

offs, and we further confirmed that our estimates are not sensitive to restricting our sample to

14
  Specifically, we compute the natural log difference in caseloads between the year prior to when the state instituted
welfare reform and 2001. This log difference is interacted with the welfare reform indicator. The mean log
difference is about 0.70.

                                                                                                                   30
individuals and agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%. We also estimated models that

included both pre-policy adoption linear trends and post-policy adoption linear trends, allowing

both sets of trends to differ by state. These controls address the concern that differential trends

may have shifted in ways that are correlated with when welfare reform was being implemented

in states.15 While the standard errors inflate and render some of our estimates statistically

insignificant (p-value ranging from 0. 08 to 0.19), the effect magnitudes continue to suggest a 7–

11% decline in minor crimes.


Conclusion

         This study found robust evidence that welfare reform in the U.S. in the 1990s led to

decreased youth arrests for minor crimes, in the range of 7 to 9 %, but had no effect on youth

arrests for serious crimes. We thus infer that maternal employment reduces minor youth criminal

behavior, which includes violations of liquor and curfew laws and disorderly conduct, but not

serious youth criminal behavior, which includes violence and felony theft. As expected, the

effects were stronger in states with stronger work incentive policies and larger caseload declines.

Contrary to our expectations, results were similar for males and females, suggesting that the

effects do not operate by changing adolescent girls’ expectations about welfare reliance as an

option for themselves in the future.

         The results from this study add to the scant literature on the effects of maternal

employment on adolescent behavior by exploiting a large-scale social experiment that imposed

strong work incentives for low income mothers that is still in effect to this day, and provide some

support for the widely-embraced argument that welfare reform would discourage undesirable


15
  In addition to limiting the identifying variation being exploited, these controls may also amount to “throwing out
the baby with the bath water”. If welfare reform is responsible for any shift in trends, then adding these controls will
underestimate the true impact.

                                                                                                                     31
social behavior, not only of mothers, but also of the next generation. Future research is needed to

explore heterogenous treatment effects by child and maternal characteristics, as well as to

investigate hypothesized pathways.

References

Aizer, Anna. 2004. "Home Alone: Supervision after School and Child Behavior." Journal of
Public Economics, 88(9), 1835–1848.
Akee, Randall, William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane Costello.
2010. "Parents' Incomes and Children's Outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using Transfer
Payments from Casino Profits." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 86–115.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's
Companion. Princeton University Press, 2009.

Antecol, Heather, and Kelly Bedard. 2007. "Does Single Parenthood Increase the Probability of
Teenage Promiscuity, Substance Use, and Crime?" Journal of Population Economics, 20(1), 55–
71.

Aughinbaugh, Alison, and Maury Gittleman. 2004. "Maternal Employment and Adolescent
Risky Behavior." Journal of Health Economics, 23(4), 815–838.
Averett, Susan L., Laura M. Argys, and Daniel I. Rees. 2011. "Older Siblings and Adolescent
Risky Behavior: Does Parenting Play a Role?" Journal of Population Economics, 24(3), 957–
978.
Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States (No. w8983). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Blumstein, Alfred, and Joel Wallman. (Eds.). 2006. The Crime Drop in America. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
Case, Anne C., and Lawrence F. Katz. 1991. The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and
Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths (No. w3705). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chase-Lansdale, P. L., Cherlin, A. J., Guttmannova, K., Fomby, P., Ribar, D. C., & Coley, R. L.
2011. “Long-Term Implications of Welfare Reform for the Development of Adolescents and
Young Adults.” Children and Youth Services Review, 33, 678–88.
Chase-Lansdale, P. L., Moffitt, R. A., Lohman, B.J., Cherlin, A. J., Coley, R. L., Pittman, L.D.,
Roff, J., & Votruba-Drzal, E.(2003. “Mothers' Transitions from Welfare to Work and the Well-
Being of Preschoolers and Adolescents.” Science, 299, 1548–52.
Cobb-Clark, Deborah A., and Erdal Tekin. 2011. Fathers and Youth's Delinquent Behavior (No.
w17507). National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                                                                 32
Coley, Rebekah Levine, Heather J. Bachman, Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal, Brenda J. Lohman, and
Christine P. Li-Grining. 2007. "Maternal Welfare and Employment Experiences and Adolescent
Well-Being: Do Mothers' Human Capital Characteristics Matter?" Children and Youth Services
Review, 29(2), 193–215.
Corman, Hope, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy E. Reichman. 2014. "Effects of Welfare Reform on
Women's Crime." International Review of Law and Economics, 40, 1–14.
Corman, Hope, Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy E. Reichman, and Dhiman Das. 2013. "Effects of
Welfare Reform on Illicit Drug Use of Adult Women." Economic Inquiry, 51, 653–674.
Corman, H., Dave, D., Kalil, A., Reichman, N. 2017. “Effects of Maternal Work Incentives on
Teen Drug Arrests.” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research , 26. Emerald
Group Publishing. In press.
Cormanor, William S., and Llad Phillips. 2002. "The Impact of Income and Family Structure on
Delinquency." Journal of Applied Economics, 5(2), 209–232.
Damm, Anna Piil, and Christian Dustmann. 2014. "Does Growing up in a High Crime
Neighborhood Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?" The American Economic Review, 104(6),
1806–1832.
Danziger, Sandra K., Ariel Kalil, and Nathaniel J. Anderson. 2000. "Human Capital, Physical
Health, and Mental Health of Welfare Recipients: Co‐occurrence and Correlates." Journal of
Social Issues, 56(4), 635–654.
Dave, Dhaval M., Hope Corman, and Nancy E. Reichman. 2012. "Effects of Welfare Reform on
Education Acquisition of Adult Women." Journal of Labor Research, 33(2), 251–282.
Eissa, Nada, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1996. "Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 605–637.
Gennetian, L. A., and Virginia W. Knox. 2003. “Staying Single: The Effects of Welfare Reform
Policies on Marriage and Cohabitation.” MDRC Working Paper Series 13. Accessed 6/30/15
from: http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/full_513.pdf
Gennetian, Lisa A., Greg J. Duncan, Virginia W. Knox, Wanda G. Vargas, Elizabeth Clark-
Kauffman, and Andrew S. London. 2002. "How Welfare and Work Policies for Parents Affect
Adolescents: A Synthesis of Research." Accessed 6/30/15 from:
http://www.mdrc.org/publication/how-welfare-and-work-policies-parents-affect-adolescents

Gennetian, L. A., Duncan, G., Knox, V., Vargas, W., Clark‐Kauffman, E., & London, A. S.
2004. “How Welfare Policies Affect Adolescents' School Outcomes: A Synthesis of Evidence
from Experimental Studies.” Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14(4), 399–423.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Bruce Sacerdote. 1999. "Why is There More Crime in Cities?" Journal
of Political Economy, 107(S6), S225–S258.
Goldberger, Arthur S., and Richard Rosenfeld, Eds. 2008. Understanding Crime Trends:
Workshop Report. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

                                                                                              33
Gove, Walter R., Michael Hughes, and Michael Geerken. 1985. "Are Uniform Crime Reports a
Valid Indicator of the Index Crimes? An Affirmative Answer with Minor Qualifications.”
Criminology, 23(3), 451–502.
Grogger, Jeffrey. 2004. “Time Limits and Welfare Use.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(2),
405–424.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn Karoly, 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change,
Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press.
Han, Wen-Jui, and Jane Waldfogel. 2007. "Parental Work Schedules, Family Process, and Early
Adolescents' Risky Behavior." Children and Youth Services Review, 29(9), 1249–1266.
Harper, Cynthia C., and Sara S. McLanahan. 2004. "Father Absence and Youth Incarceration.”
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 14(3), 369–397.
Heiland, Frank, Joseph Price, and Riley Wilson. 2014. "Maternal Employment and Time
Investments in Children." Review of Economics of the Household, 1–15.
Kaestner, Robert, Sanders Korenman, and June O'Neill. 2003. "Has Welfare Reform Changed
Teenage Behaviors?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(2), 225–248.
Kalenkoski, Charlene M., David Ribar, and Leslie S. Stratton. 2009. How Do Adolescents Spell
Time Use? (No. 4374). IZA Discussion Papers. Accessed 6/30/15 from:
http://ftp.iza.org/dp4374.pdf

Katz, Michael B. 2001. The Price of Citizenship: Redefining the American Welfare State. New
York, NY: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt & Co., 2001.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2005. "Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87–130.
Koball, Heather. 2007. "Living Arrangements and School Dropout among Minor Mothers
Following Welfare Reform." Social Science Quarterly, 88(5), 1374–1391.
Levitt, Steven D., and Lance Lochner. 2001. "The Determinants of Juvenile Crime." In Risky
Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, pp. 327–374. University of Chicago Press.
Loeber, R., Farrington, D. P., & Petechuk, D. (2013). “Bulletin 1: From Juvenile Delinquency to
Young Adult Offending (Study Group on the Transitions between Juvenile Delinquency and
Adult Crime).” Access 11/19/16 from: https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/242931.pdf

Lohman, B. J., Pittman, L. D., Coley, R. L., & Chase‐Lansdale, P. L. 2004. “Welfare History,
Sanctions, and Developmental Outcomes among Low‐Income Children and Youth.” Social
Service Review, 78(1), 41–73.
Lopoo, Leonard M., and Thomas DeLeire. 2006. "Did Welfare Reform Influence the Fertility of
Young Teens?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 25(2), 275–298.

                                                                                               34
Mahatmya, Duhita, and Brenda Lohman. 2011. "Predictors of Late Adolescent Delinquency: The
Protective Role of After-School Activities in Low-Income Families." Children and Youth
Services Review, 33(7), 1309–1317.
Miller, Amalia R., and Lei Zhang. 2012. "Intergenerational Effects of Welfare Reform on
Educational Attainment." Journal of Law and Economics, 55(2), 437–476.
Moffitt, Robert A. 1992. "Incentive Effects of the US Welfare System: A Review." Journal of
Economic Literature, 1–61.
Moffitt, Robert A. 1995. “The Effect of the Welfare System on Nonmarital Childbearing." Pp.
167–176 in Report to Congress on Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing." Hyattsville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.

Moffitt, Robert. 1998. “The Effects of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility,” Pp. 50–97 in Welfare,
the Family, and Reproductive Behavior, R. Moffitt, ed., National Research Council.

Nagin, Daniel. 1998. "Criminal Deterrence Research at the Outset of the Twenty-First Century."
Crime and Justice, (23), 1–42.

Offner, Paul. 2005. "Welfare Reform and Teenage Girls." Social Science Quarterly, 86(2), 306–
322.
Peters, H. Elizabeth, Plotnick, Robert. D., and Se-Ook Jeong. 2003. “How Will Welfare Reform
Affect Childbearing and Family Structure Decisions?” Pg. 59–93 in Changing Welfare, edited by
R.A. Gordon and H.J. Walberg. New York, New York: Kluwer Academic.
Ratcliffe, Caroline; McKernan, Signe-Mary and Rosenberg, Emily. 2002. "Welfare Reform,
Living Arrangements, and Economic Well-Being: A Synthesis of Literature." Washington DC:
The Urban Institute. Accessed 6/30/15 from:
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2205862
Schoeni, Robert. F., and Blank, Rebecca M. 2000. What has welfare reform accomplished?
Impacts on welfare participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure (No.
w7627). National Bureau of Economic Research.
See, S. G. (2016). Parental supervision and adolescent risky behaviors. Review of Economics of
the Household, 14(1), 185–206.
Snyder, H. N. (2012). Arrest in the United States, 1990–2010. NCJ 239423. Washington, DC:
Department of Justice. Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 26.
Ulmer, Jeffery T. and Darrell Steffensmeier. 2014. “The Age and Crime Relationship: Social
Variation, Social Explanations.” Pp. 377–397 in The Nurture versus Biosocial Debate in
Criminology, edited by K. Beaver, B. Boutwell, and J.C. Barnes. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. Population Estimates, 1990–1999. Washington, DC. Accessed
5/21/15 from: https://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/asrh/1990s/st_age_sex.html.



                                                                                              35
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. Population Estimates, 2000–2010. Washington, DC. Accessed
5/21/15 from: https://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/state/files/ST-EST00INT-
AGESEX.csv.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. State Implementation of Major Changes
to Welfare Policies, 1992–1998. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation,
Washington, DC. Accessed 5/22/15 from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/waiver-
policies99/Table_A.htm
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2000. Crime in the United States,
2000. Accessed 6/05/15 from: https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-
u.s/2000/00sec4.pdf.
Vander Ven, Thomas M., Francis T. Cullen, Mark A. Carrozza, and John Paul Wright. 2001.
"Home Alone: The Impact of Maternal Employment on Delinquency." Social Problems, 48(2),
236–257.
Western, Bruce. 2002. "The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and Inequality."
American Sociological Review, 526–546.
Ziliak, J.P. 2006. “Taxes, Transfers, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers.” Unpublished
Working Paper. Accessed 5/22/15 from:
http://gatton.uky.edu/Faculty/Ziliak/laborsupply_taxes_transfers_withtables_102405.pdf
Zimring, Franklin E. 2007. The Great American Crime Decline. New York: Oxford University
Press.




                                                                                                 36
                Figure 1. Serious Crime Arrest Rates per
                100,000 (excluding drug-related arrests)
                               1990–1991
 14000

 12000

 10000

   8000

   6000

   4000

   2000

       0
                 10-14               15-17               18-19               20-14               25-29

                                                Males      Females


Notes: Arrests are based on data from criminal justice agencies with populations of at least 50,000 and coverage for
at least half of the year. We added arrests from all such agencies in all states in a given year and divided this annual
total by the total population of those reporting agencies for that state/year as a fraction of the total state population in
that year. We then computed the mean for 1990–1991.
Source of population data by state, age, and sex: U.S. Census
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/asrh/1990s/st_age_sex.html for the 1990s (accessed 5/21/15).
Serious crimes included are murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, other
assault, arson, forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, embezzlement, stolen property crimes, vandalism, weapons
offenses, prostitution, other sex offenses and gambling.




                                                                                                                         37
                 Figure 2. Minor Crime Arrest Rates per
                     100,000 Population 1990–1991
 16000

 14000

 12000

 10000

  8000

  6000

  4000

  2000

      0
                10-14             15-17              18-19              20-14             25-29

                                            Males      Females


Notes: For sources and computation, see notes to Figure 1. Minor crimes are offenses against family and children,
driving under the influence, liquor law violations, drunkenness, disorderly conduct, vagrancy, suspicion, curfew
violations and loitering, runaways, and all other crimes except traffic violations.




                                                                                                                    38
                Figure 3. Serious Crime Arrest Rates by 1990–2005
 14000



 12000



 10000



   8000



   6000



   4000



   2000



       0
           1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
                Males 10-14            Males 15-17           Males 25-29            Females 10-14            Females 15-17


Notes: Arrests are based on data from criminal justice agencies with populations of at least 50,000 and coverage for
at least half of the year. We added arrests from all such agencies in all states in a given year and divided this annual
total by the total population of those reporting agencies for that state/year as a fraction of the total state population in
that year. We then computed the mean for the 16 years (1990–2005).
Source of population data by state, age, and sex: U.S. Census
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/asrh/1990s/st_age_sex.html for the 1990s (accessed 5/21/15).
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/state/files/ST-EST00INT-AGESEX.csv for the 2000s (accessed
5/21/15).
Serious crimes included are murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, other
assault, arson, forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, embezzlement, stolen property crimes, vandalism, weapons
offenses, prostitution, other sex offenses, and gambling.




                                                                                                                         39
                Figure 4. Minor Crime Arrest Rates 1990–2005
 12000


 10000


   8000


   6000


   4000


   2000


       0
           1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

                                  Males 10-14             Males 15-17             Males 25-29
                                  Females 10-14           Females 15-17



Notes: For sources and computation, see notes to Figure 3. Minor crimes are offenses against family and children,
driving under the influence, liquor law violations, drunkenness, disorderly conduct, vagrancy, suspicion, curfew
violations and loitering, runaways, and all other crimes except traffic violations.


Notes: Arrests are based on data from criminal justice agencies with populations of at least 50,000 and coverage for
at least half of the year. We added arrests from all such agencies in all states in a given year and divided this annual
total by the total population of those reporting agencies for that state/year as a fraction of the total state population in
that year. We then computed the mean for 1990–1991.
Source of population data by state, age, and sex: U.S. Census
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/asrh/1990s/st_age_sex.html for the 1990s (accessed 5/21/15).
Serious crimes included are murder, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, other
assault, arson, forgery and counterfeiting, fraud, embezzlement, stolen property crimes, vandalism, weapons
offenses, prostitution, other sex offenses and gambling.




                                                                                                                         40
                                                Table 1
                          Implementation Dates of Welfare Reform by State, U.S.
             10/92 to    9/96 to                                   10/92 to     9/96 to
               2/97       1/98    10/92 to 1/98                      2/97        1/98     10/92 to 1/98
              AFDC                Any Welfare                       AFDC                  Any Welfare
             Waiver      TANF        Reform                        Waiver       TANF        Reform
Alabama                  Nov-96        Nov-96          Montana       Feb-96     Feb-97       Feb-96
Alaska                    Jul-97        Jul-97         Nebraska      Oct-95     Dec-96       Oct-95
Arizona      Nov-95      Oct-96        Nov-95          Nevada                   Dec-96      Dec-96
                                                       New
Arkansas      Jul-94      Jul-97        Jul-94         Hampshire                Oct-96       Oct-96
California   Dec-92      Jan-98        Dec-92          New Jersey    Oct-92      Jul-97      Oct-92
                                                       New
Colorado                  Jul-97        Jul-97         Mexico                    Jul-97      Jul-97
Connectic
ut            Jan-96     Oct-96        Jan-96          New York                 Nov-97      Nov-97
                                                       North
DC                       Mar-97        Mar-97          Carolina      Jul-96     Jan-97       Jul-96
                                                       North
Delaware      Oct-95     Mar-97        Oct-95          Dakota                    Jul-97      Jul-97
Florida                                Oct-96          Ohio          Jul-96     Oct-96       Jul-96
Georgia       Jan-94     Jan-97        Jan-94          Oklahoma                 Oct-96       Oct-96
Hawaii        Feb-97      Jul-97       Feb-97          Oregon        Feb-93     Oct-96       Feb-93
                                                       Pennsylvan
Idaho                     Jul-97        Jul-97         ia                       Mar-97      Mar-97
                                                       Rhode
Illinois     Nov-93       Jul-97       Nov-93          Island                   May-97      May-97
                                                       South
Indiana      May-95      Oct-96        May-95          Carolina                 Oct-96       Oct-96
                                                       South
Iowa          Oct-93     Jan-97        Oct-93          Dakota        Jun-94     Dec-96       Jun-94
Kansas                   Oct-96        Oct-96          Tennessee     Sep-96     Oct-96       Sep-96
Kentucky                 Oct-96        Oct-96          Texas         Jun-96     Nov-96       Jun-96
Louisiana                Jan-97        Jan-97          Utah          Jan-93     Oct-96       Jan-93
Maine                    Nov-96        Nov-96          Vermont       Jul-94     Sep-96       Jul-94
Maryland     Mar-96      Dec-96        Mar-96          Virginia      Jul-95     Feb-97       Jul-95
Massachu                                               Washingto
setts        Nov-95      Sep-96        Nov-95          n             Jan-96     Jan-97       Jan-96
                                                       West
Michigan      Oct-92      Sep-96        Oct-92         Virginia                 Jan-97       Jan-97
Minnesot
a                         Jul-97        Jul-97          Wisconsin    Jan-96     Sep-97       Jan-96
Mississip
pi            Oct-95      Jul-97        Oct-95          Wyoming                 Jan-97       Jan-97
Missouri      Jun-95     Dec-96         Jun-95
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999).




                                                                                                      41
                                                                        Table 2
                                                             Males Ages 10–14 & 15–17
                                         Effects on Ln Arrests – Serious Offenses (excluding Drug Violations)
                                                                      1990 – 2005

              Sample                                            Ages 10–14                                           Ages 15–17
              Model                               1            2          3               4            5            6          7               8

              Any Welfare Reform               0.0525        0.0307                    0.0221       0.0232        -0.0103                   -0.0012
                                              (0.0599)      (0.0499)                  (0.0615)     (0.0507)      (0.0341)                  (0.0335)
              AFDC Waiver                                                 0.0209                                               -0.0105
                                                                         (0.0453)                                             (0.0346)
              TANF                                                        0.0873                                               -0.0091
                                                                         (0.0995)                                             (0.0488)

              Extended Covariates                No           No           No           Yes           No           No           No           Yes
              Arrests – All Offenses             No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25-29
              Arrests – Serious Offenses         No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25-29

                Observations                      8921          8895         8895         8895          8921          8895        8895         8895
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in parentheses. All
models are weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real personal income,
log of total population, log of population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log state criminal
justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction the coverage
rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear trends. . All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects. Extended
covariates include the 1-year lag of the unemployment rate and per capital real personal income, and 1- and 2-year lags of the state’s welfare caseload. Asterisks
denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                42
                                                                        Table 3
                                                            Females Ages 10–14 & 15–17
                                         Effects on Ln Arrests – Serious Offenses (excluding Drug Violations)
                                                                      1990 – 2005

              Sample                                            Ages 10–14                                           Ages 15–17
              Model                               1            2          3               4            5            6          7               8

              Any Welfare Reform               0.0656        0.0449                    0.0545       0.0277        0.0005                    0.0132
                                              (0.0498)      (0.0414)                  (0.0372)     (0.0423)      (0.0325)                  (0.0301)
              AFDC Waiver                                                 0.0364                                               -0.0005
                                                                         (0.0375)                                             (0.0326)
              TANF                                                        0.0930                                                0.0064
                                                                         (0.0905)                                             (0.0482)

              Extended Covariates                No           No           No           Yes           No           No           No           Yes
              Arrests – All Offenses             No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29
              Arrests – Serious Offenses         No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29

                Observations                      8921          8895         8895         8895         8921          8895        8895          8895
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in parentheses. All
models are weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real personal income,
log of total population, log of population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log state criminal
justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction the coverage
rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear trends. All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects. Extended
covariates include the 1-year lag of the unemployment rate and per capital real personal income, and 1- and 2-year lags of the state’s welfare caseload. Asterisks
denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                43
                                                                          Table 4
                                                                Males Ages 10–14 & 15–17
                                                          Effects on Ln Arrests – Minor Offenses
                                                                        1990 – 2005

              Sample                                            Ages 10–14                                           Ages 15–17
              Model                               1            2          3               4            5            6          7               8

              Any Welfare Reform               -0.0483       -0.0569                   -0.0628      -0.0747     -0.0837**                  -0.0785*
                                              (0.0682)      (0.0643)                  (0.0582)     (0.0490)      (0.0402)                  (0.0413)
              AFDC Waiver                                                 -0.0753                                             -0.0814*
                                                                         (0.0543)                                             (0.0424)
              TANF                                                         0.0482                                             -0.0972*
                                                                         (0.1569)                                             (0.0506)

              Extended Covariates                No           No           No           Yes           No           No           No           Yes
              Arrests – All Offenses             No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29
              Arrests – Serious Offenses         No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29

                Observations                      8920          8902         8902         8902         8920          8902        8902          8902
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in parentheses. All
models are weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real personal income,
log of total population, log of population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log state criminal
justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction the coverage
rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear trends. All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects. Extended
covariates include the 1-year lag of the unemployment rate and per capital real personal income, and 1- and 2-year lags of the state’s welfare caseload. Asterisks
denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                44
                                                                          Table 5
                                                               Females Ages 10–14 & 15–17
                                                          Effects on Ln Arrests – Minor Offenses
                                                                        1990 – 2005

              Sample                                             Ages 10–14                                           Ages 15–17
              Model                                1            2          3              4             5            6          7              8

              Any Welfare Reform                -0.0685      -0.0719                    -0.0740      -0.0919     -0.0942*                  -0.1051*
                                               (0.0642)     (0.0605)                   (0.0539)     (0.0567)     (0.0543)                  (0.0559)
              AFDC Waiver                                                -0.0981*                                            -0.1036**
                                                                         (0.0525)                                             (0.0512)
              TANF                                                        0.0772                                               -0.0382
                                                                         (0.1372)                                             (0.0893)

              Extended Covariates                 No           No           No           Yes           No          No           No           Yes
              Arrests – All Offenses              No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No          Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29
              Arrests – Serious Offenses          No           Yes          Yes          Yes           No          Yes          Yes          Yes
              Males 25–29

                Observations                       8920          8902        8902         8902         8920          8902        8902          8902
Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in parentheses. All
models are weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real personal income,
log of total population, log of population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log state criminal
justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction the coverage
rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear trends. All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects. Extended
covariates include the 1-year lag of the unemployment rate and per capital real personal income, and 1- and 2-year lags of the state’s welfare caseload. Asterisks
denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                45
                                                                                    Table 6
                                                                    Effects on Ln Arrests – Minor Offenses
                                                                        Lagged Effects & Event Study
                                                                                  1990 – 2005

Sample                                          Males            Males             Males             Males            Females           Females          Females          Females
                                              Ages 15–17       Ages 15–17        Ages 15–17        Ages 15–17        Ages 15–17        Ages 15–17       Ages 15–17       Ages 15-17
Model                                             1                2                 3                 4                 5                 6                7                8

Any Welfare Reform: 12-month lag               -0.0837**                                                               -0.0942*
                                                (0.0402)                                                               (0.0543)
Any Welfare Reform: 6-month lag                                  -0.0712*                                                                -0.0795
                                                                 (0.0389)                                                               (0.0521)
Any Welfare Reform: 1-month lag                                                    -0.0337                                                                 -0.0572
                                                                                  (0.0467)                                                                (0.0556)

>3 Years Pre Welfare Reform                                                                           -0.0267                                                               -0.0292
                                                                                                     (0.1045)                                                              (0.1226)
25–36 Months Pre Welfare Reform                                                                       -0.0148                                                                0.0137
                                                                                                     (0.0710)                                                              (0.0874)
13–24 Months Pre Welfare Reform                                                                       -0.0450                                                               -0.0324
                                                                                                     (0.0471)                                                              (0.0586)
1–12 Months Pre Welfare Reform                                                                          Ref.                                                                  Ref.

0–11 Months Post Welfare Reform                                                                        0.0153                                                               -0.0067
                                                                                                     (0.0378)                                                              (0.0346)
12–23 Months Post Welfare Reform                                                                      -0.0482                                                               -0.0739
                                                                                                     (0.0485)                                                              (0.0543)
24–35 Months Post Welfare Reform                                                                    -0.1181**                                                             -0.1393**
                                                                                                     (0.0518)                                                              (0.0581)
≥3 Years Post Welfare Reform                                                                         -0.1135*                                                               -0.1101
                                                                                                     (0.0607)                                                              (0.0906)

Observations                                       8902           8902              8902                8902               8902            8902              8902             8902
Notes: Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in parentheses. All models are
weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real personal income, log of total population, log of
population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police
officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction the coverage rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear
trends. All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; * 0.05 <
p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                                   46
                                                                        Table 7
                                                                 Effects on Ln Arrests
                                                        Heterogeneous Effects and Placebo Effects
                                                                      1990 – 2005

                                                            State Heterogeneity                                               Placebo Effects

Outcomes                                                        Ln Arrests                                      Ln Arrests                     Ln Arrests
                                                              Minor Offenses                                 Serious Offenses               Minor Offenses
Sample                                     Males          Females        Males            Females          Males         Males            Males         Males
                                         Ages 15–17      Ages 15–17   Ages 15–17         Ages 15–17      Ages 25–29 Ages 25–49          Ages 25–29 Ages 25–49
Model                                        1               2             3                 4               5             6                7             8

Any Welfare Reform                        -0.0715*          -0.0766         0.0122          0.0588         0.0542          0.0447          -0.0278        -0.0516
                                          (0.0424)         (0.0579)        (0.0900)        (0.1057)       (0.0393)        (0.0435)        (0.0387)       (0.0419)
Any Welfare Reform*                        -0.0274          -0.0585
Strong Work Incentives                    (0.0707)         (0.0712)
Any Welfare Reform*                                                         -0.0988         -0.1630
% Decrease in State Welfare                                                (0.0937)        (0.0979)
Caseload

Arrests – All Offenses Males 25–29              Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            No             No              No             No
Arrests – Serious Offenses Males                Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            No             No              No             No
25–29
Observations                                   8902            8902             8902           8902           8918           8928            8902           8915
Notes: Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within states over time and reported in
parentheses. All models are weighted by the state’s population of females ages 21–49. Basic covariates include the state’s unemployment rate, per capital real
personal income, log of total population, log of population of males (ages 10–14 or 15–17 as appropriate), log of the agency population for the arrest reports, log
state criminal justice expenditures, log full-time equivalent police officers, state minimum wage, state poverty rate, maximum age of juvenile court jurisdiction
the coverage rate for reporting agencies, and pre-welfare reform state-specific linear trends. All models further control for state and year*month fixed effects.
Strong work incentives are defined based on Blank and Schmidt (2001). Percent decrease in welfare caseloads refers to the decrease occurring between the year
prior to when the state instituted welfare reform and 2001. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01; ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05; *
0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.1.




                                                                                                                                                                 47
Appendix A1: Crime categories and codes in FBI crime reports

                            Serious Criminal Offenses
UCR Code
Violent “Index” Crimes
01         Murder and Non-Negligent Manslaughter, Manslaughter by Negligence
02         Forcible Rape
03         Robbery
04         Aggravated Assault
Property “Index” Crimes
05         Burglary - Breaking or Entering
06         Larceny/Theft (except motor vehicle)
07         Motor Vehicle Theft
Other Serious Criminal Offenses
08         Other Assault
09         Arson
10         Forgery and Counterfeiting
11         Fraud
12         Embezzlement
13         Stolen Property - Buying, Receiving, Possession
14         Vandalism
15         Weapons - Carrying, Possessing, etc.
16         Prostitution and Commercialized Vice
17         Sex Offenses (except Forcible Rape and Prostitution)
18         Drug Abuse Violations
19         Gambling

                                    Other Offenses
UCR Code
20       Offenses Against Family and Children
21       Driving Under the Influence
22       Liquor Laws
23       Drunkenness
24       Disorderly Conduct
25       Vagrancy
26       All Other Offenses (except traffic)
27       Suspicion
28       Curfew and Loitering Law Violations
29       Runaways




                                                                               48
