NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RELATED INVESTING:
CORPORATE OWNERSHIP AND CAPITAL MOBILIZATION DURING EARLY INDUSTRIALIZATION
B. Zorina Khan
Working Paper 23052
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23052

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

I am grateful for comments and discussions with Howard Bodenhorn, Alan de Bromhead, Stanley
Engerman, Michael Haines, Leslie Hannah, Eric Hilt, Noel Johnson, Naomi Lamoreaux, Gary
Libecap, Aldo Musacchio, Tom Nicholas, Mary O’Sullivan, Susie Pak, Robin Pearson, Jean
Rochat, Christy Romer, Richard Sutch, John Turner, Noam Yuchtman, and participants in
seminars at Queen’s University Belfast, George Mason University, the University of California at
Berkeley, the NBER, the University of Geneva, the University of Toulouse, the London School
of Economics, Warwick University, the Business History Conference, and the World Economic
History Conference. This project would not have been possible without the excellent research
assistance of Joseph Amdur, Charles Boyle, Nicholas Cast, Cameron Chisholm, Andrew Haeger,
and Nathan Joseph. Richard Sylla and Robert Wright generously shared their data and offered
valuable suggestions. Ginny Hopcroft, Carr Ross and Guy Saldanha, and employees at the Maine
Archives were very helpful. Thanks are also due to Bowdoin College for offering support for the
project. Liability for errors is limited to the author. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Related Investing: Corporate Ownership and Capital Mobilization during Early Industrialization
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 23052
January 2017
JEL No. D22,G32,L2,N21,N81
ABSTRACT
Scholars engage in extensive debate about the role of families and corporations in economic
growth. Some propose that personal ties provide a mechanism for overcoming such transactions
costs as asymmetrical information, while others regard familial connections as conduits for
inefficiency, with the potential for nepotism, corruption and exploitation of other stakeholders.
This empirical study is based on a unique panel dataset comprising all of the shareholders in a
sample of early corporations, including information on such characteristics as gender, age,
occupation, household composition, real estate holdings and personal wealth. Related investing
was widespread among directors and elite shareholders, but was also pervasive among women
and small shareholders. Personal ties were especially evident among ordinary investors in the
newer, riskier ventures, and helped to ensure persistence in shareholding. “Outsider investors”
were able to overcome a lack of experience and information by taking advantage of their own
networks. The link between related investing and the concentration of ownership in these
corporations suggests that this phenomenon was likely associated with a reduction in perceptions
of risk, especially beneficial for capital mobilization in emerging ventures. These patterns are
consistent with a more productive interpretation of related investing and its function in newly
developing societies.

B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Related investing refers to investors whose personal ties influence their decisions to enter or exit
the market, the composition of their portfolios, or other actions that they might not otherwise
undertake. Market efficiency is in part defined in terms of depersonalized transactions, so many
analysts regard related investing as a sign of the existence of inefficiencies. Some claim that the
exploitation of family networks offers a haven for potential redistributive or criminal activity.
Even if personalized interactions were initially prevalent because of productive reasons, it is
commonly contended that such connections should tend to diminish in importance as financial
markets and the economy matured. Most notably, Sir Henry Maine (1861) is frequently cited for
his proposal that societies evolve from communal relationships based on status or ascribed ties,
to contracting by autonomous actors. Thus, related investing is typically viewed as a temporary
phenomenon, and its persistence is associated with anomalous deviations from optimality, or
outright corruption. As the economy evolves, according to this perspective, one might expect
that transactions costs would fall, and that a transition would occur towards the arguably more
efficient state of depersonalized exchange.
This evolutionary assumption is evident in the work of John Majewski (1996), who
examined the financing of transportation infrastructure in the antebellum period, drawing on the
experience of six railroad enterprises in Pennsylvania and Virginia. He found that early
expansions in transportation networks were financed by local residents or small investors who
were connected by ties of kinship and social capital or community spirit. Majewski argues that
the development of the Southern economy was retarded by the continued involvement of local
investors, whereas the Northeast expanded in part because its investments evolved away from the
“friends and family” approach towards arms-length professional transactions. Others have raised

3

the possibility that, while relational investing might be productive in certain circumstances, such
ties might be incompatible with efficiency within some organizational structures, and in
corporations in particular.1
In today’s developing countries, a parallel extensive debate centers on the role of families
and corporations in economic growth. La Porta et al., (1999) point out that family businesses are
common in many parts of the world, and ownership in such firms is typically not dispersed.
Even though family ownership and control in business enterprise is pervasive, the scholarly
discussion tends to be somewhat skeptical and pessimistic about the contributions of kinship
groups. First, complementary institutions such as legal and political systems may be inefficient
and inadequate to support the needs of the corporate form. Second, research points to problems
in corporate governance, and the potential for the expropriation of shareholders by the groups
that control the company. Minority shareholders and other outside stakeholders can be
expropriated by such practices as nepotism and on-the-job consumption by entrenched family
members. Outside investors face the risk that both internal and external control mechanisms
may be too weak to protect them from “tunneling” or corruption in the firm. Acheson et al.
(2016) study Victorian England, and conclude that the negative effect of family ownership
depended on whether members of the group had control over the governance of the firm. A
survey of the extensive literature on tunneling and malfeasance by families points out that the
empirical context has been somewhat restricted, and calls for expansion of research to pay
attention to other settings (Bhaumik, Sumon Kumar, and Andros Gregoriou 2010).
Although agency costs may be magnified in the presence of kinship ties among the
managers and leading shareholders, who can form blocks to transfer resources to themselves at
1

See Ingram and Lifschitz (2006) who argue that kinship ties allowed family firms to reduce the risk of bankruptcy,
but that some types of relational governance conflicted with corporate modes of governance.

4

the expense of outsiders, groups with relational links can still generate net positive benefits.
Such benefits are especially evident in circumstances where institutional imperfections hinder
market transactions. Family networks can facilitate remedies for market failure, such as
investments in trust and social capital, the ability to monitor group members more effectively,
cheaper enforcement mechanisms, and the use of reputation to reduce informational
asymmetries. Relational contracts may result in stronger commitments or incentives to adhere to
agreements. Although one might expect that such ties would tend to weaken over geographic or
genetic distance, this is not necessarily the case. For instance, Avner Greif (2006) found that
Maghrebi traders formed coalitions that enabled them to overcome obstacles to long distance
trade. These private institutions functioned as commitment devices that enforced agreements
and deterred opportunism among market participants.
Research on the corporate form of business organizations has tended to focus on the role
of managers, directors, and other elite investors in the firm.2 Naomi Lamoreaux (1996), for
instance, demonstrated the importance of “insider lending” in early U.S. capital markets.3 She
found that elite investors in banks tended to be related to each other, and these owners directed a
significant fraction of the loans in the bank to other insiders. Rather than unproductive
“tunneling,” Lamoreaux finds that relational links in the banking sector were an effective means
of mobilizing capital. Insider lending facilitated risky investments in venture capital for

2

A significant amount of research on the role of corporations in early American development has focused on issues
in corporate governance (Bodenhorn 2012, Dunlavy 2006, Hilt 2008). In particular, they examine ownership
structures of the firms, and the causes and consequences of different voting rules. For instance, the charters of
corporations sometimes specified graduated voting rights that reduced the degree of control exerted by the largest
shareholders. Hilt analyzed the ownership structure of corporations in New York State in the 1820s, and concludes
that minority shareholders were in danger of being “oppressed” by majority shareholders, but the latter were
checked by corporate charters. Thus minority shareholders were granted disproportionate representation, and this
reduced the cost of capital and enhanced diversification of portfolios. Bodenhorn similarly finds that graduated
voting rules were prevalent in early American banks and were designed to attract small investors.
3
Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development in Industrial
New England, New York: Cambridge University Press (1996).

5

innovative initiatives as industrialization got underway. Outsiders were quite aware that their
stock purchases in the bank were destined to finance the other enterprises owned by the directors
of the bank. They likely benefited from access to investment opportunities in new ventures, for
the arrangement offered the uneducated investor the opportunity to gain enhanced profits beyond
the banking sector, while diversification reduced risk. Insider lending comprised an efficient
response to supply and demand, whereby outsiders were induced to make investments in the new
industries of the day primarily because of their trust in the reputation and experience of the
prominent families who founded the financial institutions. Familial and other social connections
substituted for incomplete markets and helped to resolve problems that arose in the presence of
such market imperfections as high risk and asymmetrical information.
The almost universal focus on the role of elite participants in the ownership of firms and
corporations leaves open the question about whether relational connections were pervasive at all
levels of business organization. If family ties were concentrated among elite investors, the
implications for our understanding of the role of such ties would be different from the inference
if these patterns were common to all investors of the time. Indeed, Naomi Tadmor (2001) rejects
the conventional dichotomy between kinship circles and those who are unrelated, arguing that
the family relationship is necessarily both affective and instrumental. However, little empirical
research has been directed to the entire population of participants in the ownership and control of
the firm, nor to the extent and implications of their heterogeneity. Most research tends to be at
the firm level, although within-firm heterogeneity among owners can lead to significant
unobserved variation which necessitates the analysis of the cadre of investors outside the
managerial class. Such characteristics and patterns might have important implications for our
understanding of the nature and consequences of kinship ties in economic development.

6

Similarly, although the structure of ownership might be expected to vary over the life
cycle of the firm and over time, the dynamics of firm ownership is still an understudied topic.
Kinship links are predicted to decline over time, but if they are found to have persisted during
economic development in an effective institutional environment, then their existence is less
likely to owe entirely to market imperfections. Helwege et al. (2007) examined how the
ownership of insiders changed over time, and concluded that moral hazard and informational
asymmetries were “irrelevant” to understanding changes in insider ownership. However, such
research does not control for family relationships which, as discussed above, tend to be pervasive
beyond the United States.4 Family ownership can be especially relevant to the dynamics of
shareholding in corporate organizations. Some regard familial relationships as a constraint on
the longevity of the firm, owing to incompetence or nepotism. On the other hand, the internal
incentives of the family unit might be more transparent and observable over time than in the case
of unrelated shareholders. The intergenerational links that characterize family membership can
thus provide a cost-effective signal to outsiders that a firm values continuity and future
exchange.
This paper examines the nature of related investing at all levels in corporations and how
such patterns changed over time. The analysis is based on a new and unique data set drawn from
the population of investors in all Maine corporations during the antebellum period. The sample
includes information on counties, industries, enterprises, as well as individual investors in banks,
manufacturing firms and transportation enterprises. The shareholders have been matched with
the manuscript population censuses, to provide information on age, occupations and wealth of
individuals and household size. The data include cross-sections of the same firms over time,
4

Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D. (2007) show that family firms comprised two thirds of enterprises listed on the French
stock exchange in the 1990s, and find that such firms out-performed their widely-held corporate counterparts by
making more effective use of inputs.

7

which permits the investigation of longitudinal changes in corporate ownership and the structure
of the firm.
The results confirm the conventional finding that corporate elites tended to be related to
others within the firm. At the same time, nonelites, or the investors who were neither directors
nor the largest shareholders, were also bound by kinship connections. Related investing was
widespread among the ordinary investors, and seems to have been pervasive throughout the firm
and the corporate economy, during the critical period of early industrialization. The universal
nature of relational investing in these data suggests that further attention needs to be paid to the
entire ownership structure and not just to the apex. Family ties were especially evident among
the ordinary investors in emerging industries and in the newer, riskier investments, and may have
played a role in inducing inexperienced investors to contribute to the venture capital of the
period. The overall patterns are consistent with a more productive interpretation of related
investing and its function in developing societies.

II. EARLY CORPORATIONS IN MAINE
From an international perspective, the corporate form of business enterprise has been prevalent
in the United States to a far greater extent than in other countries. Unlike the general perspective
from studies in developed economies at the present time, the conclusions from research in
economic history tend to be more consistent with a favourable interpretation of the link between
corporations and family holdings. Corporations developed rapidly, in tandem with deep and
accessible financial markets in debt and equity. In the American colonies local and interstate
debt contracting were extensive and functioned effectively from the earliest decades (Khan
2008). Many scholars credit financial markets and the spread of the corporate form of business

8

organization with aiding the rapid industrialization and economic progress of the United States in
the nineteenth century (Irwin and Sylla, 2011).5
In New England, banks and insurance companies were the first types of corporations with
diffuse ownership, and these enterprises attracted a diverse array of investors, including
relatively risk-averse savers such as trustees, women and the elderly. Banks provided “saver
education” that helped to inform new entrants in the market for corporate capital mobilization,
and both firms and investors in subsequent transportation and manufacturing ventures were able
to benefit from their example. In some instances, banks served as institutional investors which
helped to fund emerging enterprises and industries. Prior research has investigated banking
firms extensively, but a lack of systematic data has made it difficult to ascertain the extent to
which their investors differed from those who funded the “venture capital” of the nineteenth
century, and how these patterns varied over time.
Records of the Maine experience offer insights into cross-sectional and longitudinal
comparisons of the financial structure of corporations. Maine was an early leader in the
chartering of U.S. business corporations and, as Figure 1 shows, its rate of incorporation
remained competitive with states of much larger populations. The growth in corporate
enterprises reflected a general expansion in the Maine economy across all sectors, ranging from
banks to shipbuilding, fisheries, lumber, and manufacturing. The state was among the nation’s
leaders in many extractive pursuits, most notably shipbuilding and lumber. However, during the
period under review there was a marked structural transformation in the state that was associated
with rapid economic growth in manufacturing and transportation, as well as general
industrialization. The first sawmill in the American colonies was established in Maine in 1634,
5

For an extremist exposition of this thesis, see Wright (2002) who is convinced that "the root cause of early U.S.
economic growth (1780-1850) . . . is the development of the financial sector, not transportation and communication
improvements, not foreign trade, and not manufacturing firms" (193).

9

and almost one thousand mills were in operation by 1820. The proliferation of natural resources
and cheap sources of power propelled manufacturing in the “take off” phase during the early
nineteenth century. The area was remarkably rich in inventive inputs, and Maine inventors were
among the most innovative and productive in the nation, accounting for a substantial fraction of
the most valuable patents filed in the United States (Khan 2005). By 1860 the economy was
significantly diversified, the agricultural sector had shrunk to 40 percent, cotton manufacturing
was the fifth highest in the country, and the state ranked ninth overall in U.S. manufacturing.
Some of the largest enterprises in the country were founded in Maine, and their average output,
capital and employment in 1860 were exceeded only by firms in New York and Massachusetts
(Bateman and Weiss, 1975). Thus, the experience of this state in the antebellum period provides
a useful case study of the nature of capital mobilization during early industrialization.
Maine granted charters to business enterprises through private acts of incorporation until
1875, after which general incorporation laws were passed, implying that the charter applications
for all of the firms in this study were individually vetted and approved by the legislature. In
1839 and 1841 the statutes required all business corporations to record and publish the complete
list of shareholders in the company, and this offers a unique opportunity to assess a panel of
corporate owners during a period of rapid industrialization.6 In 1845, 55 commercial enterprises
were organized as corporations in Maine, with an average of 64 shareholders. The Portsmouth,
Saco and Portland Railroad company was the largest firm in terms of the number of shareholders
(255), whereas the York Manufacturing Corporation had the greatest total capitalization
($1,000,000). During the antebellum period the number of firms and the extent of capitalization
expanded, and by 1855 the number of corporations had increased to 122 firms, with an average
6

The 1839 law stipulated that banks should file their stockholders’ lists, and the law was extended in 1841 to
include all commercial (for-profit) corporations. The data in this study exclude nonprofit corporations such as
towns, religious and educational institutions.

10

of 107 shareholders. The largest railroad firms were owned by some one thousand shareholders,
and several corporations now had capital investments that exceeded a million dollars.7
The data set (Table 1) comprises a random sample of roughly half of all corporations
filing in 1845, 1850 and 1855.8 These include 21 banks in 1845, and 15 nonbank firms; 13
banks and 17 nonbank firms in 1850; and 29 banks and 25 nonbank firms in 1855. The entire
sample includes some 13,900 individual observations of investors in these corporations.
Shareholder lists include the names of the individuals, the amount and/or value of shares held,
and their place of residence. The lists allow us to categorize related investors, who are defined
as individuals within a company who share the same surname. They also enable the
identification of women shareholders, corporate and nonprofit investors, trustees and other proxy
investors, the entire stock portfolio of a given investor, and persistence or turnover in ownership.
The names of stockholders were matched with the federal manuscript censuses in 1850 and
1860, which provided additional information on age, real estate and personal wealth, occupation,
household composition, and marital status.
At the firm level, the charters that were granted at time of incorporation yielded
additional information on the founding members of the company, governance rules, the initial
capitalization, and stipulations about shareholder liability.9 These corporate charters provided
insights into restrictions on directors and officers of the corporation, voting rights, accounting
7

The Atlantic &St Lawrence Railroad had 1747 shareholders, and the Androscoggin & Kennebec Railroad had
1221 shareholders. The Portland, Saco & Portsmouth Railroad had grown to 958 shareholders. The Boston &
Maine Railroad was capitalized at over four million dollars, firms with at least one million dollars included the
Portland, Saco and Portsmouth Railroad, the York Manufacturing Corporation, and the Lewiston Water Power
Company.
8
The sample includes data for 1840, but they are not included in the analysis for this paper because they comprise
only banks.
9
Dick Sylla and Robert E. Wright generously provided access to their database of corporate charters in Maine,
which supplemented the sample information on charters. The provisions of Maine corporate charters between 1840
and 1855 specified that the director should live in-state (40.4 % of all charters), directors had to be shareholders
(37.4%), number of directors (72.5 %), officers had to give a bond (33.3%). Proxy voting was allowed in all cases,
and graduated voting schemes were stipulated in 37.4 % of the charters, with only 2.9 % that allowed one vote per
person (Carlson 2007).

11

standards, and disclosure requirements. It is significant to note that Maine was an early
innovator in disclosure rules that were intended to protect outside investors: almost threequarters of the charters required the firm to offer financial statements to shareholders, and in
many cases shareholders had the right to inspect the books of the firm at any time. Each
enterprise is associated with a date of incorporation (and thus the age of the firm), limited
liability status, industry, total number of shareholders, total capitalization at par value (paid-in
capital for some), the names of the directors, presidents and other officers, and measures of
ownership concentration. Finally, county-level variables include population and its density, and
economic activity such as the percentage of employment and output in manufacturing, aggregate
estimated wealth from tax records, and urbanization.
Many of these corporations under review were successful at the national, and even the
international, level. For instance, the North Wayne Scythe Company of Kennebec County was
chartered in 1848, by Reuben B. Dunn and J. E. T. Dunn, along with four other founding
members. Reuben Dunn was the President of the company, and he remained the majority
shareholder, with $67,500 in shares. The initial authorized capitalization of the enterprise was
$300,000, but in 1850 only $130,200 was paid in. The firm manufactured scythes and other
tools and implements, and ultimately grew to become the largest scythe manufactory in the
world. North Wayne scythes were awarded the first prize, a silver medal, at the 1851 Crystal
Palace Exhibition in London, England. During the Civil War a military contract for ten thousand
sword blades was granted and filled for the United States Government.

III. GENERAL PATTERNS OF SHAREHOLDING

12

This section considers general patterns of shareholding during the antebellum period, and
identifies the characteristics of safer, low-risk investments in the banking sector, relative to
newer and riskier ventures in the incipient manufacturing industry and transportation enterprises.
Banking and securities markets have been well-researched, especially financial centers such as
Boston, Philadelphia and New York, which were extensive and integrated by the end of the
eighteenth century (Bodenhorn 2000, Wright 2002). Lamoreaux (1996) shows that, in terms of
formal banking institutions, Maine was somewhat behind its Northeastern counterparts, but its
per capita access to funds was on par with the national average. Significantly less research has
been directed to the study of financial debt in “frontier regions,” although empirical evidence
does support the view that such markets were active and liquid from the earliest days of
settlement in the American colonies (Khan, 2008).
A key question for understanding the process and extent of capital mobilization is the
geographical origins of investors. If shareholders reside in distant locations, it suggests that
information is cheaply available, or else that mechanisms to reduce transactions costs exist.
Localization of adequate sources of funding, on the other hand, could point to a fairly
sophisticated domestic financial system. Changes in these patterns over time offer insights into
the evolution of capital markets. Table 2 therefore presents the distribution of shareholding by
residence and industry over time. The residence of shareholders varies significantly by type of
industry, although in all cases the percentage of domestic investors increases over time. Banks
were predominantly owned by local residents, and over eighty percent of their shareholders lived
in Maine, a proximity that reduced investor risk and transactions costs. As might be expected,
nonresident investors had addresses in nearby states such as Massachusetts, and very few
stockholders were truly foreign (from other countries).

13

It is interesting to note, by way of contrast, that manufacturing shares initially were
primarily owned by investors from out of state. However, this percentage fell over time, and in
the 1850s local residents accounted for the majority of the value of capital invested, indicating
that they held larger average numbers of shares of the company than the nonresidents.
Transportation was a volatile and risky industry, with booms and waves of bankruptcies from
turnpikes through railroads and the capital structure of transportation corporations similarly
experiences a marked change over time.10 Initially, out-of-state investors comprised almost two
thirds of the shareholders, but in the 1850s this pattern is reversed, and there is a significant
move towards local ownership of transportation corporations. These results are consistent with
the view that, over the course of economic development, a process of “investor education” was
underway. By the end of the antebellum era, Maine residents were adopting riskier portfolios,
and in the process, they provided funding for the enterprises that would contribute to the course
of industrialization and rapid economic growth that occurred during this period.11
Alexander Gerschenkron had pointed to the special role of banks in promoting economic
development. Table 3 provides a useful perspective on the contribution of banks, bankers, and
other financial sector transactors in funding the growth process. Banks themselves were owned
by investors with links to finance, but these individuals accounted for only one third of bank
shares. Instead, it is interesting to note that almost one quarter of bank shares were owned by
investors with primary links to manufacturing, highlighting the symbiotic relationship which
Lamoreaux (1996) had identified. Only 15 percent of shares in manufacturing enterprises were
10

It is not a coincidence that American bankruptcy law was closely tied to the experience of transportation
corporations and, as Skeel (2001, p. 48) points out, “the history of corporate reorganization is the history of
nineteenth-century railroad failure.”
11
For a study of overall transportation patterns, see Wright and Murphy (2009), showing some 7,000 private U.S.
corporations had been chartered in the antebellum period to operate bridges, canals, ferries, railroads, and roads.
Private capital investment accounted for a significant share of total domestic output; according to Klein and
Majewski (2006) cumulative private sector investment in turnpikes between 1800 and 1830 in the New England and
Middle Atlantic states likely comprised over six percent of 1830 GDP.

14

owned by manufacturers, with 41.4 percent attributed to bankers and others in related
occupations.12 The role of manufacturers in capitalizing transportation networks is especially
noteworthy. At the other end of the spectrum, artisans and farmers played a relatively minor role
in securities markets throughout the economy, despite their prevalence in the population at large.
The table also brings to the fore the disproportionately high participation of professionals
and white-collar workers in the financial underwriting of corporate enterprises in all three
sectors. This group might have been expected to be more risk-averse than financiers and
manufacturers, and to have been primarily attracted to the security and low risk of banking
investments. Instead, only 14.9 percent of bank stocks were owned by white-collar workers.
Another striking result is that this class invested more in the manufacturing sector than
shareholders whose occupation was in manufacturing (although obviously the table does not
control for income levels), and comprised the largest proportion of the funders of transportation
corporations. This finding is different from Majewski (1996) who argued that transportation
improvements generated spillover benefits that encouraged farmers to pay for railroads and
turnpikes, even if they were privately unprofitable. While manufacturers certainly benefited
from internal improvements, it is unlikely that professional and white collar workers were
motivated by such externalities.
Table 4 reveals another departure from previous findings, regarding the role of women in
capital mobilization for firms. The stereotype of women investors points to their tendency to
cluster in the banking sector, which attracts the wealth of “widows and orphans” because of its
familiarity and perceived low risk, derived from fixed-income returns and predictable dividend

12

See Fear and Kobrak (2010) who examined the role of “banks on board” and found that banks played a significant
role in corporate governance during the second industrial revolution, and this was especially true in the case of
investment banks in the United States before the advent of the Federal Reserve system.

15

flows. Scholarly arguments tend to be based on quite limited numbers of individuals and
institutions; for instance, Laurence (2008) studies six customers of Hoare’s Bank in England in a
discussion of how women evolved from consumers of banking services to purchasers of stocks.
Women investors in Maine typically owned disproportionately higher shares in bank stocks,
relative to manufacturing and transportation. Women were even the largest shareholders in the
Medomak Bank of Waldboro, and the Exchange Bank of Bangor. The percentage share of
female bank stockholders increased from almost 20 percent in 1845, to 26.1 percent a decade
later. As might be expected, the average size and value of their holdings was lower than those of
male investors. However, over time women’s portfolios increasingly included riskier equity
shares in manufacturing and transportation corporations. Most notable is the rapid increase in
ownership of transportation shares: by 1855 women comprised almost one quarter of investors in
this sector, and the value of their investments had more than tripled to 11.4 percent of shares.
These results are inconsistent with those of such case studies as Majewski’s, which found that
few females invested in transportation stocks; instead, they suggest that women investors in the
antebellum period may have been more similar to their male counterparts. Women were
increasingly drawn into underwriting securities in riskier, newer ventures, in which it might be
expected they would tend to have possessed little information or experience.
These patterns raise the question of the mechanisms that underlay investors’ portfolio
decision-making. Laurence (2008) argues that, in England, both the business of the bank and
investments in the stock market occurred within the context of groups who were linked by
kinship, religion, and other noneconomic ties. This is a plausible hypothesis but, again, such
studies are limited to a few examples in a single industry. It would therefore be useful to
examine the extent to which related investing was prevalent, not just in a single sector, but across

16

the entire economy, and how these practices varied during the process of economic
transformation. The next section investigates the role of family connections in the mobilization
of capital during this period.

IV. RELATED INVESTING
The brothers of the Richardson family of Portland, Maine were all prosperous merchants in the
East India trade who, along with several other family members, became key insiders in some of
the most important new Maine ventures. Joshua Richardson was a Maine-born founder of the
Cumberland Bank in 1813, and also started the Merchants’ Bank with his brothers Israel
Richardson, and William Putnam Richardson. Joshua was involved in the Portland Gas Light
Company, the Portland Manufacturing Company, the Maine Bank, and the Atlantic and St.
Lawrence Railroad. He was an officer in several other firms, and acted as the President and
Chief Executive Officer of the Manufacturers and Traders Bank, in which his mother Eunice
Richardson was also a prominent shareholder.13 According to the census records, Joshua
Richardson held over $20,000 in real estate assets in 1850, while his brother Israel owned
$15,000. William Putnam was subsequently President of the American Insurance Company in
Salem, Massachusetts. In both developed and developing societies today, this network of
interlocking directorships and familial ties would likely raise questions about conflicts of
interest, and the potential for negative outcomes such as tunneling and the exploitation of
“outside” investors.
Table 5 illustrates the patterns of related investing in banks, manufacturing, and
transportation corporations, by examining the percentage of investors within each industry who
13

In 1845 Joshua Richardson held $1100 in shares, whereas Eunice Richardson owned $2100 in the Manufacturers
and Traders Bank.

17

owned shares in firms where at least one other shareholder was a relative. Contrary to the notion
of the demise of related investing during market expansion, the significance of kinship ties
instead increases significantly during the period of industrialization. In 1845, 40 percent of bank
shareholders could be counted as related investors, a figure which had grown to become almost
half of all shareholding a decade later. This was also true of corporations engaged in
manufacturing and transportation. The importance of kinship ties in manufacturing corporations
increased to the point where more than half of the value of shares was held by related investors.
Again, the most marked change was evident in transportation, where close to 70 percent of
shareholders could be considered as related investors. Unlike manufacturing, related investors in
transportation enterprises held smaller stakes on average, amounting to roughly half of the value
of shares.
The standard studies of kinship networks in an economic context tend to focus on
corporate insiders, or officers who hold key managerial positions or directorships. Table 6
shows the prevalence of overall ownership and of related investing among such officers,
comprising treasurers, directors, or presidents in Maine corporations. Banks and manufacturing
exhibit similar trends over time. First, the officers of the firm remained roughly the same
fraction of the total number of shareholders: bank insiders comprised around seven percent of all
shareholders; directors and other key officials in manufacturing corporations numbered about
four percent of the shareholders. Second, insiders held disproportionately larger amounts of
capital, and their ownership shares increased significantly over time. By the end of the period,
insiders accounted for approximately 20 percent of the capital in banks, and 23 percent in
manufacturing enterprises. Once again, transportation is notably different from these other

18

industries, with a more “democratic” distribution of shareholders and share value among the
officers of the corporation.
The distribution of ownership concentration for overall corporate insiders is reflected in
the patterns for related investors. In 1845 a third of all officers were related to another
shareholder in the same firm, and this soon increased to over half of all insiders. Related
investing was largely responsible for the increase in the influence of insiders in both banking and
manufacturing corporations. In banks, related insiders initially owned 5.3 percent of total
capital, and this jumped to 13.5 percent of capital by 1855. Similarly, manufacturing exhibited a
sharp rise in the concentration of shares in the hands of related insiders, to 18 percent of the
capitalization of these firms. In the case of transportation, the level and degree of concentration
was significantly lower, since related inside investors owned no more than 3.6 percent of
outstanding shares.
Women were far more likely to share a surname with another investor in the same firm.
In some cases, their shares were inherited from male relatives. For instance, in 1840 David
Wooster, a Justice of the Peace in Vinalhaven, owned $700 in the Lime Rock Bank of Rockland,
without any relatives listed in the roster. In 1845, his name does not appear among the bank’s
shareholders, but the records now include Lydia Wooster, a 66-year-old widow with $200 in real
estate wealth, holding $700 in shares of the Lime Rock Bank of Rockland. Her unmarried
daughter, 31-year-old Jane Wooster, who lived in the same household, owned $100 worth of
shares in the same bank. But apart from passively inheriting shares, women were also
represented as shareholders who had made active decisions about how to allocate their wealth.
When the York Bank was first incorporated in 1831, its biggest shareholder was the wealthy

19

widow Sarah Cleaves, followed by her children, Mary and Daniel.14 In 1845, after the death of
their mother, Mary Cleaves became the majority shareholder, and owned 10 percent of the bank;
whereas, her brother Daniel Cleaves was the second-largest shareholder, and served as the
President of the bank from 1849 through 1865. However, even if they were active investors, it is
impossible to determine whether these female related shareholders made decisions wholly
independently, or whether they were following the advice of relatives with more financial
experience. In any event, the general point is that, whether as active or passive investors, women
were more likely to be involved in financial decisions as part of a family unit.
We can gain more insights into the characteristics of related investing if we exploit
variation in investments across industries in terms of gender. Table 7 shows that the number of
women shareholders increased from 385 (8.9 percent of the total) in 1845 to 1681 (15.4 percent)
a decade later. In 1845, 57.9 of women appeared on the roster of related investors, growing to 66
percent in 1855, in comparison to the 30.4 percent of men who were related to other shareholders
in 1845, and 54 percent in 1855. Part of the rising prominence of related investors owed to the
experience of women shareholders in transportation enterprises. By the end of the period, 78.5
percent of female stockholders in railroads, turnpikes, bridges, and similar corporations were
related to other investors in the same firm, significantly higher than the 50.7 percent in banks.
The lower prevalence of related investing in the stable banking industry, and the higher
incidence in transportation suggests that kinship ties played a role in attenuating transactions
costs in more venturesome enterprises.15 In particular, it is likely that the burden of these
14

The patriarch of the Cleaves family, the Daniel Cleaves Sr., had died in 1817 leaving the largest estate in Maine at
that time, created from diverse successful investments and businesses in shipping, banking, land, and manufacturing.
Daniel Cleaves Jr. was around 25 years of age when the decision was made to contribute to the founding of the York
Bank.
15
Majewski (1996) similarly concludes from his study of transportation corporations in two counties in PA and VA,
that kinship was a means of reducing transactions costs (in this case, a free rider problem). He found that 40-50
percent of the shareholders in most of these enterprises shared the same surname.

20

transactions costs were disproportionately felt by women and other groups that were financially
uneducated, less wealthy, or otherwise disadvantaged at equity investing.
The notion that related investing aided in the democratization of securities markets is
supported by the kernel density distributions of related and unrelated investors, both in terms of
the value of shareholding (Figure 3) and the amount of real estate wealth in their investment
portfolio (Figure 4).16 Just as in the case of the kernel density estimate of the value of shares
held, there is greater “heaping” for related investors at the lower tails of the distribution of real
estate wealth, as well as in personal wealth (figure not included). The density estimates for the
transportation corporations and other enterprises are noticeably skewed leftward for related
investors, and to a greater extent than in the case of unrelated investors. This result suggests that
the current tendency for researchers to focus almost exclusively on the kinship networks of elite
investors is likely to miss what may be other crucial functions of related investing. Indeed, these
distributions provide visual confirmation that kinship ties were especially relevant for small
investors and individuals who were less wealthy.
What was the impact of related investing on ownership in the firm? The regressions in
Table 8 examine the effects of related investing, ceteris paribus, on the shareholders’ ownership
stake in the firm, or the fraction of total shares that the individual holds.17 The cross-tabulations
had indicated that banks, manufacturing, and transportation corporations were characterized by
different processes and outcomes. Diffuse ownership in these industries was also determined by
16

Kernel density estimation creates a hypothesized probability density function from the shareholder observations.
A Gaussian density function was used as the kernel and nonparametric techniques were employed for the density
estimation.
17
Regressions were also run that allowed the coefficients and intercepts to vary over each time period, and
controlled for the size of the firm in terms of the number of stockholders, and for the age and location of the firm.
These results confirmed that ownership by local Maine residents rose in each subsequent year. Shareholders in
transportation held lower amounts of ownership rights initially, but by 1855 they owned significantly higher
fractions of total equity in corporations. Related investing had grown over time, but the pattern was not due to the
elite insiders in the firm, it was rather because of the higher percentage of shares held by the “outsider” related
investors.

21

varying factors. For instance, in banking and manufacturing, farming areas were associated with
higher ownership concentration, but in transportation enterprises lower concentration occurred in
more prosperous farming regions. For banks, older firms had lower concentration of shares,
while the opposite was true of railroads. As one would expect, in all corporations directors and
other officers owned larger fractions of shares, and this was especially true of manufacturing
firms. The less advantaged shareholders, such as women investors, owned lower stakes in the
banking and manufacturing enterprises, but they held larger proportions of equity in
transportation. Directors in transportation held higher amounts of shares, but related investors
were associated with concentration to an even greater extent. This result is consistent with the
hypothesis that kinship networks encouraged their members to reduce perceived riskiness of
investments. Related investing arguably promoted a democratization of capital mobilization
during the early industrial period.
The regressions in Table 9 show the determinants of variation in “persistence,” or the
holding of shares in a company for more than five years. As might be expected, concentrated
ownership (a higher fraction of equity held by an investor) was positively associated with
persistence. Elite officers of the firm, such as the President, were also more likely to retain
shares for longer periods, but occupation in general (such as white-collar status, or financial
backgrounds) was not a significant explanatory factory. Women were more apt to hold shares
for a shorter period, which is perhaps consistent with the notion of passive investing. Perhaps
unexpectedly, manufacturing shareholders tended to be longer-term investors, relative to banking
or transportation. The regression results suggest a positive role for related investing, in
explaining persistence of both elite investors with family ties, as well as the persistence of
nonelite investors.

22

IV. CONCLUSION
Related investing refers to family ties among the owners of firms, and has been found to be
pervasive in most parts of the world. Research has primarily focused on kinship networks
among elite investors such as corporate insiders, ignoring the characteristics of the rest of the
population of shareholders. From this perspective, related investing in securities markets is
typically held as anomalous and suspect, raising the possibility that insiders are taking advantage
of their family relationships to avoid or manipulate governance oversight. The negative
connotations are highlighted in regions where institutions are opaque and external controls are
nonexistent or ineffective; the use of kinship ties might compound the problem of corruption by
circumventing internal controls within the corporation. In short, related investing has been
regarded with caution because it has the potential to serve as a mechanism through which
resources within the firm are redistributed to the elite owners. Even in studies where personal
ties are acknowledged to play a productive role, such as overcoming transactions costs, it is
generally argued that their influence should decline and disappear as markets become more
developed and impersonal.
The current project employs a more extensive data set of shareholders and firms than has
previously been available to reexamine the debate about related investing. The scope of
coverage encompasses a period when the economy of Maine was undergoing rapid
industrialization, and many of its corporations were leaders in the national sphere. It is generally
agreed that Maine institutions were effective and transparent, and helped to promote
technological change and economic growth. The results confirm that elite insiders, officers of
the firm including treasurers, directors, and its presidents, were typically connected to other

23

shareholders in the corporation. These familial networks did not decline over time, instead, they
increased as the economy developed. Moreover, it is striking that, when the analysis is extended
to all shareholders in the firm, the same patterns are detected; outsiders were able to overcome a
lack of experience and information by taking advantage of their own networks. As such, related
investing seems to have been a universal feature of equity markets in the antebellum period.
This leads to the question of why kinship ties existed, not just among insiders, but also
among outside shareholders. At least one implication is that, although insiders might attempt to
use family networks to exploit other shareholders, their ability to tunnel is limited by the
countervailing power of family networks among outsiders. Rather than seeking to expropriate
their peers, related founders of Maine corporations introduced institutional mechanisms to ensure
transparency, disclosure and monitoring of the financial and accounting status of the firm.
Ideally, one would wish to determine whether related investing was associated with higher
earnings or profits but, in the absence of the necessary data, a systematic analysis of variation
across such factors as industry, gender, wealth, ownership concentration, and persistence shed
some light on the underlying mechanisms.
The variation in the patterns that existed across the banking, manufacturing, and
transportation sectors suggests that family networks may have served to attenuate risks and
transactions costs, especially for inexperienced investors. The expansion of the railroads
required and attracted extensive investments in securities markets, that primarily consisted of
small investors who were likely to have been uneducated about financial assets. Women and
comparatively disadvantaged newcomers with lower stocks of personal and real estate wealth
were induced into making contributions to capital mobilization, perhaps because the external
benefits offered by their kinship networks reduced transactions costs. Investors with family

24

connections, for instance, were significantly more likely to persist in holding shares over a longer
term. Finally, the analysis of the effects of related investing on the concentration of ownership in
the corporations suggests that this phenomenon was likely associated with a reduction in
perceptions of risk, especially in the context of the mobilization of “venture capital” in
manufacturing and transportation. This may in part explain why, instead of declining over time,
related investing increased.
The analysis here has more general implications for our understanding of the nature of
the firm. Standard approaches tend to be based on a dichotomy between family businesses
where governance might be compromised by personal tastes and affinities; and impersonal
corporations that are run by managers whose decisions are independent of the identities of the
owners. Alfred Chandler even contended that the British owed its loss of industrial leadership
owing to the prevalence of its style of “personal capitalism” based on family ownership. Khan
(2016), however, showed that family firms in France were able to compensate for the
institutional disadvantages that women entrepreneurs confronted. The results from this study of
extensive personal elements in shareholding throughout a successfully industrializing economy
instead suggests that the extent of personal ownership in firms lies along a continuum. Just as in
family firms, related ownership in corporations can play a productive role in the democratization
and dynamics of capital mobilization during early economic development.

25

Figure 1
Incorporations in Maine, New Jersey and Pennsylvania in the Antebellum Period

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Maine

New Jersey

Pennsylvania

Notes and Sources: Evans (1948). Maine separated from Massachusetts to become an
independent State in 1820. The comparison states were chosen because they all granted
corporate charters through special acts of the legislature during the period under review,
and changed to general incorporation in the 1870s (Maine, 1875; New Jersey, 1875; and
Pennsylvania, 1873).

26

Figure 2
Cumulative Frequency of Shareholders in Sample, and of Total Corporations
by Year of Incorporation

16000

1200

14000

1000
800

10000
8000

600

6000

All firms

Shareholders

12000

400

4000
200

2000
0

1820

1825

1830

1835
1840
shareholders

1845
firms

1850

1855

0

Notes and Sources: Sample of Maine Corporations. The figures show the cumulative number of
shareholders who have invested in corporations by the year of incorporation of the firm in which they
have acquired ownership, and the total number of firms which had become incorporated in that year.

27

Figure 3

Banks

Mfg

Transportation

Other

28

Figure 4: Wealth and Related Investing

Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. The shareholders were matched
in the manuscript censuses of 1850 and 1860 by names and town of residence. The
matching procedure was successful for approximately 47 percent of the sample. This
yielded information on state of birth, occupations, age, marital status, and wealth for the
subset of the matches.

29

Table 1
Sample of Corporations in Relation to Total Maine Corporations

Banks
Nonbank
Total Corporations
Percent NonBank

1845
1850
1855
1845-1855
Maine
Sample
Maine
Sample
Maine
Sample
Sample %
35
21
35
13
70
29
45.0
20
16
34
17
52
25
63.2
55
37
69
30
122
54
49.1
36.4
43.2
49.3
56.6
42.6
46.3

Notes and Sources: See text for sources. The sample comprises a random selection of 121 firms, and
13,900 shareholder observations, from the published returns of stockholders in Maine Corporations.

Table 2
Residence of Shareholders

No.

1845
%

1850
No.

%

1855
No.

%

BANKS
Maine
Mass.
Other US
Foreign

N=1428
1253
118
51
6

87.8
8.3
3.6
0.4

N=971
816
68
67
20

84
7
6.9
2.1

N=2292
1986
156
123
27

86.7
6.8
5.4
1.2

MFG
Maine
Mass.
Other US
Foreign

N=568
99
446
23
0

17.4
78.5
4.1
0

N=730
417
281
28
4

57.1
38.5
3.8
0.6

N=843
279
507
54
3

33.1
60.1
6.4
0.4

TRANSPORT
Maine
Mass.
Other US
Foreign

N=460
188
240
32
0

40.9
52.2
7
0

N=2263
1525
632
105
1

67.4
27.9
4.6
0

N=3187
2284
654
199
50

71.7
20.5
6.2
1.6

______________________________________________________________
Sources: see text.

30

Table 3
Shareholding by Industry and Occupation
_________________________________________________

BANKS
Artisan
Farmer
Finance
Manufacturer
None
White Collar

Number
2439
323
378
415
522
347
454

Mean
1476.86
1110.4
751.2
3049.7
1533.9
1024.6
1184.2

Std
3437.6
1992.2
832.7
6564.2
3019.8
2680.5
1340.5

Percent
100
10.0
7.9
35.1
22.2
9.9
14.9

MFG
Artisan
Farmer
Finance
Manufacturer
None
White Collar

916
183
35
146
266
21
265

4192.09
3495.3
1547.4
10899.1
2158.8
2223.8
3524.4

13124.26
5907.5
2618.6
29243.1
3900.4
2108.8
7462.4

100
16.7
1.4
41.4
15.0
1.2
24.3

TRANSPORTN
Artisan
Farmer
Finance
Manufacturer
None
White Collar

3219
791
532
165
811
246
674

1038.95
675.1
586.6
3120.6
1150.0
469.5
1387.6

2316.71
1410.8
1454.3
5221.3
2380.3
860.6
2508.3

100
16.0
9.3
15.4
27.9
3.5
28.0

_______________________________________________
Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. The shareholders were matched
in the manuscript censuses of 1850 and 1860 by names and town of residence. The
matching procedure was successful for approximately 47 percent of the sample. This
yielded information on state of birth, occupations, age, marital status, and wealth for the
subset of the matches. Artisans include labourers; white collar occupations include
“gentlemen” and other professionals except for those employed in finance, which
incorporates bankers, stockbrokers, and accountants.

31

Table 4
Women Investors as a Percentage of All Shareholders and Total Capitalization, by Industry
___________________________________________________________

1845

1850

1855

19.8
12

25.8
16

26.1
14.8

MANUFACTURING
% Investors
% Share Value

9.6
5

8.7
8.3

14.8
6.4

TRANSPORTATION
% Investors
% Share Value

8.5
3.4

11
7.6

24.1
11.4

15.4
7.2

14
9.6

23
10.6

BANKS
% Investors
% Share Value

ALL INDS
% Investors
% Share Value

__________________________________________________________
Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Value refers to the par value of shares
held by the investor.

Table 5
Related Investing, by Industry
1845

1850

1855

% Investors % Value

% Investors % Value

% Investors % Value

Banks

40

35.5

45.3

51.4

45.1

49.1

Manufacturing

36.5

38.4

41.3

45.4

44.7

52.5

Transportation

40.4

39.2

66.9

57.8

68.9

52.3

Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Value refers to the par value of shares
held by the investor.

32

Table 6
Related Investing Among Corporate Insiders
(percentage of industry total)

Industry
Banks
All insiders
Related insiders
Manufacturing
All insiders
Related insiders
Transportation
All insiders
Related insiders
All insiders (n)
% Related

1845
Investors

Capital

1850
Investors

Capital

1855
Investors

Capital

7.8
2.5

12.1
5.3

7.3
4.1

16.6
12.2

7.1
3.6

19.5
13.5

3.8
1.6

12.2
4.4

3
1.5

11.2
8.9

4.2
2.2

22.7
18

3.6
1.1

11
1.4

1
0.5

5.2
3.5

1.3
0.7

4.9
3.6

154
33.1

131
50.4

268
51.9

Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Insiders are defined as all officers of the
corporation who could be traced, including treasurers, directors, and presidents of the firm.
Related insiders are those officers who share the same surname as another investor in the same
enterprise.

33

Table 7
Related Investing by Industry and Gender

1845

1850

1855

Industry

Men

Women

Men

Women

Men

Women

Banks
%M, %F
% All Bank Invs

35.4
28.4

59
11.7

43.3
32.1

51.2
13.2

43.1
31.8

50.7
13.2

Manufacturing
%M, %F
% All Mfg Invs

34
30.8

60
5.8

39.3
35.9

62.5
5.4

41.9
35.7

61.1
9.1

39.7

47.5

66.7

68.8

65.8

78.5

36.4

4

59.4

7.6

50

18.9

2123
30.4
30.4

385
57.9
8.9

3585
56.4
48.5

582
60
8.4

5533
54
41.4

1681
66
15.4

Transportation
%M, %F
% All Transp
Invs
ALL (N=13,890)
% Related
% All Invs

Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Related investors share the same surname as another
investor in the same enterprise.

34

Table 8
Regressions: Influence of Related Investing on Ownership Share
By Industry
________________________________________________________________________________
BANKS

T-Stat

MFG

T-Stat

TRANSPORT

T-Stat

VARIABLE
10.50**
Intercept

*

4.02

18.9*

2.03

46.85***

13.68

6.63***
5.54***
-1.36*
2.09***

8.91
4.57
-1.81

8.51***
1.52**
0.58***

34.12
2.18
2.46

-4.32

2.56***

14.07

0.14

7.86***

26.85

22.21

24.9***

28.66

5.98
-1.01

-4.72***
2.4***

-11.94
6.45

-2.72

-1.55***

-6.08

4.69

-2.00***

-30.85

Investors
Maine Resident
Directors
Female

-0.41*
1.55***
0.03

-1.63
5.49
0.16

Related Investor

-0.5***

-3.30

-4.03***
14.94**

-21.71

Firms
Established Firm
Closely Held
Time Period
Year=1850
Year=1855

*

22.92
0.94***
-0.97***

4.37
-5.55

0.08

0.41

0.13***

2.48

0.081
30.68**
*
4.18***
-0.69

County
Log(CountyPop)
Log(County
Farm Value)
R'-square
N

1.95***
0.83***

0.24
4535

0.32
2420

0.62
5857

________________________________________________________________________________
Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Insiders are defined as all officers of the
corporation who could be traced, including treasurers, directors, and presidents of the firm.
Related investors/insiders are those shareholders/officers who share the same surname as another
investor in the same enterprise. Established firms had been in existence for at least ten years.
Closely held firms were owned by fewer than 20 shareholders. The excluded industry is banking.
Population and farm value are estimated at the county level.

35

Table 9
Regressions: Influence of Related Investing on Persistence in Shareholding
__________________________________________________________________________________

Estimate
Intercept
1850
1855
Maine resident
Manufacturing
Transportation
Female
Related investor

-0.03
0.24
0.43
0.07
0.11
-0.04
-0.05
0.05

T-Stat

Variable

Estimate

T-Stat

-1.16
9.69***
18.44***
3.81***
4.27***
-2.31**
-3.22***
3.38***

Intercept
1850
1855
Maine resident
Manufacturing
Transportation
Age of Firm
President
Director
Other Officer
Trustee
Female
Percent
Ownership
Related Investor
Related Director

-0.19
0.23
0.4
0.06
0.14
0.03
0.01
0.2
0.11
0.01
0.012
-0.04

-3.71***
8.62***
14.13***
3.14***
5.01***
1.05
2.64***
1.82*
1.73*
0.16
0.45
-2.45***

0.01
0.04
0.17

3.56***
2.79***
2.07**

N=3912
Rsq=0.11

N=3912
Rsq=0.12

Notes and Sources: See text for sources of data set. Persistence refers to shareholding for more
than five years. Insiders are defined as all officers of the corporation who could be traced,
including treasurers, directors, and presidents of the firm. Related investors/directors are those
shareholders/officers who share the same surname as another investor in the same enterprise. The
excluded industry is banking.

36

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Acheson, GG, Campbell, G, Turner, JD & Vanteeva, N., 'Corporate Ownership, Control, and
Firm Performance in Victorian Britain,' The Journal of Economic History, vol 76 (1) 2016: 1-40.
Angell, Joseph, and Samuel Ames. A Treatise on the Law of Private Corporations Aggregate.
Boston: Hilliard, Gray, Little & Wilkins, 1832.
Bagwell, Laurie S., “Shareholder heterogeneity: Evidence and implications,” American
Economic Review 81(1991): 218-221.
Bateman, Fred and Thomas Weiss, “Comparative Regional Development in Antebellum
Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 35 (1) 1975:182-208.
Bhaumik, Sumon Kumar, and Andros Gregoriou. "‘Family’ownership, tunnelling and earnings
management: A review of the literature." Journal of Economic Surveys 24.4 (2010): 705-730.
Bodenhorn, Howard, A History of Banking in Antebellum America: Financial Markets and
Economic Development in an Era of Nation-Building, New York: Cambridge University Press,
2000.
Bolton, Patrick, and Ernst-Ludwig von Thadden, “Blocks, liquidity, and corporate control,”
Journal of Finance 53, 1998:1-25.
Bogart, Dan, and John Majewski, “Two Roads to the Transportation Revolution: Early
Corporations in the U.K. and the United States,” in Dora Costa and Naomi Lamoreaux, eds.,
Understanding Long-Run Economic Growth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Boyce, Gordon. “Communication and Contracting: A Link Between Business and Social
History”. Business and Economic History 24.1 (1995): 287–295.
Carlos, Ann M., and Larry Neal. “The Micro-Foundations of the Early London Capital Market:
Bank of England Shareholders During and After the South Sea Bubble, 1720-25,”
Economic History Review, 59, 498-538.
Carlos, Ann M., and Larry Neal, “Women investors in early capital markets, 1720-1725,”
Financial History Review, XI (2004): 197-224.
Carlson, Stephen Barrett, A quantitative analysis of capital market development in antebellum
Maine, Bowdoin College Honors Project, 2007.
Chandler, Alfred D., Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism, Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press, 1990.

37

Davis, Joseph S. Essays in the Earlier History of American Corporations. New York: Russell &
Russell, 1917.
Davis, Lance E., “Stock Ownership in the Early New England Textile Industry,” Business
History Review, Vol. 32, No. 2 (Summer, 1958): 204-222.
Demsetz, Harold, and Kenneth Lehn, “The structure of corporate ownership: Causes and
consequences,” Journal of Political Economy 93, 1985: 1155-1177.
Dodd, Edwin M., American Business Corporations Until 1860. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1954.
Dodd, E. Merrick, “The Evolution of Limited Liability in American Industry: Massachusetts,”
Harvard Law Review, Vol. 61, No. 8 (Sep., 1948): 1351-1379.
Dunlavy, Colleen, “Social Conceptions of the Corporation: Insight from the History of
Shareholder Voting Rights.” Washington & Lee Law Review 63, 2006:1347-1388.
Evans, George, Jr. Business Incorporations in the United States, 1800-1943. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research, No. 49, 1948.
Fear, Jeffrey and Christopher Kobrak, "Banks on Board: German and American Corporate
Governance, 1870-1914," Business History Review 84 (Winter 2010): 703-736.
Gerschenkron, Alexander, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, A Book of Essays,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1962, pp. 5-30.
Gordon, Jeffrey N., “Institutions as Relational Investors: A New Look at Cumulative Voting,”
Columbia Law Review, Vol. 94, No. 1 (Jan., 1994):124-192.
Greif, Avner, Institutions and the path to the modern economy: lessons from medieval trade,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Gulati, Ranjay, “Does Familiarity Breed Trust? The Implications of Repeated Ties for
Contractual Choice in Alliances,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 38, No. 1 (Feb., 1995):
85-112.
Handlin, Oscar and Mary Handlin. “Origins of the American Business Corporation.” Journal of
Economic History 5 (1945):1-23.
Helwege, Jean, Christo Pirinky, and Rene M. Stulz, “Why do Firms Become Widely Held? An
Analysis of the Dynamics of Corporate Ownership,” Journal of Finance, 62 (2) 2007: 995-1028.
Ingram, Paul and Arik Lifschitz, “Kinship in the Shadow of the Corporation: The Interbuilder
Network in Clyde River Shipbuilding, 1711–1990,” American Sociological Review; Apr2006,
Vol. 71 Issue 2, p334-352.
38

Irwin, Douglas A. and Richard Sylla (eds), Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the
1790s, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Johnson, Simon et al., "Tunneling," American Economic Review, vol. 90 (2) 2000: 22-27.
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, “Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
costs and ownership structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3,1976: 305-360.
Kessler, W. C. “Incorporation in New England: A Statistical Study, 1800-1875,” Journal of
Economic History 8 (1948): 43-62.
Kessler, W. C. “A Statistical Study of the New York General Incorporation Act of 1811,”
Journal of Political Economy 48 (1940): 877-882.
Khan, B. Zorina, “`Justice of the Marketplace’: Legal Disputes and Economic Activity on
America’s Northeastern Frontier, 1700-1860.” Journal of Interdisciplinary History, vol. 39 (1)
2008: 1-35.
Khan, B. Zorina, “Invisible Women: Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Family Firms in
Nineteenth-Century France,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 76 (1) 2016: 163-195.
Klein, Daniel B., and John Majewski. 1992. “Economy, Community and the Law: The Turnpike
Movement in New York, 1797-1845,” Law & Society Review, 26, 469-512.
Lamoreaux, Naomi and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. “Legal Regime and Contractual Flexibility: A
Comparison of Business’s Organizational Choices in France and the United States During the
Era of Industrialization.” American Law and Economics Review 7 (2005): 28-61.
Lamoreaux, Naomi , Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development
in Industrial New England, Cambridge University Press, 1996.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Corporate ownership
around the world,” Journal of Finance Vol. 54, No. 2 (Apr., 1999): 471-517.
Laurence, Anne, “The Emergence of a Private Clientele for Banks in the Early Eighteenth
Century: Hoare's Bank and Some Women Customers,” Economic History Review, New Series,
Vol. 61, No. 3 (Aug., 2008): 565-586.
Maine State, Public Documents of the State of Maine, Augusta, Maine: n.p., various years.
Maine State, Secretary, An Abstract from the Returns of the Directors of the several
Incorporated Banks within this State, made to the Office of the Secretary of State, Augusta,
Maine: n.p., various years.
Maine, Henry Sumner, Ancient Law: Its Connection with the Early History of Society, and its
Relation to Modern Ideas, New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1906.
39

Majewski, John. 1996. “Who Financed the Transportation Revolution? Regional Divergence and
Internal Improvements in Antebellum Pennsylvania and Virginia,” Journal of Economic History,
56: 763-88.
______. 2006. “Toward a Social History of the Corporation: Shareholding in Pennsylvania,
1800-1840,” in Matson, ed., The Economy of Early America: Historical Perspectives and New
Directions. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.
Meissner, Christopher M. “Voting Rules and the Success of Connected Lending in 19th century
New England Banks.” Explorations in Economic History 42, 2005: 509-528.
Musacchio, Aldo. Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance and Financial
Development in Brazil, 1882-1950. New York: Cambridge University Press (2009).
Skeel, David A., Debt's Dominion: A History of Bankruptcy Law in America, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2001.
Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D., “Performance and Behavior of Family Firms: Evidence from the
French Stock Market,” Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 5 (2007): 709–751.
Sylla, Richard and Robert E. Wright, “Corporation Formation in the United States, 1790-1860:
Law and Politics in Comparative Contexts,” unpublished paper, Summer 2012.
Seavoy, Ronald. The Origins of the American Business Corporation, 1784-1885: Broadening the
Concept of Public Service During Industrialization. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1982.
Weber, Warren E., "Early State Banks in the United States: How Many Were There and When
Did They Exist?" Journal of Economic History, June 2006: 433-55.
Wright, Robert E. The Wealth of Nations Rediscovered: Integration and Expansion in American
Financial Markets, 1780-1850. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Wright, Robert E. 1999. “Bank Ownership and Lending Patterns in New York and Pennsylvania,
1781-1831,” Business History Review, 73, 40-60.
Wright, Robert E. and Richard Sylla, “Corporate Governance and Stockholder/Stakeholder
Activism in the United States, 1790-1860: New Data and Perspectives,” in Jonathan Koppell ed.,
Origins of Shareholder Advocacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011: 231-51.

40

