NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT MARKETS VERSUS IMPERFECT REGULATION IN U.S. ELECTRICITY
GENERATION
Steve Cicala
Working Paper 23053
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23053

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

I am grateful to Gary Becker, Jim Bushnell, Thom Covert, Tatyana Deryugina, Edward Glaeser,
Michael Greenstone, David Hémous, Lawrence Katz, Ryan Kellogg, Erin Mansur, Kevin
Murphy, Erica Meyers, Morten Olsen, Jim Sallee, Andrei Shleifer, Chad Syverson, Roberton
Williams III, Matthew White, and seminar participants at Harvard, MIT, Cornell, Chicago, Yale,
the UC Energy Institute, the EEE Session of the 2015 NBER Summer Institute, UIUC, Wharton,
and Brown for helpful comments and suggestions. Sébastien Phan, Julien, Sauvan, Songyuan
Ding, Enrique Chazaro-Acosta, Xianying Fan, Mary Vansuch, and Dan Pechi provided excellent
research assistance. This paper has been reviewed by the Energy Information Administration to
ensure no confidential data has been disclosed. All errors remain my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Steve Cicala. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Imperfect Markets versus Imperfect Regulation in U.S. Electricity Generation
Steve Cicala
NBER Working Paper No. 23053
January 2017
JEL No. D4,D61,L1,L5,L94,Q4
ABSTRACT
This paper measures changes in electricity generation costs caused by the introduction of market
mechanisms to determine output decisions in service areas that were previously using commandand-control-type operations. I use the staggered transition to markets from 1999- 2012 to evaluate
the causal impact of liberalization using a nationwide panel of hourly data on electricity demand
and unit-level costs, capacities, and output. To address the potentially confounding effects of
unrelated fuel price changes, I use machine learning methods to predict the allocation of output to
generating units in the absence of markets for counterfactual production patterns. I find that
markets reduce production costs by $3B per year by reallocating output among existing power
plants: Gains from trade across service areas increase by 20% based on a 10% increase in traded
electricity, and costs from using uneconomical units fall 20% from a 10% reduction in their
operation.

Steve Cicala
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
scicala@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

When regulation brings its own host of distortions and inefficiencies, the mere existence of a market failure is insufficient to ensure government intervention will improve
welfare. Instead, by comparing the distortions under potential regulatory regimes, one
can identify superior policies as those with relatively fewer imperfections. This paper
undertakes such an evaluation in the context of U.S. wholesale electricity markets,
which have replaced command-and-control-type operations in some areas.
To do so I construct a virtually complete hourly characterization of supply and
demand of the U.S. electrical grid from 1999 - 2012. Data on fuel costs, capacities, heat
efficiency, and operations of nearly all generating units at the hourly level allows me
to construct power supply curves (known as the “merit order”) for each of 98 “Power
Control Areas” (PCAs), as well as observe the units that were chosen to operate
to meet demand at any moment in time. These curves allow me to calculate two
key welfare measures for each PCA-date-hour: “out of merit” losses from dispatching
higher marginal cost units relative to installed capacity, and the gains from trading
electricity across areas. Market power losses manifest themselves as out of merit
production (Borenstein et al. (2002); Mansur (2001)), as do normal grid operations,
such as maintenance, refueling, start-up costs, and transmission congestion (Davis
and Wolfram (2012); Mansur (2008); Reguant (2014)). In either case, the increased
operational costs are observationally equivalent as the distance between the realized
cost of operations and cost from utilizing only the lowest-cost installed capacity.
While prior papers have evaluated one of these outcomes during single instances of
market transition, I develop a framework and compile the necessary data to examine
both outcomes over the history of market transitions since 1999. I use the staggered
creation and expansions of wholesale electricity markets over this period to estimate
the causal impact of using markets to allocate production on these welfare measures.
I employ a differences-in-differences (DD) framework to estimate changes in gains
from trade and out of merit losses following the transition to market dispatch against
PCAs that have not undergone any regulatory changes. This approach finds gains
from trade increase by upwards of 30% after adopting market dispatch due to a 10%
increase in electricity traded. There is also a 10% decrease in out of merit operations,
reducing these costs by nearly 20%.
The simple DD approach is susceptible to the confounding effects of fuel price
fluctuations (over time and across areas) when estimating counterfactual outcomes:
Fuels prices shift supply curves, making historical outcomes poor counterfactuals
for what would have happened today under a different set of prevailing fuel prices.
1

This means one might estimate changes in the gains from trade without any actual
changes in production patterns because the value of offset production scales with
fuel prices. This issue motivates a policy function approach in which I estimate each
system operators’ rules for dispatching units in a given year, and compare outcomes
the following year against those predicted by the policy function. I show how the
treatment effect can be estimated by comparing changes in the quality of fit of this
rule across areas that switch to market dispatch against areas with no change in
regulation.
Estimating dispatch probabilities with out-of-sample validity is a pure prediction
problem for which recent developments in the machine learning literature have proven
to be particularly effective (Kleinberg et al. (2015)). I use the random forest algorithm
of Breiman (2001) to non-parametrically estimate policy functions, then embed the
results in a DD framework to estimate causal treatment effects. This part of the paper
complements the recent work of Burlig et al. (2016), who also use machine learning
methods (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator) to predict counterfactual
outcomes.
This approach yields estimates smaller in magnitude than the simple DD estimates
for gains from trade, suggesting fuel price confounding. I find that production costs
are reduced by about three billion dollars per year due to market-based improvements
in allocating output to lower cost units, with these savings split between reduced
output from uneconomical units and gains from trade by 2:1.
It should be noted at the outset that my estimates measure changes in how output is allocated given the installed capacity, costs, and patterns of demand. It would
not be unreasonable to suspect that market dispatch has affected investment incentives, which are likely to be an important source of welfare changes. In addition, my
estimates measure the average effect of market dispatch, which itself has been heterogeneous both with respect to pre-existing institutions (i.e. power pools, bilateral
markets, or smoke-filled rooms), and with respect to the rules of the markets implemented (uniform or locational marginal prices, virtual bidding, market monitors,
etc.). However, given the even greater differences between market and traditional
dispatch methods these estimates should be informative regarding the performance of
the relatively new mechanisms that currently determine how over 60% of generating
capacity in the United States is utilized.
The paper is organized as follows: in the next section I describe the structure
of electricity generation and transmission in the United States, and the institutional
details that will facilitate estimation. The third section describes how out of merit
2

costs and gains from trade are measured in electricity generation, and the fourth
section describes the data. The fifth section presents an estimation strategy motivated
by this setting. The sixth section presents causal estimates of the impact of markets
on gains from trade and out of merit costs. The final section concludes.
2

Background on Power Control Areas and Dispatch in the United States

The U.S. electricity grid developed over the 20th century based on a mix of IOUs,
government-owned utilities (municipal, state, and federal), and non-profit cooperatives. All of these organizations tended to be vertically integrated, so they owned the
power plants, the transmission system, and the delivery network within their respective, exclusively operated territories. The entity that determines which power plants
operate to meet demand is called a “Balancing Authority.” A single Balancing Authority controls the transmission system and dispatches power plants within a “Power
Control Area,” or PCA. When vertically-integrated, the Balancing Authority and
Utility have often been one-in-the-same, as with the service territory and the PCA.1
These areas operate with relative autonomy over their assets, and transmission lines
that connect areas enable flows between them.
The national grid consists of three large Interconnections: East, West, and Texas
(with relatively little capacity to transmit power between them). Figure I shows
the approximate configurations of the U.S. Electricity Grid in 1999 and 2012.2 The
boundaries between Interconnections are denoted in Panel A by the thick black lines
separating Texas and the West (unchanged over the period). The red lines denote regions of the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) who coordinate
their operations in order to preserve the stability of the transmission system (when
large plants go down for maintenance, for example). The tangle of power control
areas reflects the legacy of local monopolies that have been the principal architects
of the U.S. electricity grid.
Although the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) opened the
door for independent power generation (by requiring IOUs to buy their output at
“avoided cost”), the growth of such producers was impeded by discriminatory trans1

Exceptions include the New York and New England Power Pools, which formed in response
to The Great Northeast Blackout of 1965, as well as smaller utilities that do not control dispatch
directly. Regional reserve margin coordination was also formalized during this time with the establishment of the National Electric Reliability Council.
2
The exact geographic boundaries of PCAs often defy straightforward demarcation. This map is
based on U.S. counties, with the predominant PCA receiving assignment of the entire county–and
is therefore approximate for visualization purposes. In addition, a number of small or hydro-only
PCAs are merged with the larger neighboring areas that provide the majority of their (fossil-based)
energy.

3

mission practices (Joskow (2000)). Because the IOUs owned the transmission system,
they could effectively shut independent producers out of wider markets by denying
transmission access.3 This began to change with the Energy Policy Act of 1992,
which required the functional separation of transmission system owners and power
marketers–they were no longer allowed to use their wires to prevent or extract the
surplus from trades across their territory. These changes were codified on April 24,
1996 with FERC orders 888 and 889, which required open-access, non-discriminatory
tariffs for wholesale electricity transmission.
Open-access created greater potential for wholesale electricity markets, which were
initially conducted through bilateral contracts for power. In this decentralized setting,
contracts would typically specify the amount of electricity to be generated by one
utility under a set of conditions, transmitted across a particular area, and withdrawn
from the system by the purchasing utility. Mansur and White (2012) give examples
showing why the nature of congestion in electricity transmission networks renders
decentralized markets particularly poorly suited for identifying all of the potential
gains from trade. In particular, transmission lines are constrained by net flows of
power. When this is the case, there are production externalities that may allow
otherwise infeasible bilateral trades to occur by coordinating offsetting transactions
to keep net flows below transmission capacity. Identifying such potential trades in
this type of decentralized market is a challenge akin to coordinating simultaneous
multilateral exchanges (Roth et al. (2004)).
Operationally, balancing authorities have relied on engineering estimates of costs
to devise dispatch algorithms to determine which plants within the PCA operate, and
separately schedule any other operations requested by utilities (for bilateral trades).
Centralized wholesale electricity markets (“market dispatch”) integrate dispatch operations in to an auction for electricity. In day-ahead auctions, for example, generators
submit bids to produce electricity, and only those below the price needed to meet
projected demand are called on to operate. These auctions incorporate feasibility
constraints, so calling on higher-priced units to operate due to transmission congestion allows for the direct revelation of the cost of shortcomings in the transmission
system.4 Day-ahead markets establish financial obligations to produce, which are subsequently either met with production in the real time market or unwound by buying
3

Examples of IOUs exercising market dominance can be found in Appendix C of FERC Order

888.
4

In particular, auctions using the “Standard Market Design” yield “Locational Marginal Prices”
(LMPs) which denote the market-clearing price at each of the points of withdrawal from the system.
When LMPs are identical everywhere, the system is said to be uncongested.

4

Figure I: U.S. Electrical Grid as Power Control Areas
(a) Approximate PCA Configuration in 1999
NPCC
MAPP
WECC
SPP

MAIN

MAAC

ECAR

SERC
ERCOT
FRCC

(b) PCAs by Market Dispatch in 2012
MISO
NEISO
NYISO
SPP

PJM

CAISO
ERCOT

Note: Thick black lines in Panel A denote Interconnection boundaries, red lines denote
NERC Reliability Regions. Boundaries are approximate.

5

.1

.2

Share of National Capacity
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure II: Share of Generating Capacity Dispatched by Markets

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006
Year

2008

2010

2012

Note: Vertical red lines indicate dates of transition to market-based dispatch.

back one’s allocated output at the real time price (Wolak (2000); Hortacsu and Puller
(2008); Ito and Reguant (2016); Cramton (2003); Jha and Wolak (2013); Borenstein
et al. (2008), among others).
As of 2012, 60 of the 98 PCAs operating in 1999 had adopted market dispatch,
either during the initial creation of a new market or as part of the expansion of
an existing market. Adopting market dispatch is a discrete change in the decision
algorithm that allocates output to generating units: the local PCA cedes control of
their transmission system to an Independent System Operator, who conducts the
auctions.
All told, there have been 15 distinct events in which PCAs have transitioned to
market dispatch overnight. Figure II denotes each of these events with a vertical red
line, and shows that over the period of study markets have expanded from covering
about 10% of capacity to roughly 60%. The remaining areas have retained their traditional dispatch methods, though a number have continued to explore the possibility
of joining existing markets.5 This variation in market adoption forms the basis of
the empirical strategy for causal estimates by allowing the comparison of changes in
allocative efficiency following the transition to market dispatch relative to areas that
have not undergone such changes over the same period.
5
For example, the East Kentucky Power Cooperative joined PJM on 6/1/2013, there was a
major southern expansion of MISO on 12/18/2013, and Pacificorp has formally begun to explore
the possibility of joining CAISO.

6

The transition from command-and-control to market dispatch is related to, but
distinct from the movement toward restructured electricity markets in the United
States (Joskow and Schmalensee (1988)). In particular, the changes to dispatch and
transmission described thus far were undertaken by the Federal government.6 The end
of cost-of-service regulation of vertically-integrated IOUs was initiated by states. It
is important to distinguish between these developments, for although all states that
adopted restructuring legislation eventually adopted market dispatch, many areas
began participating in these markets while preserving their traditional regulatory
framework.7 I therefore focus my attention on the cost of generating electricity,
rather than the retail price of power delivered to consumers, whose relationship with
their local utility may or may not have changed over this period.
Vulnerability to the exercise of market power has been a primary focus of the
research on wholesale electricity markets to date. From the UK (Wolfram (1999);
Wolak and Patrick (1997)), Spain (Ito and Reguant (2016); Reguant (2014)), New
Zealand and Australia (Wolak (2012)) abroad, to California (Borenstein et al. (2002);
Bushnell et al. (2008); Joskow and Kahn (2002); Puller (2007); Borenstein (2002)),
PJM (Mansur (2001, 2008)), and Texas (Hortacsu and Puller (2008)) in the United
States, one could fairly characterize these vulnerabilities as robust. Against these
losses, there is sparse evidence of allocative efficiency gains from market dispatch, with
the notable exception of Mansur and White (2012) who study one of the 15 market
expansion events described above. Instead, liberalization studies have focused on
state-led deregulatory events to estimate within-plant changes: reduced maintenance
time (Davis and Wolfram (2012),Cropper et al. (2011)), labor and fuel costs (Fabrizio
et al. (2007); Cicala (2015)), and capital intensity of pollution abatement equipment
(Fowlie (2010); Cicala (2015)). On the other hand, the actual rate at which heat
is converted to electricity (heat rate) has proven largely unaffected by the nature of
regulatory oversight (Fabrizio et al. (2007); Wolfram (2005); Cropper et al. (2011)).
While market imperfections are certainly cause for concern, evidence of their existence is not proof of their inferiority. The relevant question for policymakers considering what to do about the current regulatory situation is: do markets (including all
of their flaws) outperform the alternative methods for deciding which plants should
6
The ERCOT system in Texas is the exception because this Interconnection does not cross
state lines, and is therefore not subject to FERC jurisdiction on many matters. However, Texas
does participates in the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), which has been
designated by FERC as the electricity reliability organization for the United States.
7
Examples include Indiana, West Virginia, and parts of Kentucky in the Pennsyvania-JerseyMaryland (PJM) Interconnection, most of the Midwest ISO (MISO), and all of the Southwest Power
Pool (SPP).

7

operate in order to satisfy demand for electricity?
3

Measuring Welfare in Electricity Generation

The approach I use to measure welfare combines the within-PCA methods of Borenstein et al. (2002) (BBW), with the Mansur and White (2012) view of gains from
trade across PCAs. Each PCA has a narrowly defined “merit order” in which the
fixed, installed generating capacity is lined up in order of increasing marginal cost
(effectively a supply curve for the area). Each generating unit has a nameplate rating
that constrains the maximum amount of electricity it is capable of generating at any
moment. Its cost per MWh is based on its heat rate, cost of fuel, and emissions fees,
making the supply curve a step function.8 “Economic dispatch” solves this constrained
cost minimization problem to meet a given level of demand without damaging plants
by exceeding their nameplate capacity.
To fix ideas, let Cpt (Qpt ) denote the observed cost of producing total quantity of
electricity Qpt in PCA p at hour t, which has Npt MW of capacity installed. Further,
∗
define Cpt
(Qpt ) as the cost of generation from the Qpt lowest-cost MW of PCA p in
merit order, indexed by i:
∗
Cpt
(Qpt )

=

Qpt
X

cpt (i)

(1)

i=0

where Qpt =

Npt
X

qpt (i);

qpt (i) ∈ [0, 1] ∀ i

i=0

where cpt (i) is the cost of dispatching the ith lowest cost MW in PCA p at time t.9
PNpt
cpt (i)qpt (i) =
Thus the observed cost of generation can be written as Cpt (Qpt ) = i=0
0
cpt qpt , the inner product of costs and production as vectors in the merit order.
Out of Merit Costs
I will refer to a unit as operating “out of the merit order” when it is called on to operate
to help meet Qpt MW of demand although it is not one of the Qpt cheapest MW of
installed capacity based on its marginal cost. There are a number of reasons to fire
up units that are out of merit: Plants must occasionally go off-line for maintenance,
8
Labor costs are unavailable, but relatively small compared to fuel costs. Commercial vendors of
unit production cost data (such as SNL or Platts) often include a 10-20% markup over fuel costs to
account for labor, operations, and maintenance costs.
9
The unit dispatch problem partitions the Npt MW of capacity into distinct units (with common
costs), and chooses how much to generate from each unit subject to nameplate rating constraints.
While this is an identical problem, indexing MW according to i creates a stable metric of the merit
order, while indexing units themselves may shuffle as fuel prices vary.

8

or are forced to shutdown unannounced, causing more expensive units to fill the
gap. Transmission constraints may make it infeasible for the least-cost units to meet
local demand. Large units require time and fuel to substantially change their output
(ramping and start-up costs) which may exceed the cost of firing up a more nimble
out of merit unit (Reguant (2014); Cullen (2011); Mansur (2008)). Large units may
also continue operating when out of merit to prevent having to pay larger start-up
costs from a cold start (idling). These are all real physical constraints that make out
of merit operation the true cost-minimizing allocation of output. The cost of these
constraints can be measured by the incrementally higher cost unit that must be used:
∗
Cpt (Qpt ) − Cpt
(Qpt ).
This can be seen in Panel A of Figure III, which plots a hypothetical (smooth)
supply curve against the perfectly inelastic demand that must be met in a particular
moment to avoid a blackout. The welfare costs of dispatching units out of merit is
simply the additional cost of output from these units relative to dispatching the lowest
cost units installed in the area. It is important to emphasize that these are the gross
costs, which are often incurred to avoid the even larger costs of following the strict
merit order.
This out of merit loss is also the loss borne when market power is exerted. A
firm may increase the market clearing price by taking an economical unit “down for
maintenance,” forcing an otherwise out of merit unit to operate (presumably to collect
rents on co-owned inframarginal units). Because demand is completely inelastic (in
real-time operations), the welfare loss is the incremental operating costs caused by
taking economical units offline (Borenstein et al. (2002)).
It should be clear that legitimate maintenance, congestion, etc. is observationally
equivalent from a welfare perspective to the exertion of market power–they differ by
intent only. Mansur (2008) and Reguant (2014) note that failing to account for startup and ramping costs will lead one to over-attribute the gap between the merit order
and observed dispatch to market power when only accounting for normal maintenance
and outages. The same is true when failing to account for transmission constraints
(Ryan (2013); Borenstein et al. (2000)). I will side-step these issues completely by
abstaining from assigning motives to the observed gap between idealized economic
dispatch and what is observed in the data. Firms may well continue to exert market
power, but also reduce downtime among low-cost units, as in Davis and Wolfram
(2012)–my interest is in how the net of these impacts brings a PCA closer or farther
away from the merit order.10
10

The critique of Mansur (2008) remains if unit operators fail to account for the wear of ramping

9

Gains From Trade
When importing electricity from another area, one saves having to fire up a more
expensive unit at the cost of the imports. When exporting, one gains any additional
revenue beyond that required to generate the power. Panel B of Figure III considers
the gains from trade between two areas as in Mansur and White (2012), effectively
a fixed-factor Heckscher-Ohlin model. The red line continues to represent demand
in the “Local” PCA of Panel A. Superimposed on this is the mirror image supply
and demand figure from a “Foreign” PCA. The width of the x-axis is the sum of the
demand of the two areas. If the two areas were to operate in autarky, the cost of
meeting this demand would be the area under the upper envelope of the supply curves,
meeting at the solid demand line. These two areas would reduce their joint production
costs if they instead produced at the vertical dotted line, the lower envelope of their
supply curves, as in any standard trade example.
The challenge in measuring these surpluses in this setting is that I do not observe
with whom a PCA is trading–these simple bilateral examples do not exist in an interconnected electricity grid with indistinguishable electrons. Instead, I lean heavily
on the following argument: PCAs pay (and are compensated) at the margin of their
merit order. When I observe an area importing electricity (as in the Local PCA of
Panel B), I infer that if they were paying more (less) than their marginal cost of generating, they would reduce (increase) their imports until these costs were in balance.
Similarly, an exporting area must at least be covering its production costs–and if they
are more than doing so, they would increase their exports until the analogous balance
were reached. This may seem strong in the presence of transmission constraints until
one considers these costs as part of the exchange: The inability to equate marginal
generation costs reflects the shadow price of insufficient transmission. Thus I assume
an importing area equates its marginal generation cost to the transmission-inclusive
price of electricity generated elsewhere (and similarly for exporting areas). With this
assumption I can measure PCA p’s gains from trade in hour t with load Lpt , as Spt by
looking at each PCA individually without needing to know the source and destination
of each MWh traded:
∗
∗
Spt = Cpt
(Lpt ) − Cpt
(Qpt ) + cpt (i = Qpt ) ∗ [Qpt − Lpt ]

(2)

The difference of the first two terms is the cost of meeting load according to the
once facing prices in a wholesale market. In this case short-run operations will move closer to the
merit order, but damage to the units will go unaccounted for. Such activities have been mentioned
during personal interviews with market participants–but those costs did not remain hidden for long.

10

merit order, as if in autarky, net of the merit order cost of the actually observed
production. The rectangle between supply and demand is formed at the marginal
merit order cost of production, on net yielding the triangle below the supply curve
between supply and demand in an area that is importing, and the triangle above the
supply curve between demand and supply for an exporting area.

11

Figure III: Welfare Measurement in Electricity Markets
(a) Out of Merit Losses

(b) Gains From Trade

12

4

Data

This study draws from a disparate and incongruous set of data sources to synthesize
an essentially complete characterization of U.S. electricity production at the hourly,
generating unit level from 1999-2012 (over 530 million unit-hour observations). This
section presents an overview of the data, while the details of data construction can
be found in the Data Appendix.
Hourly Load Data
The demand side consists of a balanced panel of hourly load (consumption) from the
98 major U.S. power control areas (PCAs) that dispatched power plants in 1999 to
meet demand. This data has been reported annually to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission on Form 714, “Annual Electric Balancing Authority and Planning Area Report.” Record-keeping challenges at FERC requires this data to be
supplemented with equivalent data from regional authorities and markets (Western
Interconnection, ERCOT, PJM, NYISO, NEISO, and NERC). In instances that original administrative data is unavailable (or reporting policies/boundaries change), I
employ LASSO to estimate missing demand based on weather, population, and employment. Combined with cross-validation to maximize out-of-sample accuracy, this
procedure delivers predictions within 4% of the realized values on average (see the
Data Appendix). Small municipal authorities that do not actually conduct dispatch
of fossil- or nuclear-powered plants are added to the load of their principal suppliers
or customers, yielding 98 total PCAs.
Figure IV summarizes the electricity load data. The US consumes a bit less
than 4,000 TWh (billions of kilowatt-hours) annually. Panel A shows that electricity
consumption increased from 1999 until the Great Recession, and was relatively flat
through 2012. Panel A also highlights the seasonal nature of electricity usage: summer
cooling and winter heating can increase usage by over a third of temperate seasonal
usage on a month-to-month basis, with much larger swings during peak usage. Panel
B plots hourly usage over the course of the week, averaged over the 14-year study
period. Here too there are large swings in usage both over the course of the day and
the week. The key fact to remember when interpreting these figures is that production
must move exactly in sync with these demand swings, and that utilities must have
enough generation capacity to meet demand at the moment of peak usage. Thus every
downward swing also represents vast quantities of generating capacity becoming idle.
As a demonstration of real-time patterns of demand, I have animated one year’s
worth of hourly load here. This animation shows the East-to-West flow of electricity
13

demand as usage follows local clocks. It also reflects the daily and seasonal patterns
shown in Figure IV, while highlighting the substantial variation around these averages:
peak demand can be as much as 2.5 times average annual usage, can be quite persistent
during summer months in the South and Southern Plains, and generally varies less
in temperate areas of the Pacific Northwest.
Hourly Generation Data
The supply side is based on data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA),
merged with hourly gross generation reported to the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) with Continuous Emissions Monitoring Systems (CEMS), as well as daily production at nuclear-powered units from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
Boilers from the EPA are matched to generators’ monthly net generation and heat
rates via Forms EIA-767 and EIA-923, “Annual Steam-Electric Plant Operation and
Design Data / Power Plant Operations Report.” Hourly production in the data is
the gross generation from CEMS scaled by the ratio of monthly gross-to-net generation from EIA at the unit level. I then merge this data on heat rates and hourly
production with coal and oil fuel costs under a non-disclosure agreement with the
EIA (from Forms EIA-423, “Monthly Report of Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric
Plants,” EIA-923 and Form FERC-423, “Monthly Report of Cost and Quality of Fuels
for Electric Plants”). This is shipment-level data, reported monthly by generating facilities with a combined capacity greater than 50MW. I use spot-market coal prices to
measure the opportunity cost of coal burned rather than contract prices. Natural gas
prices are from 65 trading hubs around the country reported by Platts, Bloomberg,
and NGI (not EIA), and are quoted daily. Plants are linked to their nearest trading
hub along the pipeline network. Areas with emissions markets for Sulfur and Nitrogen Oxides include the cost of pollution based on measured emissions and monthly
market prices from BGC Environmental Brokerage Services.
Generation from hydro-powered units either comes directly from from the source
(i.e. Tennessee Valley Authority, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, etc.), or is based on the
streamflow of the nearest downstream gage from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Streamgage Network (linked through analysis of the National Hydrography Database). Because the cost of reservoir-based hydropower is the opportunity cost of the water, I
price hydropower based on the marginal cost of fossil generation in the merit order
that is being supplanted. Run-of-river hydro is priced at zero. Hydropower units
>10MW were classified as reservoir or run-of-river based on internet searches and/or
satellite images.

14

Figure IV: Electricity Load over Time

250

300

TWh

350

400

(a) Total Monthly Load

Jan−1998Jan−2000Jan−2002Jan−2004Jan−2006Jan−2008Jan−2010Jan−2012
Month−Year

350

400

GWh

450

500

(b) Average Load by Hour of Week

0

24

48

72
96
Hour of Week

15

120

144

168

Hourly generation is unavailable from a number of smaller fossil-fired units (whose
net generation rarely exceeds 3% by NERC region-year). Power from these units is
distributed across the hours of the month in an intuitive manner: having produced nW
MWh in a month, where W is the unit’s nameplate capacity, I assume that the unit
produced at maximum capacity during the n hours of highest demand observed over
the course of the month. This replicates the behavior of a dispatcher who employs
a threshold rule of when to generate from a unit (assuming no start-up costs or
ramping constraints), while allowing observed behavior to dictate what threshold was
employed each month.
Figure V presents the aggregate annual statistics for electricity generation in the
US. Coal supplied the energy for roughly half of the electricity generated from 1999 2012, but has been in decline since 2007. From that time, natural gas has grown from
rough parity with nuclear (20%) to 30%, almost entirely at the expense of coal-fired
generation. Following a nearly three-fold increase from 1999 - 2008, Panel B shows
that fossil fuel expenditures fell by approximately 50% from the peak in 2008 from the
combined effects of reduced demand overall and the massive reallocation of output
to units burning cheaper gas thanks to the advent of hydraulic fracturing (Hausman
and Kellogg (2015); Linn et al. (2014); Knittel et al. (2014)). Fossil fuel expenditures
averaged about $72B/year over these 14 years, thus the complete dataset tracks the
burning of $1T of fuel at the plant-generation unit-hour level.
Matching Supply and Demand
Because the supply data is built up from microdata independently from the demand
side, it is important to ensure congruence between the data sources–there is nothing
institutional about their reporting to ensure they agree. Beginning with the 1999
configuration of the electrical grid, I match plants to their initial PCA from the EPA
eGRID database. New capacity since that time is matched to PCA either directly
or based on historical utility service territory in the case that the PCA territory has
changed. These associations are then checked based on power plant names reported
by PCAs in FERC 714. I then compare the implied monthly totals from the supply
side of the data against those reported by the PCAs to FERC. In total, about 99%
of reported generation from FERC 714 can be accounted for in the supply-side data.
About 3% of net generation does not fit neatly in to a single power control area
because multiple PCAs report a share of output from large plants as their own. In
these cases, the plant is assigned to the PCA with greatest dispatch authority.
Figure VI breaks down generation by data source, and shows the quality of the

16

Figure V: Annual Net Generation and Fuel Cost by Source

0

1000

TWh
2000

3000

4000

(a) Net Generation

2000

2003

2006
Year
Nuclear
Natural Gas
Hydro

2009

2012

Coal
Oil
Wind

0

Billions of $
50
100

150

(b) Fuel Cost

2000

2003

2006
Year
Coal
Oil

17

2009
Natural Gas

2012

match between supply and demand. The top black line in Panel A is identical to the
total monthly load shown in Panel A of Figure IV. After totaling the generation observed (or calculated) based on high-frequency data, the remaining numbers reported
at the monthly level result in totals that almost exactly match the demand side of the
data. Panel B gives a closer view of what is missing by calculating the gap (as imports
or exports) every hour across PCAs, then adding them separately up to the monthly
level, measuring the volume of trade across areas. The first striking statistic is that
roughly 90% of generation is effectively consumed in its local PCA–while PCAs are
interconnected, they continue to largely produce energy for their own consumption.
To my knowledge, these statistics are new: regulatory bodies typically report the net
flow of electricity between areas, which fails to reflect the real-time interdependence
among PCAs (or lack thereof).
The remaining gap between imports and exports as I observe them is due to
imports from outside of the US (which have grown over this period to about 1%
of supply (Energy Information Administration (2012) Table 2.13). Based on the
framework presented in Section 3, not observing this generation effectively values it
as an import from outside of each PCA, which is valued as displaced local generation.
The production costs and exporter surpluses (mostly from Canada) are outside of the
data.
5

Estimating Counterfactual Operations

I use the staggered timing of market creation and expansion to arrive at an estimate
of the causal impact of the transition to market-based electricity dispatch. These
events are defined as the PCAs formally ceding control of their transmission system
to an Independent System Operator, who conducts auctions to allocate output to
generating units. As demonstrated in Figure II, these are discrete events–typically
demarcated prominently in the history of each market. These events suggest a DD
approach, using areas without regulatory change to estimate counterfactual outcomes
after one has adjusted for common shocks and time-invariant differences:
ypt = τ Dpt + γp + δtr + εpt

(3)

where ypt is the logged value of the outcome variable, and Dpt is an indicator of
market dispatch. This approach may also allow PCA-specific coefficients on flexible
measures of demand (taken to be exogenous since consumers do not face the real-time
cost of electricity). 11 The time fixed effects δtr are included at the date-hour-region
11

This would account for heterogenous time-invariant relationships between the outcome vari-

18

Figure VI: Annual Net Generation and Fuel Cost by Source

0

100

TWh
200

300

400

(a) Monthly Net Generation by Data Source

Jan−1998Jan−2000Jan−2002Jan−2004Jan−2006Jan−2008Jan−2010Jan−2012
Month−Year
Nuclear
Wind
Monthly

Hydro
CEMS Hourly
Load

20

25

TWh / Month
30

35

40

(b) Monthly Trade Across PCAs

Jan−1998 Jan−2000 Jan−2002 Jan−2004 Jan−2006 Jan−2008 Jan−2010 Jan−2012
Month−Year
Sum of Hourly PCA Imports

19

Sum of Hourly PCA Exports

level to account for spatial and time-varying unobservables, particularly with respect
to fuel prices (Cicala (2015)). τ measures the average effect of market dispatch,
and should be interpret as an Average Treatment on the Treated (ATT)–it measures
the effect in the areas that have adopted market dispatch. Interpreting this as an
Average Treatment Effect (ATE) requires the stronger assumption that PCAs in the
South and West have the same potential benefits from market integration–rather than
the continued business-as-usual assumption required for the validity of the ATT. One
should keep in mind that markets themselves are heterogenous, and their rules change
over time. Thus a single “treatment effect” of markets as conceived here takes the
average of these various institutional changes, compared to the various institutions
that preceded the transition to market dispatch.
A Policy Function Approach to Counterfactuals
The causal effect of markets on gains from trade or out of merit dispatch is the difference between an observed outcome in a market area and what that outcome would
have been but for the market–holding production capacity, fuel costs, and demand
fixed. Although DD forms a natural starting point for the analysis, it is insufficient to
simply estimate the change in outcomes following market introduction, even relative
to areas without any regulatory change: Within a PCA, outcomes (holding demand
fixed) are confounded by varying fuel prices over time, which change the cost of operating a given unit out of merit, or the value of offset production through trade.
Contemporaneous differences across areas are confounded by the fact that PCAs differ in their installed capacity, and are therefore differentially affected by common
time-varying shocks.
To illustrate this problem, Figure VII presents the import gains of the “local”
supply curve from Figure III. The lighter grey addition represents the import gains
realized in this same area, but under a different set of fuel prices, represented by the
dashed curve. Though there may be no differences in production between these two
curves, the difference in prices yields different gains from trade. If one curve were
realized during regulation, and the other after the introdutction of markets, a simple
difference would indicate that gains from trade had changed, although there had been
no change in behavior. Because each PCA differs in the composition of units, common
fuel price shocks affect areas differently, comparing changes in neighboring areas will
able and demand–the fact that some areas are more prone to congestion in times of high demand,
for example. In addition, controlling for demand also accounts for the possibility that differences
in outcomes across areas might be driven by regional trends (such as population) instead of how
dispatchers allocate production taking demand as given.

20

Figure VII: Cost Changes Unrelated to Deregulation Confound Counterfactual Estimates

Note: This figure shows how measured gains from trade change with the price of fuel, holding
demand and traded quantities constant. Using gains from trade in period t0 as the counterfactual
for what would have happened in t in the absence of treatment would yield a predicted change in
outcome in spite of no behavioral change.

fail to correct for this confounding.
I propose a policy function approach that builds upon the “generation regressions”
of Davis and Hausman (2016) to overcome this issue: I use historical patterns of unitlevel production given load, unit capacity, and position in the merit order to estimate
predicted allocations of production.12 I apply these predicted quantities to observed
unit costs to estimate what production costs would have been if not for treatment.
Let a policy function for PCA p in year y be the probability that the PCA orders
generation from the ith MW of capacity of the merit order in hour t, conditional upon
covariates Xipt (such as load, month of year, hour of day, and nameplate capacity of
the unit producing the ith MW) and treatment, Dpt
ψpy (i, Xipt , Dpt ) = P r [qpt (i) = 1|Xipt , Dpt ]
12

(4)

Here, policy refers to a rule that maps states in to actions, without any reference to the optimality
of that rule, as is typically implied in the use of this term in the control theory literature.

21

With this notation, a PCA can be expected to produce the total amount
E(Qpt |Xipt , Dpt ) =

Npt
X

ψpy (i, Xipt , Dpt )

i=0

Expected costs of production are based on the inner product of costs and the policy
function in vector form, cpt 0ψpt (Xpt , Dpt ).
To operationalize these policy functions for causal inference, some assumptions
are required. To economize on notation I adopt the ‘Potential Outcomes’ framework
popularized by Rubin (1974), in which a generic outcome of can be thought of taking
on value Ypt0 in the absence of treatment, and Ypt1 if treated. Thus estimating the
causal impact when Ypt1 is observed requires estimating Ypt0 , which is not. Here the
outcomes being evaluated are functions of production allocations and costs, capacities,

D
and demand: Y D = F qD
pt , Xpt , such as gains from trade as denoted in equation
(2).
Assumption 1. Demand, unit production costs and capacities are invariant to treatment:
0
1
Xipt
= Xipt
= Xipt

This assumption narrows the set of potential outcomes to focus on the question,
how does market dispatch affect the allocative efficiency of meeting demand? Realtime pricing for retail customers is nearly nonexistent during the sample period, so
that consumers’ behavior is invariant to hourly production costs. Although I have
shown elsewhere (Cicala (2015)) that prices paid for coal (but not gas) depend on
plant-level regulations, this study focuses on allocative efficiency changes–how production moves across power plants holding costs fixed. The brief time horizon evaluated
after the introduction of market dispatch is intended to hold the capital stock fixed
so that the observed supply function for each area is invariant to treatment.

22

Assumption 2. Parallel trends in unobservables and evolution of the policy function:
Ypt0 = F q0pt , Xpt






0
0
, Xpt + ...
, Xpt + F q0pt , Xpt − F ψp,y
= F ψp,y−1
|
{z
}
Contemporaneous Error


0
0
+ F ψp,y
, Xpt − F ψp,y−1
, Xpt
{z
}
|
Change in Policy Function

0
= F ψp,y−1
, Xpt + δtr + γp + υpt
where E (υpt ) = 0
This assumption forms the basis of the estimation strategy, using the allocation of
production based on operations in year y−1 to predict operations in year y. There are
two forms of error with this approach: the difference between the true outcome and
the value based on the contemporaneous policy function, and the difference induced by
the evolution of policy functions from year-to-year. Assumption 2 decomposes these
errors in to a PCA-specific, time-invariant component, a regional contemporaneous
shock, and noise. This allows, for example, for out-of-sample predictions based on
last year’s operations to persistently be off by an amount that varies by PCA, while
also accounting for contemporaneous regional shocks to fuel prices.

Ypt0 ,



0
0
ψp,y−1
− ψ̂p,y−1



|=

Assumption 3. Conditional Independence of Treatment for Control Outcomes and
Policy Function Measurement Error
Dpt |Xpt

That treatment is conditionally independent of control outcomes allows the identification of an average treatment on the treated (ATT). The second part of this
assumption ensures that using estimated values of counterfactual outcomes will not
bias estimates of the treatment effect. Rather than including these estimates as a
generated regressor, this assumption allows a modified DD-type estimating equation
in which the dependent variable is the departure from the outcome predicted by the
estimated policy function:
0
Ypt − F (ψp,y−1
, Xpt ) = τ Dpt + δtr + γp + υpt

(5)

There are a number of potential threats to the validity of this research design.
First and foremost, the stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA) requires
23

that the treatment status of markets that become PCAs does not affect the outcomes
of other areas. This will be violated, for example, if the expansion of PJM facilitates
the delivery of electricity from the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), which is not
dispatched by markets. Using TVA as a control PCA will understate the true effect of
market dispatch when their exports change due to the policy change. This estimation
framework also assumes that outcomes change immediately with the change in treatment status. However, sudden massive changes tend not to be conducive to keeping
the lights on. The pre-period may be contaminated if PCAs began to change their
dispatch policies in preparation for the transition to markets. On the other hand, the
treatment effect may take time to fully manifest itself as PCAs learn how to use the
market to improve their operations (or exert market power).
As is standard in DD research designs, unrelated, differential trends between treatment and control also threaten the validity of estimates. Aside from including PCAspecific trends, the policy function approach mitigates this issue by transforming the
dependent variable in to the residual of behavior predicted by the prior year’s policy.
This kicks the threat of differential trends up one level (for quantities, not prices),
requiring an unrelated trend in how well last year’s policy matches that of this year.
Such problems become evident with event study-style estimates leading up to the
time of treatment.
On interpretation, the supply curves I construct are based on fuel and emissions
prices, while variable labor, operations, and maintenance costs are ignored. Although
these other costs are small relative to total variable cost, they create distance between
my measured merit order and the true marginal cost of power. The treatment effect
on the costs I observe may be well-measured, but it will be a biased estimate of the
overall change in allocative efficiency if something about the transition to market
dispatch changes these errors–such as reduced labor costs in markets as in Fabrizio
et al. (2007). The small share of non-fuel costs multiplied by the modest impact of
restructuring renders the potential magnitude of this bias quite small. There is likely
to be greater measurement error concerning exact fuel prices and unit capacities. I
reduce these errors to the extent possible by using daily gas prices at geographically
disperse hubs (to account for pipeline congestion), and by using the implied capacity
based on observed operations from CEMS (maximum hourly net generation by season)
rather than the round figures reported to EIA. Again, these errors bias my causal
estimates only to the extent that they are non-stationary and correlated with market
dispatch.
Regarding inference, estimates using this approach are presented with standard
24

errors calculated by block-bootstrapping PCA-months, with regular DD estimates
clustered at the PCA-month. This reflects the thought experiment that the observed
data (a complete census of operations) is drawn from a super-population of operations
to allow for the inference of potential outcomes–and that each months’ fluctuations
in demand allow for an independent observation for each PCA. If one believes that
there are truly really only 98 (PCA) independent observations, the reported standard
errors roughly double. Conversely, the standard errors become infinitesimal if one
follows the existing literature, having studied one area at a time with independence
assumed across fine time units.
Machine Learning Estimation of the Policy Functions
The policy function approach removes the role of fuel price variation in the estimation
of counterfactual outcomes for a given allocation of output: Instead it is the quantities themselves that are predicted, then applied to the observed prices to calculate
counterfactual behavior.
Estimating the policy functions requires balancing flexibility and risk of overfitting. On one hand, the probability of running a unit is a complex, unknown function
of the variables system operators use to make decisions–simple approximations are
unlikely to deliver high-quality predictions of behavior. On the other hand, overlyflexible specifications may provide the illusion of superior fit, but perform poorly outof-sample. Since the estimated treatment effect comes from changes in the quality of
fit between predicted and observed behavior, it is particularly important to prevent
overfitting from showing up as illusory treatment effects.
This is a pure prediction problem, for which recent tools from machine learning are
well-suited. I use the “random forest” algorithm of Breiman (2001) as implemented by
Wright and Ziegler (2016). This nonparametric estimation algorithm draws bootstrap
samples of the data and calculates means of the outcome variable for random partitions of the explanatory variables. It then aggregates these weak predictions across
the bootstrap samples to form robust estimates without functional form assumptions.
More formally, for PCA p and year y − 1 with sample size Np,y−1 , random forest
draws Np,y−1 pairs (qipt , Xipt ) with replacement from that PCA-year. It then “grows”
a regression tree as follows: starting from a single node, it randomly selects a set of
variables from Xp,y−1 ⊆ Rp where p is the dimension of Xp,y−1 . It then splits the data
along these dimensions at cut-points that make the subsequent nodes as homogenous
as possible with respect to the outcome (Breiman et al. (1984)), forming two nodes.
Each of these nodes are subsequently split using the same method until a pre-specified

25

(and here, cross-validated) number of observations remain at each final node, referred
to as leaves (or perfect uniformity is achieved). Using θm to denote the random vector
used to draw the bootstrap sample and determine which explanatory variables are
used to split at each node of tree m, the tree produces a set of leaves l = 1, ..., L that
partition the space of explanatory variables (Rp ) in to rectangular subspaces, Rl . The
prediction of the tree given a particular x is obtained by averaging over the outcomes
of the observations in the leaf to which x belongs, l(x, θm ). Following Meinshausen
(2006), the prediction for a vector of covariates x can be thought of as a weighted
mean of the entire sample of the original data, depending upon each observation’s
inclusion in the bootstrapped sample and terminal leaf position
Np,y−1

ψ̂m (x) =

X

wi (x, θm )qi

i=1

where

1 Xi ∈ Rl(x,θm )
wi (x, θm ) = PNp,y−1 
1 Xj ∈ Rl(x,θm )
j=1
with 1 {· } denoting an indicator function that is one when the statement in the
braces is true, zero otherwise. The prediction from a single tree provides a poor
prediction–it does not use all of the underlying data and over-fits the data it does
use–Breiman (2001) shows that as the number of trees grown in this way increases,
the quality of out-of-sample predictions stabilizes.13 Continuing with the weightedaverage interpretation, one draws a number of iid θm vectors to grow M trees, then
calculates the final weights each observation receives in the final prediction as
M
1 X
wi (x, θm )
wi (x) =
M m=1

Predictions for policy functions are made out-of-sample for year y for data with
explanatory variables Xp,y by calculating
M Np,y−1
1 X X
ψ̂p,y−1 (Xp,y ) =
wi (Xp,y , θm )qi
M m=1 i=1
13

Scornet et al. (2015) establish the consistency of random forests grown in this way as estimators
of the conditional expectation function in the presence of an additive error. Wager and Athey
(2016) establish consistency and asymptotic normality results more broadly in the context of causal
inference using the unconfoundedness assumption for estimating treatment effects conditional upon
terminal leaf partitions, and review related results.

26

where each i indexes observations of the production data of PCA p in year y − 1.
The core motivation for methods such as random forest from the machine learning
literature has been its performance in out-of-sample prediction. This remains true in
this setting as well, as demonstrated in Figure VIII. The metric of performance here is
the out-of-sample residual sum of squares, divided by that of a simple OLS regression
of unit operations on the covariates used in the random forest estimation (separately
by PCA, including month and hour of day as dummies). The x-axis separates units by
their position in the merit order, as a percentile of costs of installed capacity for each
PCA-hour to create a common scale. The figure is constructed using data from areas
without market dispatch to show quality of fit in the control group. The dashed line
shows the performance of a more flexible OLS specification: a second-order polynomial
of all terms, estimated separately by PCA for each month and hour of day. While this
specification fits the data better than the simpler one, random forest far outperforms
throughout the merit order. It delivers a superior fit to observed operations uniformly
across the merit order, and is particularly good at predicting baseload and peaking
operations.
It is important to note that this estimation framework has been designed so that
all predicted values of the policy function come from out-of-sample estimates. The
treatment effect is based on changes in how well last year’s operations predict this
year’s operations. Using the change in how well observed behavior in year y − 1 fits
predictions estimated during year y − 1 against using year y − 1’s predictions for year
y risks baking-in an in-sample/out-of-sample change in fit.14 It also requires iterative
estimation of placebo treatment dates among areas that never receive treatment, an
exceptionally high computational burden in this setting (or the assumption of time
invariance of overfitting issues).
6

Results

Tables I through IV present the main results as Average Treatment on the Treated
estimates to measure the impact of market dispatch on allocative efficiency in electricity production. The first columns are based on straight DD estimates that includes
date-hour-region and PCA fixed effects. The second column flexibly controls for the
14

Burlig et al. (2016) deal with this issue by randomly selecting a placebo date to separate insample/out-of-sample data in the control group, then including an indicator of out-of-sample prediction. This makes the estimated treatment effect the relative deterioration of fit going from in-sample
to out-of-sample (non-contemporaneously). The approach taken here avoids making assumptions on
the in-sample/out-of-sample transitions, instead evaluating the quality of out-of-sample predictions
made from contemporaneous training periods. The cost of this approach is that a year of baseline
outcomes lacks out-of-sample predictions.

27

.6

RSS Relative to Simple OLS
.7
.8
.9

1

Figure VIII: Relative Prediction Quality of Random Forest in Control
Group

0

20

40
60
Percentile of Merit Order
Flexible OLS

80

100

Random Forest

Notes: This figure plots the relative residual sum of squares (RSS) based on out-of-sample
predictions of random forest and a flexible OLS specification where the numeraire is the
RSS of an OLS specification with linear terms and indicators for month and hour of day.
Explanatory variables include: position in the merit order, nameplate capacity, and load.
All predictions are estimated separately by PCA.

28

effect of load on the outcome variables (allowing a different slope for each quartile of
each PCA’s load distribution). This permits each area to have persistent idiosyncratic
relationships between demand and how it goes about meeting that demand with out
of merit generation and trade. The third column adds PCA-specific time trends.
The final column transforms the outcome variable to be the difference between the
observed outcome and that predicted by the policy function, as described in Section
5.
All specifications also include separate dummies for greater than 24 months prior,
and greater than 24 months after the transition to markets. This serves two functions: For the first three specifications, this prevents long-term responses to market
dispatch (and potential confounders) from loading on to the short-term DD estimates.
For the policy function estimates, “treatment” only occurs when predicting behavior
for a period with a different status of market dispatch. I predict from the year before
dispatch out two years afterwards (and year-on-year otherwise). Subsequent predictions are based on behavior after markets have begun, making treatment effectively
an impulse during this initial window. A post-24-month indicator allows this new
period to have a different mean than pre-treatment. Changes in observation counts
between these tables indicates the extent to which PCAs operate exactly according to
my measure of the merit order: zeroes are dropped in the logarithmic specifications
when the merit order is followed so that no generation is out of merit. The drop in
observations between the DD and policy function specifications in Tables I through
IV is because the baseline period is held out to ensure all observations for the policy
function estimates are from out-of-sample calculations.15
Beginning with quantities, Table I indicates a roughly 10% increase in traded volumes following the adoption of market dispatch. Because these numbers look PCAby-PCA, an increase in exports in one area will be complemented with increases in
imports in other areas, but not show up additively in the coefficients–and thus do
not double-count trade volumes. These estimates are relatively stable across specifications, and do not change in a statistically significant manner when using policy
functions to predict counterfactual operations. This is also true for out of merit
generation, with the exception of a drop when including PCA-specific trends. However, estimates return to their original levels in the final specification, suggesting the
coarser linear trend projects over changes that are more subtly accounted for with
15

To avoid losing the first year completely (which includes the New York and New England transitions), the held-out data is from every-other day for the first year. The impacts in these markets
were relatively large, but dropping them does not change the overall estimates substantially.

29

policy functions.
One striking measure of the work being done here by the policy functions is to
compare the R2 of the models across specifications. Removing the outcomes predicted
by the machine learning algorithm leaves substantially less variation in the dependent
variable, and the control variables have far less power in explaining the variation that
remains.
To ensure these results are not the artifacts of pre-existing time trends, Figure
IX estimates the model of column (2), including separate dummies for each month
measuring the time until (or since) market dispatch adoption. Note that this specification only measures the effect for the initial transition to market dispatch: performance changes among incumbents (with whom the area is trading) following market
expansion are not included. While not as clean as one might like for event study-style
figures, they make clear that the overall estimates are not due to long-term trends.
There is an overall level shift in Panel (a) corresponding with the onset of treatment,
while it appears the slide to a new, lower level of out of merit generation occurs over
a few months.
Tables III and IV estimate the welfare impacts of this reallocation of output based
on changes in production costs. These results indicate substantial impacts of market
dispatch: over 30 log points for gains from trade, and 20% reductions in out of
merit costs. One should note the substantial reduction in observations between the
two tables. This is because the specifications in Table III condition upon positive
gains from trade: in roughly 25% of PCA-hours, there is sufficiently little trade that
both supply and demand land on the same generator, which yields zero surplus (as
described in Section 3).
That the value of this trade exceeds the change in volume implies that there is
a substantial gap between the cost of electricity whose production increases versus
that being displaced–equating the marginal cost of power across areas would yield
zero net benefits of an additional MWh traded. Similarly for out of merit costs, these
results imply that it is the relatively expensive out of merit units whose production
is reduced by market dispatch.
Figure X presents the main results on cost reductions relative to the onset of
treatment. The additional volatility of coefficients in these figures relative to the
quantity estimates highlights the dependence of the welfare estimates on fuel prices
mentioned above: production costs scale with input prices in this Leontief setting, so
volatility in fuel prices is directly translated in to volatility of the welfare impacts of
a given change in behavior.
30

While there is a nice jump in gains from trade in Panel (a), longer-term trends
play a more prominent role in the overall shape of the plots than in Figure IX. That
differential trends in fuel prices might confound estimates as presented in Figure X
motivates the policy function estimates of Figure XI. This figure plots the analogous
event-time coefficients, but with the dependent variable transformed in to the residual
between observed outcomes and those predicted by the policy function. Although this
approach adds volatility relative to the straight DD estimates, it makes clear that the
estimated treatment effects are not due to differential trends: there are unambiguous
breaks in the series for both outcomes and an absence of pre-trends. The timing of
these breaks also correspond with the transition to markets, though reductions in out
of merit costs begin the month prior to market dispatch.
There are two possible contributing factors to why the results are lower for the
policy function approach for gains from trade. First, estimating a slightly smaller
shift in output naturally yields smaller cost reductions (less output is offset). Second,
as highlighted in Figure VII, the simple DD estimates are potentially confounded by
fuel price changes. Higher fuel prices steepen the supply curve, yielding greater gains
from trade compared to periods with lower prices. Straight DD estimates make such
comparisons, while the basis of the policy function approach is to compare a given
supply curve to itself.
With over $4.2B in trade surplus in market PCAs annually, applying the gains
from trade treatment uniformly over the treated territories is worth nearly $1B/year.
For out of merit costs, these estimates applied to the $10B accrued in market PCAs
raises the overall impact of this institutional change on cost reductions to about $3B
per year.

31

Table I: Market Dispatch on Log(Trade Volume)
Market Dispatch
Log(Load)
PCA Trend
Policy Function
Clusters
PCAs
R2
Obs.

(1)
0.125***
(0.021)

(2)
0.118***
(0.020)
Yes

(3)
0.095***
(0.021)
Yes
Yes

16464
16464
16464
98
98
98
0.557
0.595
0.613
12001882 12001882 12001882

(4)
0.098***
(0.029)
Yes
Yes
Yes
15910
98
0.099
11352820

Note: All specifications include PCA and Region-Date-Hour Fixed
Effects. Demand controls are PCA-specific. Standard errors clustered
by PCA-Month in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

Table II: Market Dispatch on Log(MWh Out of Merit)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Market Dispatch –0.111*** –0.113*** –0.061***
(0.018)
(0.017)
(0.017)
Log(Load)
Yes
Yes
PCA Trend
Yes
Policy Function
Clusters
16448
16448
16448
PCAs
98
98
98
2
R
0.841
0.852
0.863
Obs.
11648909 11648909 11648909

(4)
–0.117***
(0.019)
Yes
Yes
Yes
16430
98
0.157
11428353

Note: All specifications include PCA and Region-Date-Hour Fixed
Effects. Demand controls are PCA-specific. Standard errors clustered
by PCA-Month in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

32

Figure IX: Treatment Effects by Months to Market: Quantities

−.4

Log( Trade Volume )
−.2
0
.2

.4

(a) Log(Trade Volume)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

−.4

−.2

0

.2

.4

(b) Log(MWh Out of Merit)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

Note: These figures are based on regressing logged outcomes on a set of indicator variables for each
month until (after) the transition to market dispatch, PCA-specific controls for load,
date-hour-region and PCA fixed effects. The month prior to treatment is normalized to zero.
Confidence intervals are based on clustering at the PCA-month level.

33

Table III: Market Dispatch on Log(Gains from Trade)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Market Dispatch 0.312*** 0.350*** 0.258***
(0.045)
(0.042)
(0.041)
Log(Load)
Yes
Yes
PCA Trend
Yes
Policy Function
Clusters
16424
16424
16424
PCAs
98
98
98
R2
0.494
0.579
0.617
Obs.
8671235 8671235 8671235

(4)
0.191***
(0.048)
Yes
Yes
Yes
15814
98
0.125
8098935

Note: All specifications include PCA and Region-Date-Hour Fixed
Effects. Demand controls are PCA-specific. Standard errors clustered
by PCA-Month in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

Table IV: Market Dispatch on Log(Out of Merit Costs)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Market Dispatch –0.186*** –0.164***
–0.009
(0.034)
(0.033)
(0.033)
Log(Load)
Yes
Yes
PCA Trend
Yes
Policy Function
Clusters
16450
16450
16450
PCAs
98
98
98
2
R
0.775
0.793
0.812
Obs.
11648731 11648731 11648731

(4)
–0.179***
(0.033)
Yes
Yes
Yes
16444
98
0.302
11427266

Note: All specifications include PCA and Region-Date-Hour Fixed
Effects. Demand controls are PCA-specific. Standard errors clustered
by PCA-Month in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

34

Figure X: Treatment Effects by Months to Market: Welfare

−1

−.5

0

.5

1

(a) Log(Gains from Trade)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

−.5

0

.5

(b) Log(Out of Merit Costs)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

Note: These figures are based on regressing logged outcomes on a set of indicator variables for each
month until (after) the transition to market dispatch, PCA-specific controls for load,
date-hour-region and PCA fixed effects. The month prior to treatment is normalized to zero.
Confidence intervals are based on clustering at the PCA-month level.

35

Figure XI: Policy Function-Based Treatment Effects by Months to
Market

−.5

0

.5

1

(a) Log(Gains from Trade)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

−.5

0

.5

1

(b) Log(Out of Merit Costs)

−20

−10

0

10

20

Ave. Treatment on the Treated
95% Confidence Interval

Note: These figures are based on regressing the difference between logged outcomes and those
predicted by the policy function on a set of indicator variables for each month until (after) the
transition to market dispatch, PCA-specific controls for load, date-hour-region and PCA fixed
effects. The month prior to treatment is normalized to zero. Confidence intervals are based on
clustering at the PCA-month level.

36

Heterogeneity over the Year
The richness of the data allows for the examination of heterogeneous treatment effects
in order to better understand the forces driving the overall point estimate. In that
spirit, Figures XII and XIII interact the treatment variable with the day of the year,
and plot the corresponding coefficients. For quantities, Figure XII shows the strong
complementarity between the two measures: The biggest reductions in out of merit
generation occur during the low demand periods utilities use to perform maintenance
on their large units (and refuel nuclear-powered units). How do they manage to
reduce these outrage costs? Panel (a) shows that trade volumes increase during these
periods in market areas. This indicates that markets keep utilities from favoring
their own higher-cost units during maintenance, and instead coordinate supply of
lower-cost power across PCAs. These results complement the prior findings of Davis
and Wolfram (2012) that merchant nuclear units reduce their down-time overall by
showing that markets facilitate reducing production costs for the down-time that
remains.
For gains from trade, Figure XII shows how fuel prices are not simply confounders,
but also drivers of treatment effect heterogeneity. There are substantial increases in
gains from trade during peak summer months even with smaller trade volumes because more expensive units’ production is supplanted with traded generation. The
overall treatment effects measured earlier are in fact weighted averages of quite large
treatment effects during shoulder seasons and summer, but much smaller effects during the winter months.
Panel (b) highlights the key opposing forces at play when switching to a regulated
area: On one hand, generators have an increased incentive to ensure their low-cost
generators are available for production, on the other hand peak periods of demand
create the potential to profitably exercise market power by taking an economical
unit offline. Thus even though there is a reduction in the quantity of out of merit
generation in XII.b, the reduction in out of merit costs is low relative to the value of
offset generation (high during these peak periods). On net, diligent market monitoring
has made these strategies of withholding production more difficult, and the effect
overall is reduced out of merit costs throughout the year.

37

Figure XII: Treatment Effects by Day of Year: Quantities

−.2

Log( Trade Volume )
0
.2
.4

.6

(a) Log(Trade Volume)

0

100

200

95% Confidence Interval

300

400

Ave. Treatment on the Treated

−.4

−.2

0

.2

(b) Log(MWh Out of Merit)

0

100

200

95% Confidence Interval

300

400

Ave. Treatment on the Treated

Note: These figures are based on regressing logged outcomes on a set of indicator variables for each
day of the year interacted with market dispatch, along with date-hour-region and PCA fixed
effects. Confidence intervals are based on clustering at the PCA-month level.

38

Figure XIII: Treatment Effects by Day of Year: Policy Function Estimates

−1

−.5

0

.5

1

(a) Log(Gains From Trade)

0

100

200

95% Confidence Interval

300

400

Ave. Treatment on the Treated

−.8

−.6

−.4

−.2

0

.2

(b) Log(Out of Merit Costs)

0

100

200

95% Confidence Interval

300

400

Ave. Treatment on the Treated

Note: These figures are based on regressing the difference between logged outcomes and those
predicted by the policy function on a set of indicator variables for each month until (after) the
transition to market dispatch, PCA-specific controls for load, date-hour-region and PCA fixed
effects. The month prior to treatment is normalized to zero. Confidence intervals are based on
clustering at the PCA-month level.

39

7

Conclusion

In this paper I use the recent introduction of wholesale electricity markets in some
areas as a natural experiment to evaluate the performance of markets relative to the
policy-relevant counterfactual: centralized dispatch by a regulated private or government local monopolist. In constructing a fourteen year panel of hourly operations,
I am able to infer gains from trade at any moment of time based on the amount
of electricity being produced and consumed in an area, and the installed generating
capacity that might have been used to equate local supply and demand. Observing
production hourly at the generating unit level allows me to calculate the difference
between actual production costs, and those that would have been realized if only the
most economical (based on marginal fuel cost) units were utilized. I estimate how the
introduction of wholesale markets affected these two measures of welfare, interpreted
as the net impact of market power problems and improved coordination on production costs. I find that market-based dispatch has caused a roughly 20% increase in
the gains from trade due to reallocated production across power control areas, while
also reducing out of merit costs by 20%–a reduction in production costs of about $3B
per year.
While the estimated allocative efficiency improvements caused by market dispatch
are substantial, they are likely part of a much bigger story. These short-run estimates
are based on responses to institutional changes imposed on a grid that was built
for reliability rather than massive trans-regional exchange. This inherently imposes
an upper bound on the potential gains that might be observed with this estimation
strategy, but is a constraint that may be relaxed over time as locational marginal
prices reveal profitable transmission investments.
About 40% of electricity in the United States continues to be generated by plants
called upon to operate based on the decision-making of the local balancing authority.
Policymakers are therefore faced with the question of whether markets should be
expanded or scaled-back. The answer depends on the balance between market failures
and regulatory shortcomings. While market power is certainly a concern for market
monitors (Wolak (2012) shows their work is critical), my results suggest the benefits
realized by more efficient allocation of output though market-based dispatch have far
outweighed such losses.
References
Borenstein, Severin, “The Trouble with Electricity Markets: Understanding California’s Restructuring Disaster,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2002, 16
40

(1), 191–211.
, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak, “Measuring Market Inefficiencies in
Californias Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market,” The American Economic
Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1376–1405.
, , and Steven Stoft, “The Competitive Effects of Transmission Capacity in a
Deregulated Electricity Industry,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 2000, 31 (2),
294.
, , Christopher R Knittel, and Catherine D. Wolfram, “Inefficiencies and
Market Power in Financial Arbitrage: A Study of California’s Electricity Markets,”
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2008, 56 (2), 347–378.
Breiman, Leo, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, 2001, 45 (1), 5–32.
, Jerome Friedman, Charles J Stone, and Richard A Olshen, Classification
and Regression Trees, Chapman and Hall / CRC Press, 1984.
Burlig, Fiona, Christopher Knittel, David Rapson, Mar Reguant, and
Catherine D. Wolfram, “Learning from Schools about Energy Efficiency,” 2016.
Bushnell, James B., Erin T. Mansur, and Celeste Savaria, “Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured US
Electricity Markets,” The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1), 237–266.
Cicala, Steve, “When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procurement in US Electricity Generation,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (1),
411–444.
Cramton, Peter, “Electricity Market Design: The Good, the bad, and the Ugly,”
Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2003.
Cropper, Maureen L., Alexander Limonov, Malik Kabir, and Singh Anoop,
“Estimating the Impact of Restructuring on Electricity Generation Efficiency: The
Case of the Indian Thermal Power Sector,” NBER Working Paper, 2011, 17383.
Cullen, Joseph A, “Dynamic Response to Environmental Regulation in the Electricity Industry,” 2011.

41

and Erin T. Mansur, “Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs in Electricity Markets:
A Revealed Preference Approach using the Shale Revolution,” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, (Forthcoming).
Davis, Lucas and Catherine Hausman, “Market impacts of a nuclear power plant
closure,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (2), 92–122.
Davis, Lucas W. and Catherine D. Wolfram, “Deregulation, Consolidation,
and Efficiency: Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2012, 4 (4), 194–225.
Energy Information Administration, “Annual Energy Review,” Technical Report
2012.
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram, “Do Markets
Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric
Generation Efficiency,” The American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1250–1277.
Fowlie, Meredith L., “Emissions Trading, Electricity Restructuring, and Investment in Pollution Abatement,” The American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3),
837–869.
Hausman, Catherine and Ryan Kellogg, “Welfare and Distributional Implications of Shale Gas,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2015.
Hortacsu, A and Steven L. Puller, “Understanding Strategic Bidding in MultiUnit Auctions: A Case Study of the Texas Electricity Spot Market,” The RAND
Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (1), 86–114.
Ito, Koichiro and Mar Reguant, “Blowin’ in the Wind: Sequential Markets,
Market Power and Arbitrage,” The American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (7),
1921–57.
Jha, Akshaya and Frank A. Wolak, “Testing for Market Efficiency with Transactions Costs: An Application to Convergence Bidding in Wholesale Electricity
Markets,” 2013.
Joskow, Paul L., “Deregulation and Regulatory Reform in the U.S. Electric Power
Sector,” in Clifford Winston, ed., Deregulation of Network Industries: What’s
Next?, Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, 2000,
pp. 113–54.
42

and Alfred Edward Kahn, “A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s Wholesale Electricity Market During Summer 2000,” The Energy Journal,
2002, 23 (4), 1–36.
and Richard Schmalensee, “Markets for Power: An Analysis of Electrical Utility
Deregulation,” MIT Press Books, 1988, 1.
Kleinberg, Jon, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Ziad Obermeyer,
“Policy Prediction Problems,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 491–495.
Knittel, Christopher R, Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and Andre Trindade,
“Dash for Gas: The Sequel,” 2014.
Linn, Joshua, Lucija Muehlenbachs, and Yushuang Wang, “How Do Natural
Gas Prices Affect Electricity Consumers and the Environment?,” 2014, pp. 1–42.
Mansur, Erin T., “Pricing Behavior in the Initial Summer of the Restructured PJM
Wholesale Electricity Market,” 2001.
, “Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (2), 369–386.
and Matthew W. White, “Market Organization and Efficiency in Electricity
Markets,” 2012.
Meinshausen, Nicolai, “Quantile Regression Forests,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 2006, 7, 983–999.
PRISM Climate Group, “PRISM Gridded Climate Data,” 2004.
Puller, Steven L., “Pricing and Firm Conduct in California’s Deregulated Electricity
Market,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (1), 75–87.
Reguant, Mar, “Complementary Bidding Mechanisms: An Application to Electricity Markets,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (4), 1708–1742.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver, “Kidney Exchange,”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (2), 457–488.
Rubin, Donald B., “Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and
Nonrandomized Studies,” Journal of Educational Psychology, 1974, 66 (5), 688–701.

43

Ryan, Nicholas, “The Competitive Effects of Transmission Infrastructure in the
Indian Electricity Market,” 2013, pp. 1–59.
Scornet, Erwan, Gérard Biau, and Jean-Philippe Vert, “Consistency of random forests,” The Annals of Statistics, 2015, 43 (4), 1716–1741.
Wager, Stefan and Susan Athey, “Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous
Treatment Effects using Random Forests,” 2016.
Wolak, Frank A., “An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Hedge Contracts on
Bidding Behavior in a Competitive Electricity Market,” International Economic
Journal, 2000, 14 (2), 1–39.
, “Regulating Competition in Wholesale Electricity Supply,” in Nancy Rose, ed.,
Economic Regulation and Its Reform: What Have We Learned?, NBER, 2012,
chapter 5.
and Robert H Patrick, “The Impact of Market Rules and Market Structure
on the Price Determination Process in the England and Wales Electricity Market,”
1997.
Wolfram, Catherine D., “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot
Market,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 805–826.
, “The Efficiency of Electricity Generation in the U.S. After Restructuring,” in
James M. Griffin and Steven L. Puller, eds., Electricity Deregulation: Choices and
Challenges., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Wright, Marvin N. and Andreas Ziegler, “ranger: A Fast Implementation of
Random Forests for High Dimensional Data in C++ and R,” Journal of Statistical
Software, 2016, in Press.

44

A
A.1

Data Appendix
Power Control Area Definitions

The definition of a Power Control Area (PCA), or Balancing Authority (BA) is somewhat flexible, varying across regions, regulatory agencies, and over time. For the
purposes of this paper, I am interested in identifying decisionmaking units responsible for allocating production to generating units to keep supply and demand for
electricity in balance at all moments in time. As a practical matter, the method I use
to measure the value of reservoir hydropower (discussed below) relies on the opportunity cost of water based on offsetting fossil power. I therefore classify PCAs as those
recognized as such in load reporting by FERC in 1999, also reporting control of fossilfired units based on a combination of reporting in FERC Form 714 (Part II, Schedule
1), and the 1999 configuration of the grid based on EPA’s eGRID database.16 This
results in the consolidation of a number of “planning areas” that report their own
load, though they do not dispatch plants, as well as a few hydropower-only PCAs
in the Pacific Northwest (see Tables A.1, A.2, and A.3). I use county-level approximations of these 1999 PCA configurations when using demographic, meteorological,
and economic variables to predict load (see Section A.2). To construct these maps, I
begin with the 1999 EIA Form 861, “Annual Electric Power Industry Report”, which
connects local utilities to PCAs, and reports the counties in which respondent utilities
have generation equipment. I then use individual service territory maps (via internet
search) to refine these boundaries.
Much like the Neighborhood Change Database, the goal is to create a timeinvariant characterization of the grid, which has indeed changed over time. New
generation units, for example, are associated with their contemporary ISO rather
than historical PCA. To determine the 1999 PCA in which new generation would
have been located (ignoring differential investment issues), I first use local utility
association: many of these utilities are unchanged in spite of changes to the bulk
electricity system. If that utility belonged to a 1999 PCA, the plant inherits that
association. If no other information is available, the 1999 PCA maps are used to
associate new generation with historical areas.
16

eGRID is used as the starting point, then corrections are made by hand based on FERC reporting
because these forms are only available as (occasionally handwritten) pdfs of plant names, rather than
EIA facility codes.

45

A.2

Load Data

Hourly data on electricity usage (load) is compiled from a combination of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Form 714, local system operators, and
the North American Electricity Reliability Corporation (NERC), depending on data
availability. While this data, in theory, is publicly-available from a straightforward
download from the FERC site, this is emphatically not the case in practice. Until
2006, there was no required submission format for hourly load data, so that each
PCA’s data might be submitted in anything from an Excel file to free-form text, often without a codebook. In addition, there is no standard procedure for accounting
for daylight savings time: some areas ignore it completely, others report zero at the
start and double-report the final hour, etc. Annual reports are missing altogether for
some PCA-years, or are reported as part of the load of an adjacent area (again, often
without documentation). A number of smaller areas that do not own generation (and
are therefore planning areas, rather than control areas) are combined with the neighboring PCA that conducts dispatch. To avoid PCAs composed entirely of estimated
hydro generation, a handful of areas in the Pacific Northwest are combined as well.
Areas that join an ISO often have their load included in the ISO total, and may not
be available as a single PCA.
When missing, hourly load data is estimated separately for each PCA using
LASSO to uncover the best functional form in a disciplined manner. One benefit
of consumers’ insulation from electricity market conditions is that electricity load can
estimated extremely well as a function of time (of year, week and day), population,
weather, and economic conditions. The day of week/year variables used in prediction
are a set of trigonometric functions with varying periodicity over the course of the week
and year to account for regular calendar fluctuations. Temperature variables measure
heating and cooling degrees (degrees above or below 65o F ) on the daily minimum,
maximum, and average temperatures, as well as relative humidity and precipitation.
This data comes from PRISM Climate Group (2004), and collapses county-level data
with population weights for PCA-wide measures. Economic data includes unemployment rates as well as electricity-intensive employment in manufacturing and mining
sectors aggregated from the county level to the approximate footprint of the PCA in
1999 as with the meteorological data.
These variables are used in a LASSO estimation procedure to avoid over-fitting by
including a regularization term in the standard OLS procedure that sets less important
predictors to exactly zero rather than fit on noise. When estimated using data for
even years, it produces estimates that have a mean absolute deviation of less than
46

5% when validated against odd years.17
Western Interconnection
Load data for the Western Interconnection comes from both FERC and the Western
Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC), depending upon availability. PCAs as of
1999, and constituent load-reporting areas are reported in Table A.1. The abundance
of hydropower requires the consolidation of a number of Public Utility Districts in
Washington and Irrigation Districts in California to arrive at a level of aggregation
such that reservoir power is offsetting fossil power. In addition, there is relatively
inconsistent reporting of load in the former Southern California Edison territory,
though total load from the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) is wellreported, as is load from the other territories in the CAISO footprint. Southern
California Edison load is therefore calculated from the remaining CAISO load after
subtracting off load from Pacific Gas & Electric, San Diego Gas & Electric, and their
respective constituent load areas.
Texas Interconnection
The Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) is a separate interconnection that
consolidated ten PCAs in to a single market on 31 July, 2001. After a period of only
reporting total ERCOT load in 2001 and 2002, the ISO began reporting load by eight
“weather zones” that do not cleanly overlap with the original PCAs. The ERCOT
total is consistently reported throughout the sample period. I therefore run LASSO
using the ERCOT total and the population-weighted characteristics for the entire ISO,
then use the ISO-derived coefficients projected upon the PCA-level characteristics to
predict PCA-level load. Final estimates are scaled by the ratio of observed ERCOT
load to the sum of predicted PCA loads to ensure that the totals match those observed
in the data. This method delivers estimates of load in 1999 and 2000 for the original
PCAs that have an absolute mean deviation from the true loads of about 6%, in line
with the out of sample estimates delivered by estimating fixed footprints to years
without load data.
Eastern Interconnection
Load data for the Eastern Interconnection varies in the consistency of reporting. The
Northeastern ISOs in New York and New England did not consolidate multiple PCAs
upon transition to markets, but simply changed the method for allocating output over
17
Using only PCA-specific means yields an error of about 20%, which is reduced to 15% by using
PCA-hour means, and no other explanatory variables.

47

a fixed territory–load reporting is consistent throughout. PCAs in the PennsylvaniaJersey-Maryland (PJM) market have delegated load reporting to the ISO, but PJM
has helpfully preserved the original footprints as the basis for more detailed reporting
available through their website. The Southwest Power Pool (SPP) has also made
hourly load data available by original PCAs in spite of aggregate reporting to FERC.
This has, unfortunately, not been the case for the Midwest ISO, which declines to
release the disaggregated data which was previously publicly available before the ISO
took over load reporting in 2009. Instead, the most disaggregated load available from
MISO is broken down by three large regions spanning many former PCAs each. Fortunately MISO began market dispatch three years before taking over load reporting,
so that demand is largely observed through the transition to markets. For the areas without directly-reported load data from 2009-2012, it is estimated via LASSO.
Adding up the predicted loads and comparing to the regional totals to which they
roughly correspond lines up reasonably well, including predicting the drop in electricity demand in 2009 due to the Great Recession based on pre-recession data.

48

Table A.1: Power Control Areas in the Western Interconnection
1999 PCA
Avista
Arizona Public Service
Bonneville Power Authority

El Paso Electric
Imperial Irrigation District
Idaho Power
Los Angeles Dept Of Water & Power
Montana Power
Nevada Power
Pacificorp
Pacific Gas & Electric

Portland General Electric
Public Service Co Of New Mexico
Public Service Co Of Colorado
Puget Sound Energy

Southern California Edison

San Diego Gas & Electric
Sierra Pacific Power
Salt River Project
Tucson Electric Power
WAPA Colorado-Missouri

Constituent Load
Avista Corp
Arizona Public Service Co
WAPA Lower Colorado River
Bonneville Power Authority
PUD 1 of Chelan County
PUD 1 of Douglas County
PUD 2 of Grant County
El Paso Electric Company
Imperial Irrigation District
Idaho Power Company
Los Angeles, City Of
Montana Power Company
Nevada Power Company
Pacificorp
Pacific Gas & Electric
Modesto Irrigation District
WAPA Sierra Nevada Region
City of Redding
Sacramento Municipal Utility District
Portland General Electric Co
Public Service Co Of New Mexico
Public Service Co Of Colorado
Puget Sound Energy
Seattle Department of Lighting
Tacoma Power
Southern California Edison
City of Vernon
CA Dept of Water Resources
City of Anaheim
City of Santa Clara
City of Riverside
City of Pasadena
San Diego Gas & Electric
Sierra Pacific Power Co
Salt River Project
Tucson Electric Power Co
WAPA Colorado-Missouri

Unreported Periods
1999

ISO

Market Date

2001-2007
2011-2012

2011-2012

CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO

1
1
1
1
1

April
April
April
April
April

1998
1998
1998
1998
1998

CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO
CAISO

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

April
April
April
April
April
April
April
April

1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998

1999

Table A.2: Power Control Areas in the Texas Interconnection
1999 PCA
Central And South West Services

Lower Colorado River Authority
Reliant Energy
San Antonio Public Service Board
Texas Municipal Power Pool
TXU Energy

Constituent Load
Central And South West Services (AEP)
South Texas Electric Cooperative
Brownsville Public Utilities Board
Lower Colorado River Authority
Austin Energy
Reliant Energy
San Antonio Public Service Board
Texas Municipal Power Pool
Texas Utilities
Texas-New Mexico Power Company

49

ISO
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT
ERCOT

Market
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July

Date
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001

Table A.3: Power Control Areas in the Eastern Interconnection
NERC Region
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
ECAR
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
FRCC
MAAC
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAIN
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
MAPP
NPCC
NPCC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SERC
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP

1999 PCA
American Electric Power

Allegheny Power Service
Big Rivers Electric
Cinergy
Consumers Energy
Detroit Edison
Duquesne Light
Dayton Power & Light Co
East Kentucky Power Coop
Firstenergy
Hoosier Energy
Indianapolis Power & Light
Louisville Gas & Electric
Northern Indiana Public Service
Southern Indiana G & E
Florida Municipal Power Agency

Florida Power
Florida Power & Light
Gainesville Regional Utilities
Jacksonville Electric Authority
Seminole Electric Coop
City Of Tallahassee
Tampa Electric
Pennsylvania-Jersey-Maryland
Alliant East
Ameren
Commonwealth Edison
Central Illinois Light
Illinois Power
Southern Illinois Power Coop
Springfield (IL) Water Light & Power
Wisconsin Energy
Wisconsin Public Service
Alliant West
WAPA Upper Missouri

Dairyland Power Coop
Great River Energy
Midamerican Energy
Minnesota Power & Light
Nebraska Public Power District
Northern States Power
Omaha Public Power District
Otter Tail Power
New England Power Pool
New York Power Pool
Alabama Electric Cooperative
Associated Electric Cooperative
Carolina Power & Light
Duke Energy
South Carolina Electric & Gas
South Carolina Pub Serv Auth
South Mississippi Electric Power
Southern
Tennessee Valley Authority
Dominion Virginia Power
CLECO
Empire District Electric
Entergy
Grand River Dam Authority
Kansas City Power & Light
Kansas City Board of Public Utilities
Louisiana Energy & Power Authority
Aquila Networks - MPS
Oklahoma Gas & Electric Co
Sunflower Electric Cooperative
Public Service of OK (SWEPCO)
Southwestern Power Admin

Western Farmers Elec Coop
Aquila Networks - WPK
Western Resources

Constituent Load
American Electric Power
Buckeye Power
American Municipal Power - Ohio
Allegheny Power Service
Big Rivers Electric Corp
Cinergy
Consumers Energy
Detroit Edison Co
Duquesne Light Company
Dayton Power & Light Co
East Kentucky Power Coop
Firstenergy
Hoosier Energy
Indianapolis Power & Light
Louisville Gas & Electric
Northern Indiana Public Service
Southern Indiana G & E
Florida Municipal Power Agency
Orlando Utilities
City of Lakeland
Florida Power Corporation
Florida Power & Light
City Of Gainesville
Jacksonville Electric Authority
Seminole Electric Coop
City Of Tallahassee
Tampa Electric Company
Pennsylvania-Jersey-Maryland
Alliant East
Ameren
Columbia Water & Light
Commonwealth Edison Co
Central Illinois Light Co
Illinois Power
Southern Illinois Power Coop
City of Springfield, IL
Wisconsin Electric Power
Wisconsin Public Service
Madison Gas & Electric Co
Alliant West
WAPA Upper Missouri East Basin
Basin Electric Power Cooperative
WAPA Upper Missouri West Basin
Dairyland Power Coop
Great River Energy
Midamerican Energy
Muscatine Power & Water
Minnesota Power & Light
Nebraska Public Power Dist
Lincoln Electric System
Northern States Power Co
Southern MN Municipal Power
Omaha Public Power District
Otter Tail Power
Minnkota Power Cooperative
New England Power Pool
New York Power Pool
Alabama Electric Cooperative
Associated Electric Cooperative
Carolina Power & Light
Duke Energy
South Carolina Electric & Gas
South Carolina Public Service Authority
South Mississippi Electric Power
Southern Co
Oglethorpe Power
Tennessee Valley Authority
Dominion Virginia Power
Central Louisiana Electric Co
Lafayette Utility System
Empire District Electric
Entergy
Grand River Dam Authority
Kansas City Power & Light
City of Independence
Kansas City Board of Public Utilities
Louisiana Energy & Power Auth
Louisiana Generating
Missouri Public Service Co
Oklahoma Gas & Electric Co
Sunflower Electric Cooperative
Public Service of OK (SWEPCO)
Southwestern Power Admin
Southwestern Public Service
Golden Spread Electric Cooperative
Western Electric Farmers Coop
Oklahoma Municipal Power Authority
Aquila - WestPlains
Western Resources

50

Unreported Periods

2011-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012

2009-2012
2006-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012
2006-2012

ISO
PJM
PJM
PJM
PJM
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
PJM
PJM

Market Date
1 October 2004
1 October 2004
1 October 2004
1 April 2002
1 December 2010
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 January 2005
1 October 2004

MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO

1
1
1
1
1
1

April
April
April
April
April
April

2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005

2003, 2004
2004

2003
2004
2009-2012
2009-2012
2004,2009-2012
2007-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012
2009-2012
2004, 2009-2012
2004, 2009-2012
2009-2012
2000, 2001, 2004, 2005
2000, 2001, 2004, 2005
2000, 2001, 2004, 2005
2000, 2001, 2004, 2011, 2012
2000-2005, 2009-2012
2010-2012
2000, 2001, 2004, 2006-2012
2000-2004, 2009-2012
2004
2004
2001, 2004, 2009-2012
1999, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2009-2012
2000, 2001, 2004
2001, 2004, 2009-2012
1999-2001, 2004

PJM
MISO
MISO
MISO
PJM
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
SPP
SPP
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
MISO
NEISO
NYISO

1 April 1997
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 May 2004
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 June 2010
1 April 2005
1 September 2009
1 September 2009
1 April 2005
1 April 2009
1 April 2009
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 April 2005
1 May 1999
18 November 1999

PJM
SPP
SPP
SPP

1 May 2005
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007

SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP

1
1
1
1

SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP
SPP

1 January 2010
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007
1 February 2007

2001

2002

2002
2002, 2006
2002, 2006
2002

February
February
February
February

2007
2007
2007
2007

2000, 2007-2012
2002
2002, 2006
2002
2003
2002
2000, 2001, 2003-2005
2007-2012
2002

A.3

Generation

EPA Continuous Emissions Monitor System (CEMS) Data
Roughly 90% of fossil-powered generation in the United States from 1999-2012 is
reported at the boiler-hour level in the EPA CEMS data. While reporting for the
largest units begins in 1996, comprehensive reporting does not begin until 1999. This
data system was designed to monitor emissions for compliance with N Ox and SO2
programs of the 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act. I adjust for net-to-gross
ratios, as CEMS reports gross generation for unit i in hour t, but power station
usage (typically about 6%) must be subtracted to measure how much power is being
sent to the grid. The adjustment is a unit-level version of that used by Cullen and
Mansur (n.d.) to measure hourly net generation, except at the interconnection-fuel
level, rather than generating unit:
Net Generationit = P

EIA Net Generationim
∗ CEMS Gross Generationit
t∈m CEMS Gross Generationit

The hourly gross load data from CEMS is merged to the monthly EIA data on net
generation and heat rate (at the unit level from EIA-767 when possible, otherwise
at the plant-prime mover level from EIA-906), and scaled by the ratio of monthly
net generation to monthly gross load. This accomplishes two tasks: First, it ensures
output represents net generation at the hourly level, smoothing start-up and ramping
costs over the month. Second, a number of units (especially Combined Cycle units)
only include the steam portion of the unit in CEMS, leaving the generation from the
second cycle unreported. This scaling treats the (hourly) unreported generation as
dispatched at the same rate as the main unit. Figure A.1 plots the kernel density
estimates of the net-to-gross ratios of CEMS units. While a density of the scaling is
overwhelmingly concentrated at about 94% (the gross-to-net scale), combined cycle
units feature a bimodal distribution with a second (much smaller) peak around 1.4
(reflecting the contribution of the unmatched cycles). The top and bottom percentile
of scales is trimmed for outliers (outside of 0.2 and 2), and estimated scales based
on a regression of observable unit characteristics are used instead.

51

For heat rate: top and bottom percent of heat rates are trimmed for outliers
(outside of 6 and 100), as well as monthly heat rates that are more than three
standard deviations from the unit’s mean heat rate (2% of unit-months). Estimated
heat rates are used for these outliers, as well as in months with zero net generation.
Estimation allows for unit-level fixed effects (which captures most of the variance),
as well as flexible unit-specific trends to account for decaying heat rates with unit
age.18
Nuclear Generation
Daily output from nuclear-powered units is reported to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) as a share of potential output for each generating unit. The exact
potential output is calculated by taking the ratio of the monthly total net generation
reported on EIA Form 906 to the sum of these daily potential outputs:19
Net Generationit = P

EIA Net Generationim
∗ NRC Share of Capacityit
t∈m NRC Share of Capacityit

Output levels are determined by multiplying the calculated potential output by daily
share of output generated, and distributing the generation over the hours of the
day. There is minimal potential for error in this last step because nuclear units
are typically running at maximum capacity, down for maintenance, or transitioning
between the two over the course of days.
Hydro Generation
Monthly hydro generation is reported on Form EIA-906. I use discharge and/or
streamflow data to distribute this aggregated generation across the hours of the
month. Inquiries at individual hydropower administrators yielded exact hourly turbine discharge numbers. These sources include the Tennessee Valley Authority, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, and U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. Over one third of hy18

Such effects are small: these regressions show heat rates tend to rise about 0.2% with each year
of operation, particularly for smaller units.
19
Note that the ratio of monthly net generation to the sum of capacity shares is equal to the
unit’s capacity:Capacityim = P EIA Net Generationim
t∈m NRC Share of Capacityit

52

Figure A.1: Net-Gross Scaling of CEMS Units with Monthly Data
(a) All CEMS units

0

5

Density

10

15

Kernel density estimate

0

.5
1
1.5
EIA Net Generation / CEMS Gross Load

2

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0028

(b) Combined Cycle Units in CEMS

0

1

Density
2

3

4

Kernel density estimate

0

.5
1
1.5
EIA Net Generation / CEMS Gross Load

kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0322

53

2

dropower generation is collected from these sources.
When exact numbers were not available, I infer hourly generation from streamflow
data collected by the U.S. Geological Survey’s streamgage network. To do so, I use
plant coordinates from EIA to locate generators along the National Hydrography
Database’s stream network. I then use network analysis software to identify the
nearest downstream gage that collects streamflow data (in many cases the dam’s
discharge monitor is the USGS streamflow recorder). I then allocate the month’s
generation to hours based on the share of monthly streamflow released in that hour
in the same spirit as the generation allocation methods described above.
Fossil Generation Reported Monthly
About 10% of generation from fossil-powered units does not appear in the CEMS
data. For these units, I use monthly data at the unit level from EIA-767 (mostly small
steam-powered boilers), or plant-prime mover level from EIA-906 (mostly small gas
turbines and internal combustion generators). To allocate this production to hours
of the month, monthly generation is allocated over hours by ranking the hours of the
month by load, and producing at maximum capacity in the highest load hours up to
the total reported monthly generation.
For example, if a turbine with a capacity of 10MW reports on Form 906 that it
produced 10MWh in a month, it is assumed that it only produced in the hour of
maximum load that month. If it produced 50MW, it is assumed to have produced
10MWh in the five highest demand hours that month, and was idle otherwise. This
approach is motivated by demand sweeping through the merit order, so that generating units are only briefly marginal, and therefore typically producing at maximum
capacity, if at all. In this case, generation is proportional to the number of hours in
which demand is sufficiently high for the unit to be “in” the merit order.
This algorithm is applied consistently throughout the sample period, and is invariant to the institutions used to allocate production. The share of production
allocated in this manner is also stable over time.

54

Other Generation
Monthly wind generation by farm is reported in EIA-906. I merge this data with
hourly wind speed data from nearby weather stations, as reported in National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Integrated Surface Database. I estimate
the potential output of the farm based on a cut-in wind speed of 3 m/s, a cut-out
speed of 20 m/s, a rated wind speed of 10 m/s (at which point the farm produces
at maximum capacity), and an increasing cubic between the cut-in and rated wind
speeds. I then use predicted power to distribute the observed monthly total over the
month:
Net Generationit = P

EIA Net Generationim
∗Predicted Wind Generationit
t∈m Predicted Wind Generationit

For areas that report hourly wind generation in the ISO footprint (ERCOT since
2007, SPP and MISO since 2008), I use the hourly analog for wind farms in the ISO
n’s footprint:

Net Generationit = P

ISO Wind Generationnt
∗Predicted Wind Generationit
i∈n Predicted Wind Generationit

Finally, geothermal generation is also reported in EIA-906 at the plant-month
level. Geothermal plants are used as baseload, run at maximum possible capacity at
zero marginal cost. The monthly generation is evenly distributed over the hours of
the month.
A.4

Heat Rates and Capacities

With a Leontief production function, the ratio of output to heat inputs measures
the productivity of generation unit. A substantial literature has developed in industrial organization to consistently measure (Hicks-neutral) productivity, which is
typically unobserved and time-invariant. It is possible to measure supply curves in
the electricity setting because unit productivity is (more or less) time invariant and
capacities are known whether the unit is operating or not. This simplifies matters

55

quite a bit.
Heat rates when operating are observed at the unit-month level in EIA-767, and
EIA-906 at the plant-prime mover-month. When not operating, I use estimated heat
rates based on regressions including unit-specific trends.
Heat rates for cogeneration units are a bit trickier: these are units that also provide useful steam energy, making it economical to run even if would not be operating
otherwise. These units tend to have higher heat rates, which unaccounted for, would
show up as out-of-merit generation. This then becomes a question of how much of
the cost of fuel should be attributed to electricity versus steam production. The approach I use is to estimate what the unit’s heat rate would be if not for cogeneration
based on its vintage, capacity, etc. Fuel usage in excess of this estimated heat rate
is attributed to steam generation, and not counted as a cost of running the unit for
electricity production.
Unit capacities are reported in EIA-860 (as well as EIA-767), but to ensure out
of merit costs are always positive, I use the maximum net generation observed from
CEMS units in a year to measure the capacity of the unit.20 For nuclear units, I
calculate capacity as described above: the ratio of monthly output to the share of
capacity utilized, as reported by the NRC. Because energy inputs are a fundamental
constraint on production from renewables units, I assume that wind and hydro units
are never withheld, and are therefore their observed production is their maximum
capacity at that moment in time. Differential capacity factors of wind farms, for
example, do not contribute to out of merit calculations. For hydro reservoirs this
means that dry years, for example, similarly do not show up as economical units
sitting idle.
20

This effectively defines the merit order frontier as the lowest possible cost of production, inclusive of the ability to produce slightly higher than the rated limit when necessary, or less than the
rated limit due to constraints not considered in nameplate rating reporting. Results are substantially unchanged when using EIA-860 nameplate capacity instead of observed capacities for CEMS
units.

56

A.5

Fuel Prices

Coal Prices
As in Cicala (2015), this paper detailed data on coal deliveries to power plants from
the Energy Information Administration (Forms EIA-423, “Monthly Report of Cost
and Quality of Fuels for Electric Plants,” and EIA-923, “Power Plant Operations
Report”) and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Form FERC-423, “Monthly
Report of Cost and Quality of Fuels for Electric Plants”). This is shipment-level data,
reported monthly for nearly all of the coal burned for the production of electricity
in the United States (all facilities with a combined capacity greater than 50MW are
required to report). The reader is referred to the Online Appendices of that paper
for more details.
For this paper, the extensive use of bilateral contracts for coal procurement is
potentially problematic: the merit order is determined by spot prices, not contract
prices. This is because it is the opportunity cost of coal that determines its value
when allocating production to plants. If coal were very expensive, one would want to
dispatch those plants judiciously, regardless of whether a particular plant received its
coal free of charge. This is a conceptually important distinction, though in practice
the main results of the paper are largely invariant to using the observed contract
prices instead of estimated spot prices.
The approach I use to estimate spot prices is to separate the delivered price of
coal delivered to plant i in region d and month m from mine county origin o in to
minemouth and shipping costs using hedonic regressions that include the characteristics of the coal and a third order polynomial in distance shipped:
coim = Xim βom + frm (distanceoim ) + εiom
I then estimate the minemouth spot prices by removing the shipping cost component
from the hedonic estimates for the deliveries procured from the spot market only. To
this I add the shipping portion of the hedonic regressions from all deliveries:21
21

Although all coal regions deliver some coal to the spot market in all periods, they do not deliver
them to all areas, making the origin-destination pairs sparse for estimating spot shipping separately.

57

spot
ˆ
ĉspot
oim = Xim β̂om + f rm (distanceoim )

Oil Prices
Oil-burning units also report deliveries in forms EIA-423/923. I estimate spot prices
at the state-month level separately by fuel type (diesel, residual fuel oil, etc.), or
wider geographic if state-month deliveries are not reported.
Natural Gas Prices
Spot prices for natural gas deliveries are based on daily prices from 65 major trading
hubs across the country with consistent prices series from 1999-2012. These data
come from the Platts, Bloomberg, and NGI. I use plant coordinates and natural gas
pipeline network shapefiles from EIA to locate plants along the pipeline network.
I then use network analysis software to connect each plant to the nearest pricing
hub. These hubs are not uniformly distributed across the US, as illustrated in Figure
A.2, which displays the connections between power plants and hubs. The southeast
generally lacks pricing points in particular. Missing daily prices for weekends and
holidays are based on carrying the most recent trading day forward.

58

Figure A.2: Gas Hub - Power Plant Links

59

