NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC ORIGINS OF CONFLICT IN AFRICA
Eoin McGuirk
Marshall Burke
Working Paper 23056
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23056

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We thank five anonymous referees for thoughtful comments that improved this article. We are especially
grateful to our editor, Jesse Shapiro, for his exemplary guidance and patience. We also thank many
people for helpful conversations, including Pierre Bachas, Bob Bates, Samuel Bazzi, Dan Bjorkegren,
Pedro Dal Bo, Alex Eble, Fred Finan, Andrew Foster, John Friedman, Nate Hilger, Rick Locke, Ted
Miguel, Nick Miller, Emily Oster, Dan Posner, Jesse Shapiro, Stephen Smith, Bryce Millett Steinberg,
Chris Udry, Pedro Vicente and Owen Zidar, as well as seminar/conference participants at UC Berkeley
(Economics and ARE), the World Bank (Development Research Group), PacDev (UC San Diego),
the World Bank ABCA (UC Berkeley), the Watson Institute (Brown University), Yale University,
Trinity College Dublin, and NEUDC (Brown University). All errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2017 by Eoin McGuirk and Marshall Burke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Economic Origins of Conflict in Africa
Eoin McGuirk and Marshall Burke
NBER Working Paper No. 23056
January 2017, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D74,H56,O10,O12
ABSTRACT
We study the impact of plausibly exogenous global food price shocks on local violence across the
African continent. In food-producing areas, higher food prices reduce conflict over the control of territory
(what we call "factor conflict") and increase conflict over the appropriation of surplus ("output conflict").
We argue that this difference arises because higher prices raise the opportunity cost of soldiering for
producers, while simultaneously inducing net consumers to appropriate increasingly valuable surplus
as their real wages fall. In regions without crop agriculture, higher food prices increase both factor
conflict and output conflict. We validate local-level findings on output conflict using geocoded survey
data on interpersonal theft and violence against commercial farmers and traders. Ignoring the distinction
between producer and consumer effects leads to attenuated estimates. Our findings help reconcile
a growing but ambiguous literature on the economic roots of conflict.

Eoin McGuirk
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
Medford, MA 02155
eoin.mcguirk@tufts.edu
Marshall Burke
Department of Earth System Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
mburke@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Civil conflict is antithetical to development. In the second half of the twentieth century, 127 civil
wars are estimated to have resulted in 16 million deaths, five times more than the death toll from
interstate wars. Most of these wars have taken place in Africa, where conflict battles have killed
between 750,000 and 1.1 million from 1989 to 2010. Indirectly, civil conflict has an enduring effect
on disease, mortality, human capital, investment and state capacity.1
How might changing economic conditions shape the likelihood of conflict? This question is of
demonstrable importance to policy, and it has spawned a large but inconclusive theoretical and
empirical literature. From a theoretical perspective, economic shocks that alter the opportunity
cost of violence could also affect the spoils of victory or a government’s capacity to repel insurgents,
yielding an unclear relationship. This ambiguity is reflected in a markedly inconclusive empirical
literature, characterized by inconsistent findings and by significant identification challenges: income
may affect conflict; conflict may affect income; and both may be influenced simultaneously by
omitted factors, such as a the security of property rights.2
We aim to overcome this ambiguity by exploiting two simple facts. First, agricultural products
represent a higher average share of household production and consumption in Africa than in any
other region. It follows that a plausibly exogenous change in world agricultural prices can generate
opposing effects on real income across different households within a country. To wit, a spike in
grain prices could increase income for grain producers while simultaneously reducing real income
in net consuming households who lack access to cheap substitutes. Second, conflict itself can take
observationally distinguishable forms. By increasing farm wages, for example, rising grain prices
can reduce the supply of labor to armed groups, thereby causing a decline in conflict battles in
rural areas. At the same time, high prices could provoke conflict over the appropriation of the
commodity itself in the form of looting or “food riots”. These distinctions—between producer and
consumer effects and between types of conflict—allow us to derive and test a set of simple but
clear predictions on the economic logic of violence that are difficult to explain with alternative
mechanisms.
We first propose that a drop in agricultural commodity prices will raise the incidence of civil
conflict battles in rural areas by reducing the opportunity cost of soldiering for farmers. A key
assumption in this model is that the expected spoils of battle do not decrease at the same rate
as the opportunity cost of soldiering. We show that this is valid for conflict over the permanent
control of territory, which is valued according to its discounted expected returns over a lifetime.
If shocks are transitory, lower crop prices will increase the likelihood that rural groups engage in
battles over territorial control. We call this type of battle factor conflict.
1
See Ghobarah et al. (2003); Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003); Collier et al. (2003); Besley and Persson (2010).
Statistics on civil war in the twentieth century are from Fearon and Laitin (2003); those on fatalities in Africa are
calculated using the UCDP GED dataset (Sundberg and Melander, 2013). At least 315,000 of these fatalities were
civilians.
2
For example, Djankov and Reynal-Querol (2010), Ciccone (2011), and Cotet and Tsui (2013) all challenge previously established associations between income and conflict.

2

To test this prediction, we exploit panel data at the level of the 0.5 degree grid cell (around 55km
× 55km at the equator) over the entire African continent. Data on factor conflict comes from the
recently released UCDP GED dataset (Sundberg and Melander, 2013), which includes geocoded
conflict events that (i) feature at least 1 fatality; and (ii) involve only organized armed groups
that have fought in battles that directly caused at least 25 fatalities over the series from 1989 to
2010. To construct producer price indices, we combine high-resolution time-invariant spatial data
on where specific crops are grown with annual international price data on multiple crops to form
a cell-year measure. Controlling for both cell fixed effects and country-year fixed effects, we find
that a standard deviation rise in producer prices lowers the probability of conflict by around 15%
in food-producing areas.
We contrast this finding with an inverse effect in cells with no crop production. Through a
negative effect on real income, we posit that food price spikes will cause those at low levels of
consumption to engage in costly coping strategies. In the presence of factor conflict, this could
imply recruitment to armed groups. Combining cross-sectional data on food consumption from
the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) with temporal variation in world prices, we
construct a consumer price index and find that higher values increase the duration of conflict in
these food-consuming cells. Because there is less cross-sectional variation in the composition of food
consumed than in the composition of food produced, these estimates are typically not statistically
significant when we include year fixed effects in our model.
The upper panel of Figure 1 presents descriptive evidence of these results, using the simple
FAO global food price index rather than the more detailed crop-specific indices we construct in
the formal analysis. Separate nonparametric plots show that higher prices are associated with a
reduction in factor conflict in cells where crops are produced (producer cells), and with an increase
in factor conflict where they are not (consumer cells). This heterogeneity is not only important in
its own right, but it also allows us to rule out as a unique explanation the most commonly posited
alternative to the “opportunity cost” theory, namely that higher revenues from exports strengthen
a state’s capacity to repress or deter insurgent activities. That price fluctuations simultaneously
raise and reduce factor conflict within states implies that household-level economic shocks play a
large role in the decision to fight.
To further elucidate the role of economic conditions in conflict, we turn to a second simple fact:
that conflict can take observationally different forms. We distinguish factor conflict from output
conflict, which we define as a contest over the appropriation of surplus. Output conflict is more
transitory and less organized given that the goal is to take rather than to permanently displace. We
posit that higher food prices will increase the value of appropriable output relative to real wages
for consumers in the short run. Thus, in contrast to the case of factor conflict, higher prices will
increase output conflict in food-producing areas as well as food-consuming areas.
The lower panel of Figure 1 presents initial descriptive support for this prediction. We measure
output conflict using geocoded data on riots and violence against civilians from the Armed Conflict
Location and Event Dataset (Raleigh et al., 2010), and see that rising global food prices are

3

associated with a higher probability of output conflict in producer cells. We test this more formally
in two empirical exercises. In the first, we find that a one standard deviation increase in world food
prices raises output conflict in food-producing cells by 17%. By contrast, for an equivalent change
in the relevant world prices, no such effect is detected in areas where production focuses on non-food
crops (“cash crops”), as higher prices do not lower real wages for consumers. In the second exercise,
we corroborate this finding using Afrobarometer survey data covering over 65,000 respondents in
19 countries over 13 biannual periods. We compile and geocode four rounds of pooled data and
find that higher food prices increase the probability that commercial farmers report incidences of
theft and violence in food-producing areas over the previous year. Moreover, we employ a triple
difference framework and again find that the effect is much larger in food-crop producing regions
relative to cash-crop-producing regions.
Our study provides new evidence that individuals weigh the economic returns to violence against
opportunity costs, with negative income shocks significantly and substantially increasing the risk
of violent conflict events. Our findings challenge claims that the relationship between poverty and
conflict is spurious (see Djankov and Reynal-Querol, 2010), as well as those stressing a unique
explanatory role for “grievances” or expressive benefits that derive, for example, from repression or
primordial ethnic hatreds.3 To that end, we advance a literature originating in country-level studies
that emphasize the robustness of correlations between conflict and economic factors. Collier and
Hoeffler (2004) favor the opportunity cost explanation for conflict participation, whereas Fearon
and Laitin (2003) argue that the relationship reflects instead the state capacity mechanism. Seminal
work by Miguel et al. (2004) improves identification by using rainfall as an instrumental variable for
GDP in a panel of African countries—an approach that no longer generates the same relationship
with updated data (Miguel and Satyanath, 2011; Ciccone, 2011)—but does not distinguish between
the mechanisms. Subsequent research further calls into question the validity of climate-derived
instruments, given the many possible channels linking climate to conflict (Sarsons, 2015; Hsiang
et al., 2013; Dell et al., 2014; Burke et al., 2015).
In part owing to concerns with the validity of climate instruments, a parallel literature instead
exploits variation in global commodity prices to identify the impact of economic shocks on civil
conflict. Results are notably inconclusive: Besley and Persson (2008) find that higher export prices
increase violence through a predation effect (Hirshleifer, 1991), a result in line with a large literature
linking oil prices in particular with conflict in low and middle income countries (Ross, 2015; Koubi
et al., 2014; Collier and Hoeffler, 2005). Against this, Cotet and Tsui (2013) find no evidence of
a significant relationship between oil discoveries and conflict, while Brückner and Ciccone (2010)
find that higher export commodity prices reduce the outbreak of civil war, a result that Bazzi
and Blattman (2014) find to be sensitive to updated data in a comprehensive attempt to reconcile
3

See Gurr (1970) and Horowitz (1985) for influential theories of political and ethnic grievance motives for conflict respectively. We are careful to note that these economic and grievance theories are not strictly incompatible.
Humphreys and Weinstein (2008) discuss the artificial nature of this dichotomy in analyzing correlates of conflict
participation among survey respondent in Sierra Leone. However, they do find that economic motives are more
consistent with the evidence than grievance-based accounts.

4

sharply conflicting results in the cross-country literature. Analyzing a sample of all developing
countries from 1957 to 2007, Bazzi and Blattman (2014) find that higher prices reduce the duration
of existing conflicts, and have no effect on the onset of new conflicts. More recently, van Weezel
(2016) and Bellemare (2015) find that higher food prices are linked to civil unrest at the country
level.
Recent advances in data quality have permitted a shift in focus away from the country-level
toward studies that exploit variation at the subnational level. Focusing on Africa, articles by
Berman and Couttenier (2015) and Fjelde (2015) suggest that declining export revenues from crop
agriculture increase the incidence of conflict battles, while Harari and La Ferrara (2014) show that
droughts in agricultural areas during critical growing periods have a similar effect. All three studies
are consistent with the opportunity cost and state capacity mechanisms. By contrast, Berman et al.
(2017) show that higher mineral prices increase conflict in areas containing mines—a result that
aligns with the predation effect and a related feasibility mechanism, whereby armed groups who
capture valuable mineral deposits are consequently equipped to launch attacks elsewhere. Analyzing
violence in Colombia, Dube and Vargas (2013) find that higher oil prices increase the likelihood of
conflict events in oil-producing areas, while higher coffee prices have the opposite effect in coffeeproducing areas. Their results are consistent with Dal Bó and Dal Bó (2011), who propose that
positive price shocks to capital-intensive sectors will increase conflict through the predation channel,
whereas shocks to labor-intensive sectors will reduce conflict through the opportunity cost channel.
Our analysis complements this literature by reconciling existing findings and by establishing
new ones. First, focusing on our factor conflict results, we identify a negative impact of real income
on conflict battles using plausibly exogenous variation in a manner that is not easily explained
by alternative accounts. This is because any confounding variable would have to affect conflict in
one direction in food-producing cells and in the opposite direction in food-consuming cells. This
strategy also allows us to cleanly isolate the opportunity cost channel from the observationally
similar state capacity channel. By identifying opposing effects of a price shock within a stateperiod, we provide clear evidence that the opportunity cost channel is an important mechanism
through which economic shocks affect conflict, overcoming a longstanding problem in the literature.
In addition to allowing for the identification of causal mechanisms, our simultaneous estimation
of consumer and producer price effects also calls for a revision of the established link between crop
prices and conflict more generally. Dube and Vargas (2013), Berman and Couttenier (2015), Fjelde
(2015), and, at the country-level, Bazzi and Blattman (2014) and Brückner and Ciccone (2010),
all find that rising crop prices lead to fewer conflict events. We show, however, that it is essential
to also consider the real income effects of consumer crop prices before drawing general conclusions.
For example, we estimate that the overall impact of the food price spike from 2004-2008 on the
average cell-level probability of conflict battles in Africa was actually positive, comprising a −13%
producer effect and a +19% consumer effect. We also show that it is not possible to detect these
opposing effects with precision when we aggregate our data to the country level.
Third, we depart from the existing subnational literature by distinguishing theoretically and

5

empirically between two different types of violence: factor conflict and output conflict. We posit
that the same producer price shock will affect these conflict types in opposing directions.4 Moreover,
our finding that food prices increase output conflict differentially in food-producing areas adds a
new dimension to our understanding of the predation motive, which is generally associated with
the control of rents from oil and mineral deposits.
Fourth, we provide a micro-level validation of the main output conflict results using household
survey data on interpersonal crime and physical assault. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first case of micro-level conflict data being used to verify results derived from geocoded conflict
event data.
We combine our results with leading forecasts of future grain prices to estimate the projected
change in conflict from 2010-2050. We predict that the effects of rising global demand coupled with
the supply-side impact of climate change will contribute to an average increase in factor conflict
by 10% and output conflict by 30%. More than half of the overall change can be attributed to the
effects of climate change alone.
We proceed in Section 2 with our theoretical framework for the analysis and with a discussion
of two illustrative case studies. Section 3 introduces the data and provides a background on global
food price variation. In Sections 4 and 5, we present our estimation strategy and results respectively.
In Section 6, we discuss the magnitude of our results and conclude.

2

Theoretical framework

In this section, we connect variation in food prices to the respective decisions of producers and
consumers to engage in different types of conflict. We begin with the case of factor conflict, where
conflict is characterized as competition over land, as in Chassang and Padro i Miquel (2009). We
then analyze case of output conflict, characterized instead as competition over output, as in Dal Bó
and Dal Bó (2011). In so doing, we highlight how the type of conflict under analysis can determine
the predicted effect of food prices. We will study the two types of conflict separately for ease of
exposition. We allow for both types of conflict simultaneously in Appendix Section A.5.
We define producers as subnational polities that control rents from landownership. These groups
solve a dynamic problem in which they can either (i) farm peacefully in the productive sector, or
(ii) launch armed attacks to acquire territory through the technology of factor conflict.
Consumers are atomistic agents who decide between (i) providing wage labor in the productive
4
Harari and La Ferrara (2014) and Bazzi and Blattman (2014), amongst many others, use different measures of
violence as dependent variables either in sensitivity tests or in order to shed light on potential channels of causation.
The examples most similar in spirit to our approach are Besley and Persson (2011), who make the case theoretically
and empirically that states of one-sided violence and two-sided violence can be ordered (although their shock variables
affect each in a similar way), and Dube and Vargas (2013), who show that while coffee price shocks and oil price shocks
respectively affect each of their four main measures of violence similarly (that is, negatively for coffee and positively
for oil), coffee price shocks have no significant impact on paramilitary political kidnappings, while oil price shocks
have a significantly positive effect. This suggests that paramilitary political kidnappings in Colombia is associated
with the predation motive—perhaps as a tool for extortion—but not with the type of violence driven by the the
opportunity cost motive.

6

sector, or (ii) providing wage labor to an armed group engaging in factor conflict. Later, we allow
consumers to appropriate producer surplus directly through the technology of output conflict.
Our goal is to derive qualitative comparative statics in order to determine the effect of crop price
movements on these decisions. Underpinning our analysis is an assumption that property rights
are not perfectly protected—a reasonable assumption in rural areas of many African countries.
This feature permits producers to consider appropriating territory, and consumers to consider
appropriating output. We examine the role of this assumption empirically in Section 5.5.

2.1

Environment

Producers

Consider two identical producer groups g ∈ {1, 2} who each initially control one half

of a territory of size N̄ and employ Lgt units of labor at time t. Each group can either allocate all of
this labor to farming, or they can divert a fixed share LV ∈ (0, 1] from production to soldiering in
an attempt to seize the other’s land through the technology of factor conflict.5 Group g’s revenue
in period t is generated as follows:
α
Ygt (Pjt , Ngt , Lgt ) = Pjt Ngt
(Lgt (1 − LVgt ))1−α

(1)

where Pjt is the price of crop j; Ngt is the area of land that group g controls in period t; LVgt ∈ {0, LV }
represents the decision to attack; and 0 < α < 1.
An offensive advantage is obtained by launching the first attack, giving a group victory with
probability π > 21 . If both groups attack simultaneously, they each win with probability 21 . War is
decisive; the victor controls the entire territory indefinitely.6
Groups seek to maximize the present discounted value of production net of total labor costs:
∞
X

δ

t−t0



α
V 1−α
V
V
V
Pjt Ngt (Lgt (1 − Lgt ))
− wjt Lgt (1 − Lgt ) − wt Lgt Lgt

(2)

t=t0

where wjt is the wage rate per unit of farm labor; wtV is the wage rate per unit of soldiering labor;
δ ∈ (0, 1) is a time discount factor; t0 is the base period; and


N̄


, if conflict has never occurred

2
Ngt = N̄ , if conflict has occurred and g won




0, if conflict has occurred and g lost

(3)

5
An alternative approach would allow producers to hire additional labor from other regions and not divert resources from production. While this is perhaps possible, existing evidence suggests that armed groups in Africa are
substantially resource constrained as they expand their activity when given a windfall, e.g., from an increase in mining revenue, as in Berman et al. (2017). Rather than modeling these credit constraints, we stipulate that producers
instead have to hire a fixed amount of local consumers in each period to either farm or fight.
6
Our model does not explicitly incorporate the role of retaliation (e.g., via alliances); however, we could approximate this by reducing the value of π. This would reduce the expected benefit of conflict. We thank a referee for
pointing this out. We also make the further assumption that conflict requires a positive amount of labor, thus ruling
out the special case where LVgt = LV and Lgt = 0.

7

This condition captures the idea that groups begin each period with

N̄
2

unless there is conflict in

the previous period, in which case they control N̄ thereafter if they defeat the other group and 0
otherwise.
Each group has an initial endowment of labor Lgt = 1. The choice facing each group in the
initial period is either to divert a share LV of labor to soldiering or instead to use all labor for
farming. In subsequent periods, groups choose the total amount of labor Lgt optimally.
Crop prices and types In each period, the world crop price Pjt is generated by a stochastic
process log Pjt = µj + φ log Pjt−1 + jt , where the innovation term jt ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) captures shocks
to international market conditions that are independent over time. Total potential income Yt can
therefore vary exogenously over periods, while always remaining positive. We assume that µj > 0
and 0 ≤ φ < 1, implying that shocks are not permanent.7
We consider price movements for three types of crops: Pt = [Pct , Pmt , Pf t ]. The first element
Pct is the price of a cash crop: a crop that is produced in a given cell but consumed elsewhere. The
second element Pmt is the price of a staple import crop: a crop that is consumed in a given cell but
produced elsewhere. The third element Pf t is the price of a staple food crop: a crop that is both
produced and consumed in a given cell.
Let j ∈ {c, f } denote the domestically produced crops, and x ∈ {m, f } denote the domestically
consumed crop, where x = m indicates that it is imported. A territory will either produce crop
c and consume m or it will produce and consume crop f . Whether a territory grows c or f is
exogenously determined by geographical characteristics such as soil suitability. We assume that
the shock terms jt are independent across crops j.
Consumers

Individuals supply labor and consume crop output. Each consumer i maximizes

utility Uit (xit ) subject to a budget constraint Pxt xit = wit , where Uit0 (.) > 0, Uit00 (.) < 0, xit is
a quantity of the domestically consumed crop, and wit is wage income. Consumers do not own
V,
land; they can supply farm labor for a wage rate wjt , supply soldier labor for a wage rate wjt

or directly appropriate output from producers. We assume that consumers can change locations
between periods but not within periods: they make a locational decision and then chose to farm,
fight, or steal.
Farm wages Farm wages in Africa adjust to international output prices incompletely and with
a lag, due in part to the seasonality of agricultural production decisions (Ivanic and Martin, 2014;
Headey and Martin, 2016). This empirical fact is captured by the idea that consumers cannot
migrate within periods (the short run), but they can migrate between periods. Thus, we assume
that farm wages are increasing in the previous period’s output price: wjt = wjt (Pjt−1 ) where
7

We examine the empirical case for this assumption in Appendix Section A.1. We reject a unit root for 9 of 11
crops, consistent with recent findings in the literature (Wang and Tomek, 2007; Hart et al., 2015), suggesting that
supply is elastic in the long run.

8

∂ log wjt (Pjt−1 )
∂ log Pjt−1

= η (for all j, t) and for 0 ≤ η ≤ φ.8

Soldiering wages Soldiering involves the risk of fatality or physical harm. Let λi represent individual i’s probability of surviving a given battle without major harm, where λi is drawn according
V so that,
to a cumulative distribution function G(λi ). Armed groups will set the soldiering wage wjt

for the marginal consumer:
V
vit (Pt , wit | wit = wjt (Pjt−1 )) + vc
c
it = λi vit (Pt , wit | wit = wjt ) + v
it



(4)

where vit (Pt , wit ) represents the consumer’s indirect utility function and vc
it is the present value

of future consumption. The marginal consumer’s λ∗ is therefore given by the solution to G(λ∗ ) =
1 − LV , where LV is the share of labor that must be diverted to soldiering if the producer decides
to attempt to seize land. This characterizes the idea that those who exhibit higher values of λi
have more to gain from fighting and will therefore fight even when LV is low. Conversely, those
with the least to gain will be the last to fight.
V −
This feature implies that armed groups must provide a soldiering premium of ω = wjt

wjt (Pjt−1 ) > 0 in order to compensate for this risk and attract a supply of labor for factor conflict.
Because of consumers’ diminishing marginal utility, armed groups set a lower soldiering premium
when real wages are low, and a higher soldiering premium when real wages are high, all else equal.
To see this, note that consumers will derive more utility from a given soldiering premium when
their consumption levels fall. This increases the supply of labor to armed groups, which in turn
lowers the equilibrium soldiering wage premium. We therefore denote this soldiering wage premium
−1
0 (.) > 0.
as a function of real wages: ωjt (wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
), where ωjt

2.2

Analysis: factor conflict and crop prices

We first consider the effect of price changes on factor conflict. In period t, each group faces a
decision to farm peacefully or to attack unilaterally, represented by Lgt ∈ {0, LV }. If one side
attacks, there is a decisive war between both groups after which the attacker, with probability
π > 12 , captures both groups’ output at t and controls the entire territory N̄ into the future. If
both sides attack simultaneously, they each win with probability 12 . If neither side attacks, each
group farms

N̄
2

in every period thereafter.9 The goal of our model is to determine how prices affect

this decision.
8

This lag is one of the reasons why the effect of a food price shock on poverty changes over time. The first order
effect is that real wages fall for net consumers of food in the short run because of rising consumer prices (Deaton,
1989; Ivanic and Martin, 2014). In the long run, producers can respond to higher prices by increasing agricultural
supply, which raises the demand for labor and therefore rural wages and employment (although production decisions
may not respond at all to sufficiently short-lived price shocks). In simulations, Ivanic and Martin (2014) estimate
that the short-run effects are adverse in all nine of the African countries in their analysis, while the net effects (i.e.,
allowing for supply responses) are still adverse in six, implying that η is low. See Headey and Martin (2016) for a
review of this literature.
9
Allowing for the possibility of future conflict does not substantively affect the model’s conclusions. See Appendix
Section A.2 for a discussion on this.

9

The game proceeds as follows: (i) Two identical, fully informed groups begin with initial endowments Ngt =

N̄
2

and Lgt = 1; (ii) Pt is revealed and observed by both groups; (iii) if it is profitable

for neither side to deviate unilaterally from peace, there is no war and each group continues to
farm

N̄
2

Payoffs

indefinitely; (iv) if not, there is a decisive war.10
Let Vg (LVgt , LV−gt ) represent group g’s payoff from choosing LVgt ∈ {0, LV } conditional on

group −g choosing LV−gt ∈ {0, LV }. The payoffs are symmetrical and are represented as follows:

Vg (LV , LV ) =

i
1h
N̄ α
(1 − LV )1−α + δVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2Pjt (
2
2
−1
V
− wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV

(5)

h
i
N̄ α
V 1−α
V
Vg (0, L ) =(1 − π) 2Pjt (
(1 − L )
+ δVt (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2
−1
V
− wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV

(6)

i
h
N̄ α
(1 − LV )1−α + δVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
Vg (LV , 0) =π 2Pjt (
2
−1
V
− wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV

(7)

V

Vg (0, 0) =Pjt

 N̄ α
2

− wjt (Pjt−1 ) + δVtP (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))

(8)

The gains from fighting consist of both groups’ production at period t less the aggregate opportunity cost of fighting, plus the continuation value of victory, VtV (.). When both sides attack
simultaneously, group g’s gains are realized with probability 21 . When group −g strikes first, group
g’s gains are realized with probability 1 − π. When group g strikes first, its gains are observed with
probability π. In all three cases, group g accrues labor costs from both farming and soldiering. If
neither side attacks, then group g receives profits from farming
peace,

N̄
2

plus the continuation value of

VtP (.).

Equilibrium

Attacking is always the best response to attacking, as Vg (LV , LV ) > Vg (0, LV ), ∀Pgt ∈

(0, ∞). The equilibrium of this game will be determined by the relative size of Vg (LV , 0) and
Vg (0, 0). If Vg (LV , 0) > Vg (0, 0), then attacking is a dominant strategy for both groups. However,
if Vg (LV , 0) < Vg (0, 0), then it is not profitable for either group to deviate unilaterally from the
initial peace.
10

We show in Appendix Section A.3 that the set of parameters for which there exists a transfer that avoids conflict
is the same set of parameters for which an equal distribution of land N̄2 avoids conflict. We therefore consider the
case in which each group controls N̄2 rather than explicitly modeling this transfer decision.

10

We can express this condition for peace as:
 N̄ α
Pjt
(1 − 2π(1 − LV )1−α ) >
2


−1
δ πVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 )) − VtP (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 )) − LV ωjt (wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
).

(9)

The left hand side is the net opportunity cost of conflict due to forgone output in time t.11 The
first term on the right hand side is the present value of the gains from conflict due to future profits.
The second term on the right hand side is the additional labor cost of conflict. Note that the
likelihood of a peaceful equilibrium is increasing in LV , the share of labor that must be diverted
from production to conflict, and decreasing in π, the offensive advantage to the first attacker.
In order to determine how price shocks will affect this decision, we must express VtV (.) and
VtP (.) in terms of Pjt . As victory confers total control over all of N̄ , the value of VtV (.) will be the
solution to

∞
X
0
0
0
0
max E[
δ t −t (Pjt0 +1 N̄ α L1−α
gt0 +1 − wjt +1 (Pjt )Lgt +1 )],
t0 =t

the expected value of farming all of N̄ in the long run when groups can hire the optimal amount of
Lgt in between future seasons at a wage rate wjt (.). Solving for this yields the following observation:
X

!
1
∞
0 +1 (Pjt0 ) α
1−α
1
P
1
0
jt
α − (1 − α) α
πVtV (.) − VtP (.) = (π − )E
δ t −t
>0
1−α N̄ (1 − α)
2
wjt0 +1 (Pjt0 ) α
t0 =t

(10)

as VtP (.) = 12 VtV (.) and π > 21 .
Under three conditions, there exists a unique fixed point at which the costs and benefits of
conflict are equated. First, the term on the left hand side of (9) is increasing linearly in Pjt . This
is true if 1 − 2π(1 − LV )1−α > 0. Second, the first term on the right hand side is an increasing
concave function of Pjt . This is true if its elasticity with respect to Pjt is between 0 and 1, or:
1
α

·

φ
1−δφ

−

1−α
α

·

η
1−δφ

< 1, from (10). Third, when Pjt is close to 0, the gains from conflict due to

future profits remain sufficiently high to offset the total costs accrued at t, or: ∀Pjt ∈ (0, ε), where
ε is an arbitrarily small value of Pjt ,
Pjt

 N̄ α
2



−1
(1 − 2π(1 − LV )1−α ) < δ πVtV (.) − VtP (.) − LV ωjt wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
.

(11)

It follows that groups are willing to maintain peace for values of Pjt above some threshold P̃jt ,
and they will unilaterally deviate from peace for values of Pjt below P̃jt . Substituting (10) into (9),
11

This is the net opportunity cost because when group g attacks it gives up Pjt ( N̄2 )α with probability 1 and gains
2Pjt ( N̄2 )α (1 − LV )1−α with probability π.

11

this threshold price is implicitly defined by:
 N̄ α

(1 − 2π(1 − LV )1−α ) =
" ∞
!#

1
X 0

α
0
0
1−α
1
P
(
P̃
)
1
jt +1 jt
−1
α − (1 − α) α
− LV ωjt wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
.
δ(π − )E
δ t −t
1−α N̄ (1 − α)
2
wjt0 +1 (P̃jt0 ) α
t0 =t

P̃jt

2

(12)
This characterizes the threshold price at which the opportunity cost of conflict (on the left hand
side) is equal to the direct gains from conflict net of additional labor costs (on the right).
Proposition 1.
There exists a price P̃jt > 0 such that groups will unilaterally deviate from peace for realizations of
Pjt < P̃jt .
Kennan (2001) demonstrates that the properties outlined above ensure a unique fixed point.
The conditions and their implications are intuitive. First, that there indeed exists a positive net
opportunity cost of conflict in terms of forgone production: 1 − 2π(1 − LV )1−α > 0. This condition
implies that the opportunity cost is a positive linear function of Pjt , ∀Pjt ∈ (0, ∞). Second,
that the persistence of a price shock over time is sufficiently low, which can be simplified to:
φ<

α+η(1−α)
1+αδ .

This implies that the gains from conflict due to future profits is a strictly increasing

and strictly concave function of Pjt , ∀Pjt ∈ (0, ∞). Finally, that these gains from conflict exceed the
opportunity cost when Pjt is arbitrarily low (condition (11)). This ensures that the concave function
(representing the gains from conflict) intersects the linear function (representing the opportunity
cost of conflict) at a unique positive fixed point.
This latter condition is plausible due to the stochastic price process defined above. As Pjt
approaches zero, the left hand side of (12) approaches zero. However, the right hand side of (12)
need not converge with the left, as Pjt+1 = euj +φlogPjt +jt . In other words, if Pjt is close to zero,
the present value of future profits will exceed the opportunity cost of conflict at t provided either
uj is sufficiently high or φ is sufficiently low.12
The intuition behind Proposition 1 is based on the transitory nature of price shocks: starting
at the point where Pjt = P̃jt , a fall in Pjt will have a greater negative effect on the opportunity cost
of fighting (lost profits from farming in time t) relative to the present value of victory (permanent
control of land), provided that φ, the persistence of price shocks over time, is sufficiently low. This
feature generates our first prediction: attacking is more likely to be a dominant strategy for both
groups at lower realizations of Pjt , while a peaceful equilibrium is more likely to be maintained at
higher realizations of Pjt .
12

For example, evaluated for any Pjt ∈ (0, ε), the concave function on the right hand side of (12) increases
exponentially as uj increases, while the left hand side remains close to zero. This implies that condition (11) is
satisfied above a certain value of uj . Intuitively, permanent control of land becomes more valuable relative to output
at t. Similarly, if φ is zero, then the right hand side of (12) is a horizontal line, as Pjt contains no information on
future profits. If the first term is greater than LV ωjt (.), then condition (11) is satisfied and there is a positive and
unique fixed point.

12

Consumer prices Equation (12) also implies that a shock to the soldiering wage premium ωjt will
affect the value of the threshold price P̃jt by shifting the right hand side function. The condition in
V such that the certainty equivalent for the marginal consumer
equation (4) states that groups set wjt

is wjt . Concave utility implies that if the real farming wage falls (exogenously), soldiering becomes
more attractive to consumers due to this wage premium. This increases the supply of labor to
armed groups and lowers the equilibrium soldiering wage premium in the process.
It follows that a rise in Pxt —the price of a crop consumed within a cell—reduces real wages
−1
wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
independently of Pjt , which in turn lowers the equilibrium soldiering wage premium.
V (.) > w (.) and U 00 (.) < 0, then:
More formally, as wjt
jt
it

∂vit (Pt , wit | wit = wt )
∂vit (Pt , wit | wit = wtV )
<
.
∂Pxt
∂Pxt

(13)

Proposition 2. An increase in consumer food prices Pxt reduces the soldiering wage premium ωjt (.)
and increases P̃jt , the threshold crop price below which groups unilaterally deviate from peace.
The proof comes from equations (4) and (13), which together imply that higher consumer
food prices Pxt will increase the supply of labor to armed groups—reducing the soldiering wage
premium—and equation (12), which implies in turn that this will increase the range of domestic
crop prices over which attacking is a dominant strategy for both groups. Intuitively, rising food
prices induce some consumers to switch from low wage agriculture to higher wage (but riskier)
soldiering through an income effect, all else equal.13 This lowers the relative cost of factor conflict
for potential armed groups, as soldiers are cheaper to hire.14

2.3

Output conflict and crop prices

In this section, we characterize conflict as a competition over output rather than land. We do so
by allowing consumers to directly appropriate producers’ surplus through the technology of output
conflict as an alternative to providing wage labor. We denote by LQ the share of labor in this
appropriation sector, and by Q(LQ ) the fraction of total output that is redistributed from the
productive sector to the appropriation sector, where the function Q(LQ ) is positive, continuous
and strictly concave due to congestion effects, as in Dal Bó and Dal Bó (2011).
13
This analysis implies that rising domestically-produced crop prices Pjt will reduce factor conflict as farming
becomes relatively profitable for groups (Proposition 1), while rising domestically-consumed food prices Pxt will
increase factor conflict as the soldiering wage premium becomes more valuable to consumers (Proposition 2). Clearly,
we cannot speak to the overall effect of price changes where j = x = f . However, we do separate these effects in the
empirical section below.
14
We do not consider second-order effects of prices on ωt due to future wages, whereby, from equation (4), an
increase in Pjt will increase vc
it , which will in turn increase ωjt as groups must further compensate soldiers due to
λ. Allowing for these effects further supports the predictions established in both propositions: rising Pjt implies
rising ωjt , which reduces the incentive to attack. This yields the prediction that conflict is less profitable at higher
realizations of Pjt , which is consistent with Proposition 1. Conversely, rising Pxt implies lowering ωjt , which increases
the incentive to attack. This yields the prediction that conflict is more profitable at higher realizations of Pxt , which
is consistent with Proposition 2.

13

We first characterize equilibrium output conflict. In the absence of factor conflict, the total value

of appropriated output in each cell is Q(LQ ) Pjt ( N̄2 )α (1 − LQ )1−α + Pxt Mxt , where Mxt ∈ {0, M̄t }
represents a steady state of imported food stocks such that Mmt = M̄t and Mf t = 0. Again drawing
on Dal Bó and Dal Bó (2011), a consumer’s decision to appropriate is determined by the following
condition:


Q(LQ )
N̄ α
−1
Q 1−α
Pjt ( ) (1 − L )
.
+ Pxt Mxt = (1 − Q(LQ ))wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
Pxt LQ
2

(14)

where the left hand side represents the individual payoff from appropriation, given by the value of
appropriated goods per individual unit of labor allocated to that sector, and the right hand side is
the payoff from one of unit of productive work net of appropriation. Both sides are adjusted for
purchasing power. A consumer will appropriate as long as it is profitable to do so. We show in
Appendix Section A.4 that there is a unique equilibrium level of appropriation LQ determined by
the equality in (14).
Our goal is to determine how shocks to crop prices will affect this equilibrium. Denoting by Ajt
the left hand side of (14) and by Wjt the right, the equilibrium level of appropriation will increase
if a price shock raises the marginal consumer’s payoff from appropriation more than it raises the
payoff from labor, or, A0jt > W0jt .15
Food crops (j = x = f ):

We begin by examining a change to Pf t where j = x = f . Note from

the left hand side of (14) that A0f t = 0, as the price terms cancel out. It is clear from the right hand
side of (14) that higher food crop prices reduce consumers’ real wages: W0f t < 0. Combining these
observations, a food price shock will increase output conflict until both sides of (14) are equated.
Cash crops (j = c; x = m):

We now examine a change to Pct where j = c and x = m. A rise in

Pct increases the value of appropriable output, as A0lt > 0. There is no change to consumers’ real
wage: W0lt = 0. Thus, a cash crop shock will increase output conflict.16
Proposition 3. A0jt > W0jt . An increase in domestically produced crop prices Pjt will raise the
equilibrium level of output conflict.
When j = x = f , this prediction is due to a change in the opportunity cost of output conflict
for consumers. A positive shock to Pf t does not affect the real value of appropriable output; rather,
it reduces the value of real wages in the productive sector.
15

We show in Appendix Section A.5 that the presence of factor conflict does not affect the qualitative nature of
the comparative statics presented below. For now, it is worth noting from equation (4) that factor conflict groups set
V
wjt
so as to equate the expected utilities of farm and soldiering labor for the marginal consumer. We can therefore
interpret Wjt as the payoff from one unit of labor—either farming or soldiering—for the marginal consumer.
16
We can allow for the effect of prices through wjt (Pjt−1 ) by considering the lagged impact of price shocks. When
j = x = f , the lagged effect is ambiguous. This is because wf t+1 increases though η (raising the numerator in Wf t+1 )
while Pf t+1 increases through φ (raising the denominator). Similarly, when j = c the lagged effect is also ambiguous.
This is because Pct+1 increases through φ (raising Alt+1 ), while wlt+1 increases through η (raising Wlt+1 ).

14

When j = c and x = m, this prediction is due to a change in the value of appropriable output.
A positive shock to Pct does not affect real wages in the productive sector, and therefore has no
impact on the opportunity cost of output conflict for consumers.
Owing to concave utility, the difference between these mechanisms implies that a given shock
to the opportunity cost of output conflict (caused by a change in Pf t when j = x = f ) will have
a larger effect on output conflict than an equivalent shock to the value of appropriable surplus
(caused by a change in Pct when j = c and x = m). This is because the lost utility from the
W0f t shock will be larger than the utility to be gained from an equivalent A0lt shock, thus rendering
output conflict more profitable.
Import crops (j = c; x = m):

Finally, we examine a change to Pmt , the price of a crop that

is consumed in a given cell but produced elsewhere. From the right hand side of (14), W0mt < 0:
higher import crop prices reduce real wages. From the left hand side, a shock to Pmt also reduces
the real value of appropriable cash crop output (the first term in parentheses), but not the value
of appropriable import crops (the second term), which remains constant in real terms. Thus, when
j = c and x = m, a shock to Pmt raises the value of output conflict by lowering its opportunity
cost.
Proposition 4. A0mt > W0mt . An increase in imported food prices Pmt raises the equilibrium level
of output conflict when j = c and x = m.
A change to Pmt reduces real wages in the productive sector without altering the real value
of import crops. This will induce marginal consumers to appropriate until the terms in (14) are
equilibrated.

2.4

Combining factor and output conflict

In Appendix Section A.5, we allow for producers and consumers to make their optimal decisions
in the presence of both factor conflict and output conflict. We model factor conflict as a state
variable and show that its presence does not qualitatively alter the output conflict predictions in
Propositions 3 and 4. In turn, the exercise allows us to refine the conditions necessary for the factor
conflict predictions in Propositions 1 and 2 to hold. We show that higher domestic crop prices will
still lead groups to farm rather than fight as long as the second order (net) impact of prices on
output conflict does not offset the opportunity cost of factor conflict in terms of lost production.
Similarly, higher import crop prices will still lead to factor conflict as long as the wage premium
reduction is not offset by the second order effect (via output conflict) on the expected benefit of
launching a factor conflict attack.17
17
We also show in Appendix Section A.6 that, were we to allow producers to endogenously determine agricultural
wages, there would not exist a wage that profitably avoids output conflict.

15

2.5

Summary and Discussion

Summary

The following statements summarize the main predictions that we investigate empir-

ically. Domestically-produced crops refer to crops produced in a subnational cell.
1. Higher domestically-produced crop prices Pjt reduce factor conflict, as groups choose to farm
rather than attack the neighboring territory.
2. Higher consumer crop prices Pxt increase factor conflict, as consumers turn to armed groups
for a higher wage.
3. Higher domestically-produced crop prices Pjt increase output conflict, as consumers respond
to the increasing value of output relative to real wages.
4. Higher consumer crop prices Pxt increase output conflict, as consumers respond to the increasing value of output relative to real wages.
Discussion

While it is not possible to assign a single cause to a particular conflict episode, it

is nevertheless illustrative to briefly consider recent cases of conflict within our sample countries
in light of the model’s predictions. The First (2002-2005) and Second (2011) Ivorian Civil Wars
represent particularly relevant examples of factor conflict in the wake of significant price shocks.
Côte d’Ivoire was largely stable under the rule of Felix Houphouet-Boigny since its independence
from France in 1960. Following his death in 1993, escalating sectarian tensions precipitated a period
of political instability, which culminated in the outbreak of civil war in 2002 between the largely
Muslim supporters of Alesanne Ouattara in the north and President Laurent Gbagbo’s Christian
supporters in the south. By the end of the violence in 2007, approximately 1370 lives were lost
(Sundberg and Melander, 2013).
The Ivorian economy relies heavily on cocoa and coffee exports. The case literature suggests the
decline of these export commodity prices throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s led to the rise of
ethno-religious tensions and more competition for land (Woods, 2003; Wong, 2005; Economic and
Political Weekly, 2004). Woods (2003, p. 648) notes that:
As [...] incomes from cocoa exports declined, pressures to control access to land rose. It
was within this context that the issue of citizenship came to the fore. At the national
level, defining who was a citizen and who was not became central to excluding certain
individuals from competing in national elections. At the village level, competition and
conflict surfaced over land, along with growing calls by those who saw themselves as
‘indigenous’ to restrict the rights of foreigners to acquire land and to vote.
It is interesting in the context of Proposition 1 to note that these tensions spilled over into
outright civil war only after cocoa and coffee prices fell to historical low points in 2000 and 2001
respectively, dragging the Ivorian economy into recession with consecutive GDP per capita growth

16

rates of −4.34% and −1.96%.18 Amid the larger scale contest for central political control, examples
of village-level “micro-conflicts” over land across the cocoa belt were picked up by international
media outlets, depicting for the most part violence arising from the expulsion of so-called foreigners
from productive land by self-styled “indigenous” southerners.19 The violence ceased by 2005 and
a peace deal was signed in 2007, by which time both cocoa and coffee prices had recovered.
The Second Ivorian Civil War broke out in March 2011 after Gbagbo refused to concede the
2010 presidential election, despite both the country’s Independent Electoral Commission and the
international community acknowledging Outtara as the true victor.20 This was one of 63 elections
in Sub-Saharan Africa from 1990-2012 that is deemed to have exhibited irregularities by the African
Elections Database.21 However, it is one of only a handful that escalated into a full-blown civil war,
which ultimately left more than 3,000 civilians dead.22 It concluded with the Battle of Abidjan—
the country’s commercial capital—and the arrest of Gbagbo by French, UN and Ouattara-aligned
forces.“
In contrast to the first civil war, this conflict began as cocoa and coffee prices hovered near
record highs. Again unlike a decade earlier, prices for staple food crops—among the country’s
main imports—were also approaching record peaks. Our model (Proposition 2) indicates that the
poverty caused by these staple food price shocks incentivized some net consumers to join the armed
conflict. In that light, it makes sense that only 3 out of 22 battles (13.6%) in the second civil war
took place outside of urban areas, as compared to 19 out of 52 (36.5%) in the first (Raleigh et al.,
2010). Moreover, the conflict’s end followed a wave of defections by Gbagbo’s troops as Ouattara’s
Republican Forces made advances across the country. Reports suggest that these defections were
rooted in Gbagbo’s inability to pay sufficient wages, owing in part to the role of international
sanctions.23
Finally, it was widely reported that Liberian mercenaries fought in large numbers for Gbagbo,
and perhaps even for Ouattara.24 In a survey of former Liberian Civil War combatants conducted
at the time of the Ivorian crisis, Blattman and Annan (2016, p. 2) found that 3-10% of respondents
reported actions such as attending secret meetings with recruiters or being willing to fight in
Côte d’Ivoire “at the going recruitment fees.” However, in a randomly selected subsample treated
18

World Bank, accessed August 25 2017 at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.KD.ZG?cid=
GPD_31&locations=CI.
19
See, for example, “Chocolate war erupts in Ivory Coast,” The Guardian, May 13 2004, accessed August 25
2017 at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/may/14/rorycarroll; “Land Quarrels Unsettle Ivory Coast’s
Cocoa Belt,” The New York Times, May 26 2004, accessed August 25 2017 at: http://www.nytimes.com/2004/
05/26/world/land-quarrels-unsettle-ivory-coast-s-cocoa-belt.html; and “Three killed in Ivory Coast land
dispute”, Reuters, May 8 2001 (Sundberg and Melander, 2013).
20
“Ivory Coast: death squads on the rise as civil war looms,” The Guardian, December 22 2010, accessed August
25 2017 at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/22/ivory-coast-death-squads.
21
For more information on this dataset, see http://africanelections.tripod.com/about.html.
22
This figure comes from Human Rights Watch, accessed August 28 2017 at https://www.hrw.org/report/2011/
10/05/they-killed-them-it-was-nothing/need-justice-cote-divoires-post-election-crimes.
23
“Ivory Coast Battle Nears Decisive Stage in Key City,” The New York Times, March 31 2011, accessed August
28 2017 at: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/01/world/africa/01ivory.html.
24
For example, see “Liberia Uneasily Linked to Ivory Coast Conflict,” The New York Times, March 31 2011,
accessed August 28 2017 at: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/01/world/africa/01liberia.html.

17

with agricultural training, capital inputs and counseling, ex-combatants were around a quarter
less likely to report these mercenary recruitment activities. The program increased their incomes
by around $12 per month, and had little effect on peer networks, social integration, or attitudes
toward violence. The study indicates not only that economic motives were a significant driver of
this particular conflict, but that the cross-price elasticity of labor supply between peaceful and
illicit sectors more generally is substantial, as potential fighters are responsive to small changes in
relative wages. This is an important assumption of our model.
Another important assumption in our model is that consumers have little access to conventional
financial smoothing mechanisms that would obviate the need to engage in risky coping strategies
in the wake of price shocks. The evidence suggests that this assumption is plausible. First, Ivanic
et al. (2012) estimate that the 2010-2011 food price shock pulled 68 million net consumers in less
developed countries beneath the $1.25 per day extreme poverty line, while also lifting 24 million
producers above it.25 Applying the same ratio of producer and consumer effects to the overall
effects reported in Ivanic and Martin (2008), we estimate that the 2005-2007 price spike pulled an
estimated 162 million consumers beneath the extreme poverty line.26 These findings indicate that
millions did not have sufficient access to conventional consumption smoothing mechanisms, which
is consistent with the correlated nature of the real income shock caused by food prices. The idea
that poor households must engage in risky or costly coping behaviors in the face of such shocks is
in keeping with evidence from a broad empirical literature (e.g., de Janvry et al., 2006; Dupas and
Robinson, 2012; Miguel, 2005; Oster, 2004).
With respect to output conflict, examples of incidents plausibly linked to the food price spikes
of 2008 and 2010/11 are plentiful. For example, in a single article, Reuters reported recent “price
rise protests and disturbances” in in 15 countries, 8 of which were African.27 In some cases demonstrations led to policy changes aimed at lowering food prices (e.g., Cameroon, Mozambique), in
others they involved direct looting (e.g., Burkina Faso).28 Examples of both can be found in Côte
d’Ivoire, where, in 2008, then-President Gbagbo cancelled custom duties after two days of violent
protests in Abidjan;29 and, during the 2011 shock, a UN Refugee Agency warehouse was looted in
the agricultural market town of Guiglo (Raleigh et al., 2010).30
Examples elsewhere also evoke direct connections to our model. For example, in a rural part of
25

Dollars are PPP-adjusted
This is derived from a 9-country sample, in which they estimate that, net of producer effects, the price shock
increased the poverty rate by 2.7 percentage points; for the African countries in the sample, this ranged from 3.6 to
4.9 percentage points.
27
“Food price rise sparks protests,” Reuters, May 15 2008, accessed August 28 at: http://www.reuters.com/
article/us-food-prices-protests-idUSL1579452720080515.
28
These policy changes suggest that one motive for consumers in urban areas is to provoke government actions
that will lower food prices. To the extent that these protests imply both an opportunity cost in terms of time and
an expected benefit in terms of lower food prices, we can interpret them as a variant of the behavior predicted by
Proposition 3. In our empirical analysis, we attempt to separate these urban “policy protests” from the predatory
output conflict more explicitly defined in our model.
29
“Riots prompt Ivory Coast tax cuts,” BBC News, April 2 2008, accessed August 28 2017 at: http://news.bbc.
co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/7325733.stm.
30
These typically contain supplies of staple cereals; see https://emergency.unhcr.org/entry/86993/
warehouse-space-standards.
26

18

the Kopsiro Division in the Mount Elgon District, Kenya, a town was raided “for food supplies on
several occasions” during the 2008 price shock. In the Bari region of Somalia, food was stolen from
a World Food Program truck by “nomadic armed men”, who distributed it to “nomad families
who complain that they are not targeted by food aid” during the 2011 shock. Also in Somalia, 25
megatons of assorted food commodities were looted from a storage facility in Bacad Weyne, a rural
town in the Mudug region. These are among many examples documented in the ACLED dataset
(Raleigh et al., 2010), described in more detail below.

3

Data and measurement

3.1

Structure

We construct a panel grid dataset to form the basis of our main empirical analysis, consisting
of 10,229 arbitrarily drawn 0.5 × 0.5 decimal degree cells (around 55km × 55km at the equator)
covering the continent of Africa. The unit of analysis is the cell-year. The cell resolution is presented
graphically in Appendix Figure A1.

3.2

Conflict

Main factor conflict measure: UCDP Factor Conflict

Our theory requires that the mea-

sure of factor conflict must capture large-scale conflict battles associated with the permanent control
of territory, as distinct from transitory appropriation of output.31 The Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP hereafter) Georeferenced Event Dataset project is particularly suitable. It represents
a spatially disaggregated edition of the well-known UCDP country-level conflict dataset used frequently in the literature. It records events involving “the use of armed force by an organised actor
against another organised actor, or against civilians, resulting in at least 1 direct death” (Sundberg
and Melander, 2013, pp.4). Moreover, it includes only dyads that have crossed a 25-death threshold
in a single year of the 1989-2010 series.32 The data are recorded from a combination of sources,
including local and national media, agencies, NGOs and international organizations. A two-stage
coding process is adopted, in which two coders use a separate set of procedures at different times
to ensure that inconsistencies are reconciled and the data are reliable. Conflict events are coded for
the most part with precision at the location-day level. We aggregate to the cell-year level, coding
the variable as a one if any conflict event took place, and zero otherwise. This reduces the potential
for measurement error to bias results, and is in line with the literature (Miguel et al., 2004; Nunn
and Qian, 2014; Bazzi and Blattman, 2014; Berman et al., 2017).33
31

In fact, this definition can be relaxed: our measure of factor conflict need only capture battles in which the
contested resource is not food.
32
For example, battles between the UNRF II and the Ugandan government crossed the 25-death threshold in 1997,
therefore events in 1996 and 1998 in which deaths d were 0 < d < 25 are also included.
33
For each event, UCDP records the headline of the associated news article. Examples include: “Five said killed,
250 houses torched in clashes over land in central DRC.” BBC Monitoring Africa, 9/21/2007; “Scores feared dead
as Nigerian villagers battle over farmland’ ’. AFP, 4/25/2005; “Tension runs high in west Ivory Coast cocoa belt. [20
killed.]” Reuters, 11/14/2002; “Five killed as tribes battle over land in Kenya’s Rift Valley region.” AFP, 2/13/2006;

19

Summary statistics for this measure of conflict incidence are presented in the top panel of
Table 1. The unconditional probability of observing a factor conflict event in a cell-year is 2.7%.
The row immediately beneath displays the corresponding onset statistics, defined as I(Conf lictit =
1 | Conf lictit−1 = 0), where i is a cell. Conditional on peace at t−1, conflicts occur with probability
of 1.4%. Beneath this again are of f set statistics, defined as I(Conf lictit+1 = 0 | Conf lictit = 1).
This is the equivalent of measuring the additive inverse of the persistence probability. Conditional
on conflict in a given cell-year, the probability of peace the following year is 53.5%. In the main
analysis, we model onset and offset in addition to incidence.34
Main output conflict measure: ACLED Output Conflict

Following our theory, the output

conflict measure must capture violence over the appropriation of surplus. These events are likely
to be more transitory and less organized than large-scale factor conflict battles over the permanent
control of territory. For this, the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED) project
provides an appropriate measure, covering the period 1997-2013. Like the UCDP project, ACLED
records geocoded conflict events from a range of media and agency sources. Of eight conflict event
categories included in the data, we discard all of the organized group “battle” categories and are
left with two remaining forms of violence: “riots and protests” and “violence against civilians”.
We allow the output incidence measure to equal 1 if any of these two events occur in a cell-year,
and 0 otherwise. Each classification includes unorganized violence by any form of group, including
unnamed mobs. This definition captures incidences of food riots, farm raids and crop theft, as well
as more general rioting and looting. No fatalities are necessary for events to be included in the
data. Table 2 shows that unconditional output conflict probability is 5%.35
Micro-level output conflict from Afrobarometer We turn to the Afrobarometer survey series for micro-level measures of interpersonal output violence. The first four rounds yield over
67,000 responses across 19 countries to questions on whether or not individuals experienced theft
or violence in the preceding year. The data are collected as repeated cross-sections between 1999
and 2009. In Table 1, we see that more than 31% of respondents report having experienced theft in
the past year, while 13% have been victims of violence.36 In validation tests (discussed in Appendix
“Tribes in Chad feud over land around well, 50 dead.” Reuters, 11/23/2000.
34
In robustness tests, we also use an alternative measure of factor conflict from the ACLED dataset. It records
conflicts after which (non-state) armed groups gain control of territory. This has the advantage of including only
battles that align with our definition of factor conflict; the disadvantage is that is likely to be a small subset: the
unconditional probability of observing this event is 0.4%.
35
ACLED data observations are accompanied by a brief note on the nature of each event. The output conflict events
contain 3438 mentions of “riot-” (i.e., including “rioters”, “rioting”, and so on), or 0.39 for each time our output
conflict incidence variable takes a value of 1; 1302 mentions of “raid-” (0.15); 1083 mentions of “loot-” (0.12); 1173
mentions of “thief”, ”thieve-”, “theft”, “steal-”, ”stole-”, “crime”, “criminal” or “bandit” (0.13); and 383 mentions
of “food” (0.04). Examples of specific notes are: “Around 25 MT of assorted food commodities to be distributed by a
LNGO were looted from its storage facility in Bacad Weyne in the night of 31/07/2011.” (Somalia); “A dozen armed
men looted and pillaged food stocks in Boguila. After shooting their weapons in the air and attacking food stores, the
bandits vanished within 45 minutes”. (Central African Republic)
36
The respective questions are: ”Over the past year, how often (if ever) have you or anyone in your family: Had
something stolen from your house?” and ”Over the past year, how often (if ever) have you or anyone in your family:

20

Section C.4), we show that the ACLED output conflict variable is significantly correlated with both
Afrobarometer survey measures, while the UCDP factor conflict variable is correlated with neither.
We discuss this dataset in more detail in Section 5.3.
The upper panel of Figure 2 displays a time plot of the two main cell-level conflict event variables. On the vertical axis is the count of cells in which at least one conflict event occurs. UCDP
Factor Conflict runs from 1989 to 2010, and ACLED Output Conflict runs from 1997 to 2013. Note
that output conflict does not appear to vary with factor conflict, and is at no stage less frequent.

3.3

Prices

To study the causal effect of price variation on conflict, we require price data with three general
properties: sufficient variation over time; variation that is not endogenous to local conflict events
and/or determined by local factors that might jointly affect prices and conflict; and variation
that significantly affects real income at the household level in opposing directions across producers
and consumers. Our approach is to construct local price series that combine plausibly exogenous
temporal variation in global crop prices with local-level spatial variation in crop production and
consumption patterns.
The middle and lower panels of Figure 2 present sets of global crop price series covering 1989
to 2013, our period of analysis. The prices are taken from the IMF International Finance Statistics series and the World Bank Global Economic Monitor (described in more detail in Appendix
Section B.1). The top panel displays three important staple food crops for African consumers and
producers: maize, wheat and rice, with prices in the year 2000 set to an index value of 100. Immediately apparent are sharp spikes in 1996 and, more notably, 2008 and 2011. Only wheat falls short of
an index value of 300 in this period. In the lower panel, we present a selection of three non-staples
(“cash crops” henceforth): coffee, cocoa and tobacco. These exhibit more heterogeneity, though
coffee and cocoa prices reach high points toward the end of the series, before falling through 2012
and 2013. For both sets of crops, our study period captures historically important variation.
Variation in global crop prices is plausibly exogenous to local conflict events in Africa. As
our sample consists of African countries only, we avoid serious concerns that cell-level conflict
events directly affect world food prices—the entire continent of Africa accounts for only 5.9% of
global cereal production over our sample period. Nevertheless, other factors could affect both
simultaneously. The World Bank (2014) posits a range of likely explanations for food price spikes
in 2008-09 and 2010-11. For instance, the surge in wheat prices is attributed to weather shocks
in supplier countries like Australia and China, while the concurrent maize price shock is jointly
explained by rising demand for ethanol biofuels and high fructose corn syrup, as well the effect of
La Nina weather patterns on supply in Latin America. Although this set of correlates is broad,
they are unlikely to influence our conflict measures through the same confluence of spatial and
temporal variation as our price indices. For example, it is unlikely that a dry spell in Argentina
Been physically attacked?”

21

could influence concurrently violence in rural and urban Uganda in opposing directions, other than
through an effect on world food prices. Notwithstanding this, we variously control for country-year
fixed effects, year fixed fixed effects, country time-trends, weather conditions, oil prices, and mineral
prices in our formal analysis.
Finally, several studies evaluate large impacts of food price shocks on household welfare and
consumption in developing countries. For example, Alem and Söderbom (2012) show that a food
price increase in Ethiopia between 2007 and 2008 significantly reduced consumption in poor urban
households. Using survey data from 18 African countries in 2005 and 2008, Verpoorten et al.
(2013) find that higher international food prices are simultaneously associated with lower and higher
consumption in urban and rural households respectively. This resonates with our own analysis in
the Appendix Section C.4, where we use Afrobarometer survey data to identify opposing effects of
higher consumer and producer prices on self-reported poverty indices. As we write above, Ivanic
et al. (2012) evaluate the effect of the 2010-11 price change for 38 commodities on extreme poverty in
28 countries, finding that the shock pulled 68 million net consumers below the World Bank extreme
poverty line of $1.25, while pushing 24 million out of poverty through the producer mechanism.
Producer Price Index To compute producer prices, we combine temporal variation in world
prices with rich high-resolution spatial variation in crop-specific agricultural land cover circa 2000.
The spatial data come from the M3-Cropland project, described in detail by Ramankutty et al.
(2008). The authors develop a global dataset of croplands by combining two different satellitebased datasets with detailed agricultural inventory data to train a land cover classification dataset.
The method produces spatial detail at the 5 min level (around 10km at the equator), which we
aggregate to our 0.5 degree cell level. Table 1 displays summary statistics on cropland coverage:
63% of cells contain cropland area larger than zero, while cropland as a share of the total area of
the continent is 7.2%. Figure 3 presents crop-specific maps for a selection of six major commodities
(maize, rice, wheat, sorghum, cocoa and coffee).
Our producer price index is the dot product of a vector of crop-specific cell area shares and the
corresponding vector of global crop prices. For cell i, country l and year t the price index is given
by:37
P P Iilt =

n
X

(Pjt ×

j=1

Njil
|{z}

)

(15)

crop share of land

where crops j . . . n are contained in a set of 11 major traded crops that feature in the M3-Cropland
dataset and for which international prices exist. Global crop prices are taken from the IMF International Finance Statistics series and the World Bank Global Economic Monitor and are each
indexed at 100 in the year 2000.38 In addition to this aggregated index, we also compute disaggref ood
gated variants: P P Iilt
is an index of prices for food crops (those which constitute more than 1%
37

Note that the subscript notation that we use henceforth in the empirical section does not align perfectly with
the subscript notation used in our theoretical model. E.g., i now refers to a cell and j refers to crops in our dataset.
38
Appendix Section B.1 presents the the descriptions and sources for the price data in more detail.

22

cash is an index of prices for cash crops (the
of calorie consumption in the entire sample); and P P Iilt

rest). The index varies over time only due to plausibly exogenous international price changes; all
other components are fixed.
Consumer Price Index The consumer price index we construct is similar in structure to the
producer price index, only the spatial variation instead comes from country-level data on food
consumption from the FAO Food Balance Sheets. Food consumption is calculated as the calories
per person per day available for human consumption for each primary commodity. It is obtained by
combining statistics on imports, exports and production, and corrected for quantities fed to livestock
and used for seed, and for estimated losses during storage and transportation. Processed foods are
standardized to their primary commodity equivalent. Although the procedure is harmonized by the
FAO, gaps in quality are still likely to emerge across countries and over time. Partly for this reason,
we construct time-invariant consumption shares based on averages over the series 1985-2013. These
are similar to the crop shares Njil above, only that crop shares in this instance represent calories
consumed of crop j as a share of total calories consumed per person in a given country over the
series.
Formally, the consumer price index in cell i, country l and year t is given by:
CP Ilt =

n
X
j=1

(Pjt ×

ξjl
|{z}

)

(16)

crop share of calories

where crops j . . . n are contained in a set of 18 crops that are consumed in Africa and for which
world prices exist, making up 56% of calorie consumption in the sample, and containing important
staples such as maize, wheat, rice and sorghum, as well as sugar and oil palm, which are used to
process other foods. Again, temporal variation comes only from the price component.

3.4

Other data

In Table 1, Urban area % is share of each cell area that is classified as urban by the SEDAC
project at Columbia University. The same source provides data on cell-level Population (which we
extrapolate from five year intervals to form a cell-year estimate) and Distance to city (measured
in km).39 Luminosity is a dummy variable indicating whether or not light density within cells is
visible from satellite images taken at night. We include statistics from 1992 (the earliest year for
which data are available) and 2010. These data are increasingly used as measures of subnational
economic development, given the relative dearth of quality data in less developed regions, and in
particular those affected by civil conflict. The data come from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Defense Meteorological Satellite Program’s Operational Linescan
39

SEDAC datasets are downloadable at: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/sets/browse. Accessed August 10th, 2015.

23

System that reports images of the earth at night captured from 20:30 to 22:00 local time.40

4

Estimation framework

Factor conflict To estimate the impact of producer and consumer food prices on factor conflict,
we propose the following specifications:
f actor conf lictilt = αi +

f actor conf lictilt = αi +

2
X
k=0
2
X

p
βt−k
P P Iilt−k + γlt + ilt

p
βt−k
P P Iilt−k

k=0

+

2
X

(17)
m
βt−k
CP Ilt−k

+ γl × t + ilt

k=0

where the outcome is factor conflict in cell i measured as incidence, onset or offset binary variables;
αi represents cell fixed effects; P P I is the producer price index; CP I is the consumer price index;
γlt is country × year fixed effects; γl × t is a country-specific time trend; and ilt is the error
term. We report two standard errors for each coefficient: one that is corrected for spatial and
serial correlation within a radius of 500km, using the procedure developed by Conley (1999) and
implemented by Hsiang (2010); and one that is corrected for spatial correlation across countries
and serial correlation within cells, which is generally more conservative.41 We sum price effects
over three years to account for delayed effects of past shocks, or potentially for displacement effects
where shocks hasten conflict that would have happened in any case. We estimate the specification
with both a linear probability model (LPM) as well as conditional logit, preferring LPM for the
main analysis.
In line with Propositions 1 and 2 respectively, we expect that β p is negative and β m is positive
when the outcome is factor conflict incidence or onset, and the reverse when the outcome is factor
conflict offset.
In the first specification, β p is estimated off within-country-year variation in prices and conflict.
The cost to this approach is that we cannot include the CPI, which varies at the level of a countryyear.42 In the second specification, we include the CPI and substitute the country-year trend for
country × year fixed effects. The identifying assumption is that, after accounting for time-invariant
factors at the cell level and common trending factors at the country level, variation in the consumer
and producer price indices is not correlated with unobserved factors that also affect conflict. We
favor our estimate for β m without year fixed effects, as most of the variation in the CPI is over
time rather than across countries (i.e., there is more spatial homogeneity in food consumption than
40

Accessed at https://ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html on July 1st, 2017.
(see
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, for a discussion on the particular suitability of nighttime lights as measure
for economic development in Africa).
41
We show in the Appendix (Table A4) that our main results are robust to setting the Conley standard error
distance cutoff from 100km to 1000km (in intervals of 100km).
42
In later specifications, we use our theory to introduce heterogeneity across cells that permits the inclusion of both
the CPI and country-year fixed effects.

24

in crop production). Nevertheless, we also present results from specifications that include year
fixed effects. In the Appendix (Table A2), we additionally include cell-level controls for an oil price
index, a mineral price index, and various weather controls.
Output conflict

To estimate the impact of producer and consumer food prices on output conflict,

we propose the following specifications:
output conf lictilt = αi +

output conf lictilt = αi +

output conf lictilt = αi +

2
X
k=0
2
X
k=0
2
X

p
θt−k
P P Iilt−k + γlt + eilt

p
θt−k
P P Iilt−k +

pf
f ood
θt−k
P P Iilt−k
+

k=0

2
X
k=0
2
X

m
θt−k
CP Ilt−k + γl × trendt + eilt

(18)

pc
cash
θt−k
P P Iilt−k
+ γlt + eilt

k=0

The first two are analogous to the specifications in (17), only with output conflict as the outcome
variable in this case. The critical difference is that we expect both θp and θm to be positive, as
predicted in Propositions 3 and 4.
The third specification tests an implication of Proposition 3. P P I f ood is the component of
the producer price index that contains information only on food commodities that constitute more
than 1% of total average consumption in our sample (capturing Pf from the theoretical model).
These include the major staples of maize, wheat, and rice. The P P I cash component picks up the
remaining cash crops such as coffee, tea and tobacco (capturing Pc from the model). Our model
indicates that the lost utility from a negative real income shock (captured in P P I f ood ) is greater
than the potential utility gained from a positive shock to the value of appropriation (captured in
P P I cash ) because of concavity. The empirical implication is that θpf > θpc .
As in the case of factor conflict, we examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of
cell-level controls for an oil price index, a mineral price index, and various weather controls as well
as year fixed effects.

5

Results

5.1

Factor conflict

Main results

In Table 2, we present results from the specifications in (17) for conflict incidence,

onset and offset. In all regression tables, coefficients represent the cumulative impact over three
years of a one standard deviation rise in a given price index.43
Column (1) shows the result of a regression that omits the CPI and includes country × year
fixed effects (CYFEs). A one standard deviation rise in the PPI decreases the incidence of factor
43

We use the sample standard deviation over time, as it is more meaningful in the context of price shocks than the
overall sample standard deviation that contains both temporal and spatial variation.

25

conflict by 0.0042, or 15.4% of the mean. The estimate is significant at the 1% level with both
Conley standard errors and two-way clustered standard errors. In Column (2), we include the
CPI and replace CYFEs with a country-specific time trend. The PPI reduces conflict by 17.2% (p
< 0.01), and the CPI increases conflict by 8.6%. The CPI effect has a p-value of 0.134 with Conley
standard errors, and 0.116 with two-way standard errors. In Column (3), we add year fixed effects
for comparison. The CPI estimate is larger but noisier in this specification. In both cases, the PPI
and CPI coefficients are significantly different from each other, whether calculated using Conley or
two-way clustered standard errors.
In Columns (4) and (5), we see similar results where factor conflict onset is the dependent
variable. The PPI effects are −16.3% and −20% respectively, and are precisely estimated in both
specifications. The CPI effect is +10.2%, and is again significantly different from the PPI effect,
but not significantly different from zero at the 10% level. In Column (6), we add year fixed effects
for comparison, finding that the CPI effect rises to 37.7%, and is significant at the 10% level with
Conley standard errors, but not with two-way clustered standard errors.
In Columns (7) and (8), we show that both indices significantly affect the duration of factor conflict. The PPI increases the probability that factor conflict will end by 8.3% and 9.2% respectively,
and the CPI reduces it by 16.5% (p < 0.01). The PPI and CPI effects are significantly different
from each other. This is consistent with the idea in Proposition 2 that rising import food prices
force low-income workers to join armed groups. In Column (9), we again add year fixed effects for
comparison. The magnitude of the CPI effect is larger but more noisily estimated.
Taken together, the main results indicate that rising food prices significantly reduce the onset
and duration of factor conflict in food-producing cells, while significantly prolonging factor conflict
in food-consuming cells. Across the nine specifications, all 15 point estimates are consistent with
Propositions 1 and 2, while the effects of the PPI and CPI are at least marginally significantly
different from each other in five of six cases.
Robustness

In Appendix Section C.1, we examine the robustness of these main results to a

variety of sensitivity tests. In Table A3, we cumulatively add (i) cell-level weather covariates and
oil prices × cell- and country-level production indicators and (ii) mineral prices × cell-level mine
indicators from Berman et al. (2017) to the specification with year fixed effects. The PPI and CPI
coefficients are at least marginally significantly different from each other in seven of the resulting
nine regressions, and all 18 coefficients carry the proposed sign. Seven of the nine PPI estimates
are significantly different from zero; the other two are marginally significant. The CPI estimates
are either below or close to the 10% significance level in five specifications.
We also show that the results are qualitatively robust to recoding the outcome variable as
“two-sided” conflict only (Table A4); varying the Conley standard error kernal cutoff from 100km
to 1000km in increments of 100km (Table A5); aggregating the cell area to 1 degree cells (i.e., by
a factor of four; Table A6); adding to that specification controls for the PPI in neighboring cells
(Table A7); including a cell-year estimate of population as a control variable (Table A8); estimating

26

a conditional fixed-effects logit model (Table A9); weighting the CPI and PPI components by the
extent to which crops are traded by a given country (Table A10); weighting the PPI by crop yields
per hectare (Table A11); and including contemporaneous price indices only (Table A12).
Heterogeneity

We present country-by-country estimates of these two effects on the left hand

side of Figure 4. We do this by interacting our price indices by country dummies and plotting the
resulting estimates and 95% confidence intervals by effect size. The red line indicates the overall
main effect calculated above. The PPI effects are presented in the upper left cell, and the CPI
effects are presented in the lower left cell. While many countries exhibit large effects that are
consistent with the overall main effect, there is nevertheless heterogeneity worthy of investigation.
Our model provides guidance on one source of heterogeneity in the consumer price effect that we
can test using subnational data. Recall that higher food prices cause net consumers to join armed
conflict groups due in part to the concavity of utility. The soldiering premium is more valuable to
a consumer when consumption levels are low, all else equal. A consumer on the margin of violence
must be earning a lower wage than that offered by the armed conflict group; they must have few
assets for dissaving and little access to credit or insurance. In short, we should not expect to find
the same impact of consumer prices on factor conflict in more economically developed cells, all else
equal.
Following a now-voluminous literature, we proxy local economic development by using satellitebased measures of luminosity at night, setting the variable equal to 1 if a grid cell showed non-zero
luminosity in a given year. The impact of the CPI on factor conflict is therefore predicted to be
lower in cells where luminosity = 1. It is conceivable also that in the event of negative price shocks,
farmers who are proximate to local non-agricultural labor markets will be less likely to join armed
groups than those who do not. If we assume that lit cells are more likely than dark cells to contain
employment opportunities outside of the agricultural sector (all else equal), then the impact of the
PPI on factor conflict also ought to be closer to zero where luminosity = 1.
Introducing the luminosity variable allows us to estimate a variant of the equations in (17)
that contains CP Ilt × luminosityi , P P Iilt × luminosityi and country × year fixed effects, as the
interaction generates variation in the CPI at the subnational level. To that end, this exercise serves
as both a robustness exercise as well as a test of theoretical implications. Our model predicts that
CPI interaction effect is negative.
We are cautious of several factors that may impede our interpretation of these interaction effects.
First, the interaction variable might simply capture the fact that lit cells are likely to contain larger
populations, which is necessary for conflict to occur in the first place. Second, global price passthrough is likely to be larger in lit cells than in dark ones, as economic development may reflect
more trade openness. This could lead us to falsely reject our prediction, as our model implies that
economic development mutes the effect of prices on violence while the passthrough story implies
the opposite. Third, it is plausible that conflict is more likely to occur in remote areas, where the
state might lack the capacity to deter armed groups. In contrast to the passthrough mechanism,

27

this could lead us to falsely corroborate our prediction, as remote cells are more likely to be dark.
To address the first concern, we include a cell-year measure of population in all specifications.
To control for both price passthrough and remoteness/state capacity, we interact the following with
the price indices: distance (in 100km units) to the next nearest lit cell; distance to the nearest port;
distance to the nearest land border; and distance to the capital city.44 The ex-ante sign of these
interactions is unclear, given the tension between the competing mechanisms.
We use measures of luminosity taken at three different points: 1992 (the earliest available),
2000, and 2010. The 1992 measure comes at the end of a long period of stagnation in Africa, and
fails to capture important economic gains of the 1990s and 2000s; on the other hand, it is less prone
to capture endogenous responses to violence itself. We run two regressions with each measure: one
with a control for population (in addition to cell fixed effects and CYFEs), and one with additional
controls for the four distance variables.
The results of this test are presented in Table 3. The outcome variable in each model is factor
conflict incidence. In all six specifications, CPI × luminosity has a negative coefficient, and PPI
× luminosity has a positive coefficient. Column (1) shows results from a model with luminosity
measured in 1992. We see that the impact of a CPI shock in lit cells is −14.7% compared to
dark cells, and that the estimate is marginally significant with Conley standard errors but not
with two-way clustered standard errors. In Column (2) we add the remaining covariates, which
substantially mutes the impact. In Columns (3) to (6), however, we see that the CPI interaction
effect is larger in (absolute) magnitude and more precisely estimated, ranging from −22% in the
baseline specifications (where all four p-values are less than 0.05) to −11% with the extra set of
controls (p-values ranging from 0.077 to 0.224).
Taken together, these results support an implication of Proposition 2: the effect of consumer
food price shocks on factor conflict is weaker in more economically developed cells. We also find a
similar result with respect to producer prices. Economic development in both cases is proxied by
nighttime luminosity from satellite images.

5.2

Output conflict: ACLED

Main results In Table 4, we present results from the specifications in (18) for output conflict
incidence, onset and offset. Again, in all regression tables, coefficients represent the cumulative
impact over three years of a one (temporal) standard deviation rise in a given price index.
In Column (1), and in clear contrast to the case of factor conflict, we see that a one standard
deviation rise in the PPI leads to an increase in the risk of output conflict of 15.1%. In Column
(2), the PPI impact is 18.9%, while the CPI impact is 14.4%. All three estimates are significantly
different from zero at the 1% level. In Column (3) we show that the CPI effect is muted when we
add year fixed effects for comparison.
In Columns (4) and (5), we see that both indices have large, positive and significant impacts on
44

Data on the distance from a cell to the nearest border and to the capital city are taken from the PRIO GRID
dataset (Tollefsen et al., 2012). Distance to port is from the SEDAC project introduced above.

28

output conflict onset (55.7% and 22.9%). The inclusion of year fixed effects in Column (6) again
results in noisy CPI estimates.
It is clear from Columns (7) and (8) that the main PPI effect is driven entirely by onset rather
than offset, while the CPI has a consistently large effect on both onset and offset (−23.8%). Again,
the inclusion of year fixed effects mutes the CPI effect.
Table 5 presents results from the lower specification in (18), in which the producer price index
is separated into food crops (Producer Price Index: Food Crops) and cash crops (Producer Price
Index: Cash Crops). This allows us to test an implication of Proposition 3: that a shock to food
crop prices will have a greater impact on output conflict than a shock to cash crop prices.
A one standard deviation rise in food crop prices increases the incidence of output conflict by
16.6% (p < 0.01), while the impact of cash crop prices is weakly negative. The estimates are
significantly different from each other, corroborating the model’s prediction. This is driven entirely
by onset effects, as both offset impacts are close to zero and statistically indistinguishable.45
Robustness

In Appendix Table A13, we again cumulatively add ii) cell-level weather covariates

and oil prices × cell- and country-level production indicators; and (ii) mineral prices × cell-level
mine indicators from Berman et al. (2017) to the specification with year fixed effects. As in the
main results, the PPI effect is large, positive, and significant in incidence and onset regressions.
The CPI effect is significant only in the offset regression with the full set of controls: a standard
deviation rise in the CPI reduces the likelihood that output conflict ends by 57.3%. Otherwise,
the inclusion of year fixed effects eliminates the CPI effect. In Table A14, we repeat the exercise
without year fixed effects, finding that the CPI has the expected impact on incidence, onset, and
offset without the mineral price controls, and on offset with the mineral price controls. Taken
together, the results indicate that the CPI effect on output conflict is mostly swept up by year
fixed effects, but is large and robust in the presence of controls for temperature, precipitation, oil
price indices and mineral price indices.
We also show that the results are qualitatively robust to recoding the outcome variable as “riots” only (Table A15); varying the Conley standard error kernal cutoff from 100km to 1000km in
increments of 100km (Table A16); aggregating the cell area to 1 degree cells (i.e., by a factor of
four; Table A17); adding to that specification controls for the PPI in neighboring cells (Table A18);
including a cell-year estimate of population as a control variable (Table A19); estimating a conditional fixed-effects logit model (Table A20); weighting the CPI and PPI components by the extent
to which crops are traded by a given country (Table A21); weighting the PPI by crop yields per
hectare (Table A22); and including contemporaneous price indices only (Table A23).
We also explore whether our measure of output conflict is picking up demonstrations that may
be driven as much by a desire to provoke government policy changes than by a desire to directly
appropriate property from others (Bellemare, 2015). This interpretation is supported by Hendrix
45

For a visual representation of our results, see Appendix Figure A2, which presents quadratic fits of the four main
estimated relationships (i.e., each of factor conflict and output conflict on both the PPI and CPI), controlling for
country time trends and cell fixed effects.

29

and Haggard (2015), who find that governments frequently alter policies in favor of consumers in
the wake of price shocks. Food riots in this context will occur in urban centers where government
authorities can plausibly be expected to respond. We therefore interact our consumer price index
with two different measures of urbanization in order to detect whether results are differentially
driven by urban unrest.
Results are shown in Table A24 and are described in more detail in Appendix C.2. Using
either an area-based or population-based definition of whether a cell is “urban”, we find that the
effect of higher CPI on output conflict remains positive and significant in non-urban areas. The
effect in urban areas is larger than the rural effect using the area-based measure, but they are
indistinguishable using the population-based measure. We conclude that our main output conflict
results are not driven exclusively by urban protests designed to create unrest and agitate for policy
reforms.
Finally, we investigate the possibility that the contrast we observe between the effects of PPI
on factor conflict and output conflict are due to differences either in the study periods or in the
data collection projects, rather than due to the mechanisms put forward in our model. To hold
the study period and data sources constant, we use the “Type 2” battle in the ACLED dataset
as a plausible measure of factor conflict, as it records battles after which non-state armed groups
overtake territory. In Table A25, we show that, using the same study period, the PPI effect on
this measure (−15.0%) is similar to the effect on the UCDP measure (−18.5%), and not similar to
the effect on ACLED output conflict (+8.9%). We discuss this exercise in more detail in Appendix
Section C.2.

5.3

Output conflict: Afrobarometer data

In this section, we incorporate data on interpersonal conflict from multiple rounds of the Afrobarometer household survey series. By merging our high resolution panel grid with survey data,
we can pursue an alternative method of examining the relationship between food prices and output
conflict. Specifically, we can identify whether or not farmers are more likely to experience theft or
physical assault in the wake of a food price shock.
The Afrobarometer dataset consists of 86,804 observations collected in four rounds from 1999
to 2009 in 19 African countries. We geocode each observation at the level of a village (of which
there are 6,186 with an average of 14.03 observations in each), and assign to it the attributes of
the cell with the nearest centroid. Once we discard rounds that do not include critical variables for
our main specification, we are left with slightly fewer than 40,000 observations.
Proposition 3 implies that higher food prices will cause net consumers to appropriate output
in food-producing areas, and that this effect will be positive and significant relative to the impact
of higher cash crop prices in cash-crop-producing areas. From whom do they appropriate? In
the model, we imply that output conflict is perpetrated against landowners. In the data, we
can approximate this by identifying commercial farmers, who number 6,751 (11%) of the 59,871
respondents to the question on occupation. Moreover, we can also include traders (7%) as potential
30

victims of output conflict, relaxing the assumption that output is traded only by producers at the
farm gate. To measure output conflict at the micro level, we exploit two survey questions introduced
in Section 3. Respectively, they ask how often respondents or their family members were victims of
(i) theft or (ii) physical attack over the preceding year. We code them as binary variables, where
0 is never and 1 is at least once. These measures closely correspond to our theoretical concept of
output conflict.
The main disadvantage of the micro-level Afrobarometer data is that we do not observe the
same farmers in different periods, meaning we cannot control for individual unit fixed effects as in
the cell-level analysis. This raises the possibility that unobserved individual factors may explain
why commercial farmers respond differently to price shocks than do other survey respondents. To
overcome this problem, we examine whether or not the effect of higher prices on theft/assault
against commercial farmers in food-producing cells is larger than the equivalent effect against
commercial farmers in cash-crop-producing cells. According to our model, output conflict rises
with the PPI for food crops because real wages decline, whereas the PPI for cash crops raises the
value of appropriable output without causing a decline in real wages. We can estimate the difference
in these effects with a framework similar in concept to a triple difference approach, as follows:

victimjilt = αi +

n
X

f ood
φft−k P P Iilt−k

k=0

+

n
X

f ood
f
P P Iilt−k
φft−k

+

2
X

cash
φct−k P P Iilt−k

k=0

× f armerjilt +

+

cash
φcf
t−k P P Iilt−k × f armerjilt

k=0

k=0
n
X

n
X

f ood
t
× traderjilt +
P P Iilt−k
φft−k

n
X

0
cash
φct
t−k P P Iilt−k × traderjilt + X jilt ζ + γlt + ejilt ,

k=0

k=0

(19)
where victimilt indicates whether or not an individual j in cell i, country l, and period t experienced
theft or physical attack in the prior year; αi is cell fixed effects; f armer indicates that individual j
is a commercial farmer, and trader a trader, hawker or vendor; X is a vector of individual controls,
including age, age squared, education level, gender, occupation (f armer, trader, or other) and
urban or rural primary sampling unit; γlt are fixed effects for country × period; and ejilt is the
error term. We cluster standard errors by cell. Our treatment effects of interest for farmers and
traders respectively are:

n
X

f
φft−k
−

k=0

and

n
X

n
X

φcf
t−k

(20)

φct
t−k .

(21)

k=0

t
φft−k

−

k=0

n
X
k=0

Our identifying assumption is that the impact of a food price shock on commercial food farmers

31

is different to that of a cash crop price shock on commercial cash crop farmers only due to the
fact that food prices deflate consumers’ wages rather than raising the value of appropriable output,
conditional on the covariates listed above. We predicts that (20) and (21) are greater than zero.46
Results

We display the results from our estimations of (19) in Table 6. The outcome variable

is an indicator for theft in the first three columns, and for physical attack in the second three. In
columns (1) and (4), we estimate a variant of (19) that includes the CPI, country fixed effects and
a country time trend instead of cell fixed effects and the country × period fixed effects. In columns
(2) and (5), we add time fixed effects (at the level of the half-year). In columns (3) and (6), we
estimate equation (19). We present the treatment effects from (20) and (21) in the second panel,
together with each effect expressed as a percentage of the dependent variable means.
Focusing on commercial farmers, we see that impact of food crop prices relative to cash crop
prices is positive and large across all six specifications. A standard deviation rise in food prices
increases the probability that a commercial farmer experiences theft by 14.7% (p = 0.005) in the
baseline specification, 15% (p = 0.004) with added period fixed effects, and 13.7% (p = 0.007) in
our preferred specification with country × period fixed effects. The equivalent impacts on violence
against farmers are 18.4% (p = 0.02), 17.5% (p = 0.028), and 12.9% (p = 0.095). The effect of the
CPI is indistinguishable from zero.
Turning to traders, we see that the impact is large and significant on theft, but not on violence.
In our preferred specification, a one standard deviation rise in food prices increases the likelihood
that traders report being victims of theft by 9.1% (p = 0.1). While the effect on physical attacks
is comparable in magnitude (8%), it is much less precise (p = 0.56).
These results provide support for our theoretical prediction. Higher food prices substantially
increase the likelihood that commercial farmers will experience theft and violence in food-crop cells
relative to equivalent changes to cash crop prices in cash-crop cells. Traders are also more likely to
experience theft, but not violence.47

5.4

Temporal and spatial structure of price effects

Our main specification models conflict in a given cell as a function of food prices in the contemporaneous and two previous years in that cell, and our main estimates report the sum of the
46
We increase the statistical power of this test by making two straightforward adjustments to the data. First, we
exploit time variation within survey rounds by replacing the annual average price data with six-monthly averages,
where each period is one half of a calendar year. This increases our temporal data points from 9 to 13. We adjust
lags accordingly in regressions so that the sum of effects over two years are presented, as in the cell-level analysis.
Second, we facilitate the inclusion of cell fixed effects by aggregating cells from 0.5 × 0.5 to 1 × 1 degrees. Without
aggregating, we discard information on 9.855 observations from cells that feature in only one survey round; by
aggregating, we discard only 3,929 single-cell observations.
47
We point readers to a number of complementary exercises in the Appendix. In Tables A26 we show that an
increase in the CPI increases self-reported poverty while an increase in the PPI reduces self-reported poverty for
farmers only. In Table A27 we show that the micro-level measures of output conflict are significantly correlated
with the cell-level version of output conflict, and not with cell-level factor conflict. Finally, in Table A28, we show a
placebo test in which the main results do not hold for non-commercial farmers.

32

contemporaneous and lagged effects. However, it is possible that own-cell price effects could have a
longer lag structure (e.g., have effects on conflict that persist beyond two years), and/or that price
shocks in one cell could affect conflict in nearby cells. Evidence of these spatial spillovers has been
suggested by Harari and La Ferrara (2014) and Berman et al. (2017) in the context of shocks to
local weather and mining activity respectively.
A primary challenge in our setting—and perhaps in related settings, although to our knowledge
it has never been explored—is that our key independent variable is both temporally and spatially
correlated. We show in a simulation in Appendix Section C.5 that while this makes it difficult to
interpret the coefficient on any single spatial or temporal lag—with point estimates on correlated
lags becoming increasingly noisy as autocorrelation is increased—the sum of either the temporal
or spatial lags is remarkably stable and provides the overall effect of a single-year price shock over
time and space (Figure A3).
Figures 5 and 6 show results from versions of our main specification that include temporal lags
and leads, as well as spatial lags with annuli (concentric circles) up to a radius of 500km. In the
top four plots of Figure 5, we show the cumulative effect of adding up to five lags in separate
regressions. The cumulative effect becomes larger as lags are added. In the bottom four plots,
we plot the individual and combined effects in a regression with four lags and two leads. In the
top panel of Figure 6 we plot the cumulative effect of adding up to 500km spatial lags, and in the
bottom panel we plot the individual effects of each additional 100km lag.
As in our simulation, coefficients on individual lags and leads are quite noisy, but their sum
remains notably stable as increasing numbers of temporal/spatial lags are added. We find that our
baseline results from the two-lag, no-spillover model are almost certainly conservative: allowing
own-cell effects to persist up to five years roughly doubles the effect sizes for both factor and
output conflict, and allowing a price shock in one cell to have effects up to 500km away also
roughly doubles estimated overall effect sizes.

5.5

Heterogeneity by subnational institutions

It is common in the conflict literature to examine the heterogeneity of effects by “institutions”,
which can take on a variety of meanings. In this context, we are particularly interested in institutions as the degree to which actors can rely on third parties to enforce contracts and protect
property rights. In the presence of such institutions, actors can more credibly commit to upholding
contracts instead of launching armed attacks.48
Rather than turning to the usual suite of country-level measures, we instead propose to harness
our subnational data by exploiting a within-country measure of historical institutional capacity
first recorded by Murdock (1957) and used by Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013). They
show that the degree of political centralization within precolonial ethnic polities is strongly related
to present-day economic development (as approximated by nighttime luminosity). To the extent
48

The argument that the emergence of the Leviathan state precipitated a dramatic decline in violence is documented
by Pinker (2012), amongst others.

33

that it persists over time, the sophistication of precolonial jurisdictional hierarchies is a plausible
subnational measure of institutional quality as it relates to property rights.
To test this hypothesis, we interact our price indices with a dummy variable that indicates
whether or not the level of precolonial political centralization went beyond the local village. The
variable is measured at the level of an ethnic homeland (which is independent of modern day
borders) and the value attributed to a cell is determined by the location of the cell’s centroid. This
feature allows us to control for country × year fixed effects in every specification.
We present the exercise and discuss the results in detail in Appendix Section C.6. Our main
finding is that both the CPI and PPI have markedly diminished effects (in absolute terms) on factor
conflict in cells associated with a higher degree of political centralization. The PPI effect changes
from −30.3% of the mean to −30.3 + 23.7 = −6.6%, while the CPI effect is lower by −17.1%. With
output conflict as the outcome, we see no significant effect of the PPI interaction. We also see that
the CPI interaction effect is in fact positive, meaning that shocks are more likely to lead to output
conflict in these cells relative to cells without a jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level. This
suggests that output conflict is more likely to be triggered by CPI shocks where factor conflict is
less of an option for would-be fighters. In any case, we can conclude that institutions—as they
are measured here—play a role in mitigating the effect of price shocks on large-scale factor conflict
battles, but not on output conflict events.

5.6

Naı̈ve estimates

In our main analysis we make critical distinctions between what can be defined broadly as consumer
effects and producer effects of crop prices on violence. We implement this empirically in two ways:
(i) harnessing cell-level data to separate the impacts of producer prices and consumer prices; and
(ii) separating factor conflict from output conflict.
In this section, we explore the ramifications of ignoring these differential effects by instead using
the country-level data and catch-all conflict and price measures commonly used in prior literature.49
We first present results from a naı̈ve specification in which the outcome variable alternates between
the (country-level) incidence of UCDP conflict and the combined categories of all ACLED conflict
events, and the price variable alternates between the aggregated producer and consumer price
indices. This reflects a common approach taken to estimate the impact of producer and consumer
price shocks on country-level conflict respectively.
As shown in the first column of Panels A and B in Table 7, none of the estimated effects on
UCDP conflict are distinguishable from zero at standard confidence levels. The null effects are due
jointly to attenuation bias caused by the omission of the “opposing” price variable, and partly by
the reduction in efficiency caused by the country-level aggregation of the conflict dummy variables.
In Panel C we include both price variables in order to remove the omitted variable bias and facilitate
comparisons. For example, the PPI impact on UCDP conflict in the naive regression is −3.6% (p =
49

We note that Bazzi and Blattman (2014) control for a country-specific consumption index in their country-level
analysis of export prices and conflict.

34

0.449); in the full country-level version it is −7.7% (p = 0.16); and in the full cell-level specification
it is −17.2% (p = 0.001).
In the second column, we replace the outcome variable with the ACLED measure that captures
all categories of recorded conflict events, as in Harari and La Ferrara (2014). In Panel A, the
PPI effect is positive but indistinguishable from zero. In Panel B, the CPI effect is positive and
marginally significant (p = 0.056). In either case, we cannot distinguish between three competing
mechanisms: the consumer price impact on factor conflict, the consumer price impact on output
conflict, or the producer price impact on output conflict—in effect, any combination of the three
propositions that predict a positive sign is plausible. Including both indices simultaneously does
not resolve the ambiguity.
We conclude that failing to account for important distinctions between producer and consumer
prices, between factor and output conflict, and between country- and cell-level analysis leads to a
misrepresention of the relationship between world food prices and conflict in Africa.

6

Discussion and conclusion

6.1

Magnitudes and projections

We illustrate the magnitude of our main estimates in two exercises. First, we offer back-of-theenvelope estimates of the impact of a change in crop prices identical to that which occurred between
2004 and 2008. The consumer price impact on factor conflict incidence is +18.8% in terms of
the sample mean, while the producer effect is −12.9%. Given that 63% of cells report non-zero
production, we estimate an Africa-wide average effect of the 2004-08 food price increase on factor
conflict of +18.8 − 12.9(0.63) = +10.7%. For output conflict, we estimate an average consumer
price impact of +31.5% across all cells, and a producer price impact of +14.2% in producer cells,
giving a weighted average impact of around +40%. Our estimates show that rising crop prices
have an unambiguously large, positive and significant effect on violence, whether in terms of largescale factor conflict or smaller-scale output conflict. This stands in contrast to recent studies that
estimate only negative partial effects through the producer channel (Berman and Couttenier, 2015;
Fjelde, 2015; Bazzi and Blattman, 2014; Dube and Vargas, 2013; Brückner and Ciccone, 2010).
In the second exercise, we apply projections of future grain prices to our estimates. The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) (Nelson et al., 2010) presents a range of scenarios
for maize, rice and wheat prices in 2050. All three are projected to rise across all scenarios, due
largely to continued global economic and population growth on the demand side, and to the effects
of climate change on the supply side. The baseline scenario in the absence of climate change is
based on income projections from the World Bank and population projections from the UN. We
interpret the projected impact of climate change on supply as the mean of four scenarios outlined
in the original analysis. We estimate the impact of these price movements on factor conflict and
output conflict through both the producer price effect and the consumer price effect. For all four
estimates, we present a “perfect climate mitigation” scenario in which all greenhouse gas emissions
35

cease in 2000 and the climate momentum in the system is halted, in addition to the mean climate
change scenario.
Using these projections, we estimate that the change in grain prices from 2010-2050 will generate
a producer price effect on factor conflict of around −12% with climate change, and −6% without.
At the same time, higher prices will generate a consumer price effect on factor conflict of +17%
(+9%). In all cells but those with above-average levels of food production, prices in 2050 will lead
to a higher probability of large-scale factor conflict events. The weighted average effect is +10%,
about half of which can be explained by climate change. This is demonstrated on the left hand
side of Figure 7.
The right hand side of Figure 7 presents the projected impact on output conflict. The producer
price effect is +11% with climate change, and +5% without. The consumer price effect is +23%
(+12%). This implies a weighted average effect of +30%, around half of which is again explained
by climate change.
It is important to acknowledge the limitations of this partial equilibrium exercise. We do not
model the direct impact of changes to global population, income and climate on conflict; rather, we
model their indirect impacts through prices using parameters estimated in our 1989-2013 sample.
Nevertheless, the exercise suggests that future prices will lead to more political instability in the
form of factor conflict (particularly in consumer areas), and to more predation in the form of output
conflict (particularly in producer areas). Mitigating entirely the role of climate change would mute
over half of the overall effect.

6.2

Concluding remarks

We draw a number of conclusions on the economic origins of violence in Africa. First, we identify
a large causal effect of income shocks on civil conflict. Along with emerging research on conflict
at the subnational level by, inter alia, Dube and Vargas (2013), Berman et al. (2017), and Harari
and La Ferrara (2014), our results help to resolve ambiguity in the large body of existing countrylevel studies. Moreover, by identifying opposing effects of prices on the behavior of consumers and
producers within countries, our study suggests that prior estimates in this literature provide an
incomplete picture.
Second, we advance knowledge on causal mechanisms. We exploit exogenous variation in world
prices that generates opposing income shocks within countries. The corresponding impacts on
violence are inconsistent with one common explanation for the inverse country-level correlation
between income and civil conflict, in which GDP is considered an approximation of a state’s capacity
to deter or repress insurgency. Our results point instead to an important role for individual income
and substitution effects: civil conflict in Africa responds to changes in household-level economic
payoffs and opportunity costs. Of course, this does not rule out the possibility that economic shocks
can affect state counterinsurgency capacity in other contexts.
Third, we formalize distinctions between different forms of conflict. In cells where food crops
are produced, higher prices reduce the incidence of “factor conflict” over the permanent control of
36

territory, and raise the incidence of “output conflict” over the appropriation of surplus. In cells
where food crops are only consumed, higher prices increase both forms of conflict. Our results
suggest that future research on the economic roots of conflict should consider different varieties of
conflict. In addition, our results on output conflict add a new dimension to the “predation” motive,
which was heretofore associated with the control of point-source commodity deposits rather than
the small-scale but widespread appropriation identified in the present paper.
Fourth, we highlight the importance of a spatially disaggregated approach to the economics
of civil conflict. Our cell-level data permit tests of theoretical predictions for which country-level
data are not suitable. We also disaggregate further to the individual level in order to validate our
cell-level results, finding that food price shocks increase self-reported theft and violence perpetrated
against commercial farmers. That the micro-level evidence is consistent with the main cell-level
analysis is reassuring, particularly in light of the recent emergence of geocoded conflict datasets
and the promise of cell-level studies that avail of them.
Fifth, our results raise questions about the existing evidence on crop prices and conflict in the
literature. While we too find that rising prices reduce conflict battles through the producer effect,
we estimate that the consumer effect can be sufficiently large to reverse the overall impact, as in the
case of the 2004-2008 price surge. Our key departure is that as crop prices rise, the locus of conflict
risk will shift from rural to urban areas within countries. This aligns well with the outbreak of
violence observed across Africa when prices approached historical peaks, from Arab Spring unrest
in the north to incidences in Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Mozambique, among others.
While our analysis provides strong evidence that economic conditions can cause violent conflict,
it does not preclude an important role for other political or social grievances. Indeed, in our
illustrations from Côte d’Ivoire, price shocks were accompanied by sectarian grievances in the lead
up to the first civil war and by an election dispute in the second. In that example, at least, it seems
that economic shocks exacerbated social or political divides. Nevertheless, we do reject claims that
the link between income and conflict is unimportant or spurious.
Finally, we note potentially important policy implications. Our results indicate that a locally
tailored policy response will be key to minimizing violence in the wake of price shocks in either
direction. Incentives to work rather than to fight can prevent farmers from joining armed groups
in rural areas. This could take the form of local workfare programs that shift from urban to rural
regions as prices fall; or through insurance products where payouts are triggered when global prices
drop to a critical level. At the same time, regionally-managed strategic buffer stocks could shelter
consumers from the deleterious impacts of critically high global prices. To that end, our results
could inform an early-warning prediction tool to assist in mitigating the impact of future price
shocks on violence in Africa.

37

References
Abadie, A. and Gardeazabal, J. (2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the basque
country. American Economic Review, 93(1):113–132.
Alem, Y. and Söderbom, M. (2012). Household-level consumption in urban ethiopia: the effects of
a large food price shock. World Development, 40(1):146–162.
Bates, R. and Carter, B. (2012). Public policy, price shocks, and civil war in developing countries.
Working Paper, Harvard University.
Bazzi, S. and Blattman, C. (2014). Economic shocks and conflict: Evidence from commodity prices.
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4):1–38.
Bellemare, M. F. (2015). Rising food prices, food price volatility, and social unrest. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 97(1):1–21.
Berman, N. and Couttenier, M. (2015). External shocks, internal shots: The geography of civil
conflicts. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(4):758–776.
Berman, N., Couttenier, M., Rohner, D., and Thoenig, M. (2017). This mine is mine! how minerals
fuel conflicts in africa. American Economic Review, 107(6):1564–1610.
Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2010). State capacity, conflict, and development. Econometrica,
78(1):1–34.
Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2011). The logic of political violence. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(3):1411–1445.
Besley, T. J. and Persson, T. (2008). The incidence of civil war: Theory and evidence. Working
Paper 14585, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blattman, C. and Annan, J. (2016). Can employment reduce lawlessness and rebellion? a field
experiment with high-risk men in a fragile state. American Political Science Review, 110(1):1?17.
Brückner, M. and Ciccone, A. (2010). International commodity prices, growth and the outbreak of
civil war in sub-saharan africa*. The Economic Journal, 120(544):519–534.
Burke, M., Hsiang, S. M., and Miguel, E. (2015). Climate and conflict. Annual Review of Economics,
7(1):577–617.
Chassang, S. and Padro i Miquel, G. (2009). Economic shocks and civil war. Quarterly Journal of
Political Science, 4(3):211–228.
Ciccone, A. (2011). Economic shocks and civil conflict: A comment. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 3(4):215–27.

38

Collier, P., Elliott, V. L., Hegre, H., Hoeffler, A., Reynal-Querol, M., and Sambanis, N. (2003).
Breaking the Conflict Trap : Civil War and Development Policy. Number 13938 in World Bank
Publications. The World Bank.
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2004). Greed and grievance in civil war. Oxford Economic Papers,
56(4):563–595.
Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2005). Resource rents, governance, and conflict. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 49(4):625–633.
Conley, T. G. (1999). Gmm estimation with cross sectional dependence. Journal of econometrics,
92(1):1–45.
Cotet, A. M. and Tsui, K. K. (2013). Oil and conflict: What does the cross country evidence really
show? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(1):49–80.
Dal Bó, E. and Dal Bó, P. (2011). Workers, Warriors, And Criminals: Social Conflict In General
Equilibrium. Journal of the European Economic Association, 9(4):646–677.
de Janvry, A., Finan, F., Sadoulet, E., and Vakis, R. (2006). Can conditional cash transfer programs
serve as safety nets in keeping children at school and from working when exposed to shocks?
Journal of Development Economics, 79(2):349–373.
Deaton, A. (1989). Rice prices and income distribution in thailand: A non-parametric analysis
(formerly ”agricultural pricing policies and demand patterns in thailand”. Economic Journal,
99(395):1–37.
Dell, M., Jones, B. F., and Olken, B. A. (2014). What do we learn from the weather? the new
climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3):740–98.
Dickey, D. A. and Fuller, W. A. (1979). Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series
with a unit root. Journal of the American statistical association, 74(366a):427–431.
Dillon, B. and Barrett, C. (in press 2015). Global oil prices and local food prices: Evidence from
east africa. American Journal of Agricultural Economics.
Djankov, S. and Reynal-Querol, M. (2010). Poverty and civil war: Revisiting the evidence. Review
of Economics and Statistics, 92(4):1035–1041.
Dube, O. and Vargas, J. (2013). Commodity price shocks and civil conflict: Evidence from colombia*. The Review of Economic Studies.
Dupas, P. and Robinson, J. (2012). The (hidden) costs of political instability: Evidence from
Kenya’s 2007 election crisis. Journal of Development Economics, 99(2):314–329.
Eck, K. (2012). In data we trust? a comparison of ucdp ged and acled conflict events datasets.
Cooperation and Conflict, 47(1):124–141.
39

Economic and Political Weekly (2004). Cocoa and conflict. Economic and Political Weekly.
Elliott, G., Rothenberg, T. J., and Stock, J. H. (1996). Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit
Root. Econometrica, 64(4):813–36.
Fearon, J. D. (1995). Rationalist explanations for war. International Organization, 49:379–414.
Fearon, J. D. and Laitin, D. D. (2003). Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. American Political
Science Review, null:75–90.
Fjelde, H. (2015). Farming or fighting? agricultural price shocks and civil war in africa. World
Development, 67:525 – 534.
Ghobarah, H. A., Huth, P., and Russett, B. (2003). Civil wars kill and maim people long after the
shooting stops. American Political Science Review, 97(02):189–202.
Gurr, T. (1970). Why Men Rebel. Paradigm Publishers.
Harari, M. and La Ferrara, E. (2014). Conflict, climate and cells: A disaggregated analysis.
Hart, C. E., Lence, S. H., Hayes, D. J., and Jin, N. (2015). Price mean reversion, seasonality, and
options markets. American Journal of Agricultural Economics.
Headey, D. D. and Martin, W. J. (2016). The impact of food prices on poverty and food security.
Annual Review of Resource Economics, 8(1):329–351.
Hendrix, C. S. and Haggard, S. (2015). Global food prices, regime type, and urban unrest in the
developing world. Journal of Peace Research, 52(2):143–157.
Hirshleifer, J. (1991). The technology of conflict as an economic activity. The American Economic
Review, 81(2):130–134.
Horowitz, D. (1985). Ethnic Groups in Conflict. University of California Press.
Hsiang, S. M. (2010). Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic production in the caribbean and central america. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(35):15367–15372.
Hsiang, S. M., Burke, M., and Miguel, E. (2013). Quantifying the influence of climate on human
conflict. Science, 341(6151):1235367.
Humphreys, M. and Weinstein, J. M. (2008). Who fights? the determinants of participation in
civil war. American Journal of Political Science, 52(2):436–455.
Ivanic, M. and Martin, W. (2008). Implications of higher global food prices for poverty in lowincome countries1. Agricultural Economics, 39:405–416.

40

Ivanic, M. and Martin, W. (2014). Short- and long-run impacts of food price changes on poverty.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7011.
Ivanic, M., Martin, W., and Zaman, H. (2012). Estimating the short-run poverty impacts of the
2010-11 surge in food prices. World Development, 40(11):2302 – 2317.
Kennan, J. (2001). Uniqueness of positive fixed points for increasing concave functions on rn: An
elementary result. Review of Economic Dynamics, 4(4):893 – 899.
Koubi, V., Spilker, G., Böhmelt, T., and Bernauer, T. (2014). Do natural resources matter for
interstate and intrastate armed conflict? Journal of Peace Research, 51(2):227–243.
Michalopoulos, S. and Papaioannou, E. (2013). Pre-colonial ethnic institutions and contemporary
african development. Econometrica, 81(1):113–152.
Miguel, E. (2005). Poverty and witch killing. The Review of Economic Studies, 72(4):1153–1172.
Miguel, E. and Satyanath, S. (2011). Re-examining economic shocks and civil conflict. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4):228–32.
Miguel, E., Satyanath, S., and Sergenti, E. (2004). Economic shocks and civil conflict: An instrumental variables approach. Journal of Political Economy, 112(4):725–753.
Murdock, G. P. (1957). World ethnographic sample. American Anthropologist, 59(4):664–687.
Nelson, G. C., Rosegrant, M. W., Palazzo, A., Gray, I., Ingersoll, C., Robertson, R., Tokgoz, S.,
Zhu, T., Sulser, T. B., Ringler, C., Msangi, S., and You, L. (2010). Food Security, Farming, and
Climate Change to 2050: Scenarios, Results, Policy Options. International Food Policy Research
Institute.
Ng, S. and Perron, P. (1995). Unit root tests in arma models with data-dependent methods for the
selection of the truncation lag. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(429):268–281.
Nunn, N. and Qian, N. (2014). Us food aid and civil conflict. American Economic Review,
104(6):1630–66.
Oster, E. (2004). Witchcraft, weather and economic growth in renaissance europe. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 18(1):215–228.
Pinker, S. (2012). The better angels of our nature: Why violence has declined. Penguin Books.
Raleigh, C., Linke, A., Hegre, H., and Karlsen, J. (2010). Introducing acled: An armed conflict
location and event dataset: Special data feature. Journal of Peace Research, 47(5):651–660.
Ramankutty, N., Evan, A. T., Monfreda, C., and Foley, J. A. (2008). Farming the planet: 1.
geographic distribution of global agricultural lands in the year 2000. Global Biogeochemical
Cycles, 22(1):n/a–n/a. GB1003.
41

Ross, M. L. (2015). What have we learned about the resource curse? Annual Review of Political
Science, 18(1):239–259.
Sarsons, H. (2015). Rainfall and conflict: A cautionary tale. Journal of Development Economics,
115:62–72.
Sundberg, R. and Melander, E. (2013). Introducing the ucdp georeferenced event dataset. Journal
of Peace Research, 50(4):523–532.
Tollefsen, A. F., Strand, H., and Buhaug, H. (2012). Prio-grid: A unified spatial data structure.
Journal of Peace Research, 49(2):363–374.
van Weezel, S. (2016). Food imports, international prices, and violence in Africa. Oxford Economic
Papers, 68(3):758–781.
Verpoorten, M., Arora, A., Stoop, N., and Swinnen, J. (2013). Self-reported food insecurity in
africa during the food price crisis. Food Policy, 39:51 – 63.
Wang, D. and Tomek, W. G. (2007). Commodity prices and unit root tests. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 89(4):873–889.
Wong, J. (2005). Ethnic animosity: Cote d’ivoire’s precarious peace. Harvard International Review,
27(3):7–7.
Woods, D. (2003). The tragedy of the cocoa pod: Rent-seeking, land and ethnic conflict in ivory
coast. The Journal of Modern African Studies, 41(4):641–655.
World Bank (2014). Food price watch. Technical report.

42

Figures
Figure 1: Factor Conflict, Output Conflict and FAO Global Food Price Index

Pr(Factor Conflict = 1)

.04

.03
Producer cells
Consumer cells
.02

.01
100

150

200

FAO Global Food Price Index

Pr(Output Conflict = 1)

.15

.1
Producer cells
Consumer cells
.05

0
100

150

200

250

FAO Global Food Price Index
Notes: Producer cells are cells where cropland area > 0. Consumer cells are cells where
cropland area = 0. Factor conflict is equal to 1 if any UCDP Factor Conflict events take place
in a given cell-year, and zero otherwise. Output conflict is equal to 1 if any ACLED Output
Conflict events take place in a given cell-year, and zero otherwise. These data are introduced
formally in Section 3. Epanechnikov kernel; bandwith 20.

43

Share of Cells in Conflict

Figure 2: Conflict and Price Variables, 1989-2013
.12
.1
.08
.06
.04
.02
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
ACLED Output Conflict
UCDP Factor Conflict

350

Price Index

300
250
200
150
100
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
Maize
Rice

Wheat

Price Index

400
300
200
100
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
Coffee
Tobacco

Cocoa

Notes: Conflict in the upper panel is measured as the share of total cells in which at least one
battle occurred each year. Price data are taken
44 from IMF and World Bank sources (2000 =
100). See Table A1.

Figure 3: The geographic distribution of crops (year 2000) and total number of conflicts over
the study period for the two conflict types.

45

0.00

PPI, Output conflict

CIV
ETH
UGA
NER
MDG
NGA
GAB
TZA
COG
TCD
SDN
GHA
MAR
GNB
CMR
TGO
ZMB
MWI
ZAF
MOZ
MLI
BEN
EGY
TUN
BWA
BFA
GMB
KEN
ZWE
CAF
LSO

0.05

−0.05

RWA

LBR

−0.05

AGO
RWA
SLE
SOM
GIN

dy/dP

SLE
SWZ
MOZ
TCD
ETH

dy/dP

TGO
SDN
MLI
GHA

0.00

ZMB
ZAF
NER
NGA
EGY
TUN
ZWE
GAB
BWA
MWI
LBY
MAR
CIV
SOM
CMR
BEN
TZA
GIN
UGA
LSO

BFA
GNB

KEN

PPI, Factor conflict

SEN

0.05

GMB

COG

SWZ
LBY
MRT

Figure 4: Impact of Prices on Factor Conflict and Output Conflict by Country

−0.10
SLE

0.08

CPI, Output conflict
country

0.04

0.04

−0.04

CIV

LBR
MDG
GNB
CMR
GAB
MWI
ZMB
BWA
BEN
ETH
MOZ
MRT
NAM
LBY
LSO
KEN
BFA
MLI
NER
EGY
TZA
MAR
GIN
SDN
COG
GHA
CIV
SEN
ZAF
CAF
SOM

−0.02

0.00
−0.02
TCD

0.00

0.02

−0.04
ZWE

0.02

NGA
TGO

0.06

dy/dP

0.06

LBR
ETH
BFA
GIN
COG
TGO
BEN
TCD
NGA
SEN
AGO
NAM
TZA
MAR
LSO
LBY
ZMB
MWI
BWA
GAB
MDG
GNB
CMR
SDN
KEN
EGY
TUN
MRT
MLI
NER
GHA
ZWE
ZAF
MOZ
DJI
CAF
SWZ
SOM

dy/dP

country

SWZ
AGO

CPI, Factor conflict

SLE

0.08

TUN

CAF
AGO

SEN

LBR
GMB

MRT
NAM

−0.10

Notes: This is a plot of country-by-country estimates for each of the four conflict-price combinations. They are generated by running either our output or factor conflict regression, and
interacting the contemporaneous and lagged price variables with country dummies. As in the
main results, we then calculate for each country the sum of the contemporaneous effect plus
two lagged effects, and plot the resulting estimates and their standard errors in increasing order
of effect size. Each circle is a country-specific estimate; grey lines are 95% confidence intervals.
The red horizontal line is the whole-continent estimate reported in the main text.

46

Figure 5: The temporal structure of food prices’ effect on conflict. Top four plots:
cumulative effect of food price shock after n years. Each circle is from a separate regression,
and P
shows the estimated cumulative effect of contemporaneous and lagged effects after n years,
t
i.e.
t−n βt . Grey shaded area shows 95% confidence interval. Our baseline specification in
Pt
the main text is the cumulative effect after 2 years, i.e. t−2 βt , and is shown as the solid black
circle in each plot. Effects get larger in absolute value as more lags are added. Bottom four
plots: individual effects for contemporaneous, lags, and leads, in a regression with 4 lags and 2
leads. Black dots show point estimate and 95% confidence for individual coefficients, blue dots
show the cumulated effect of contemporaneous and lagged effects.

47

Figure 6: The spatial structure of food prices’ effect on conflict. Top plots: the
cumulative effect of a 1-SD producer shock in a given cell on conflict up to 500km away, for
factor conflict (left) and output conflict (right). Each circle is from a separate regression, and
shows the estimated cumulative effect of own-cell effect and spatial lag effect up to k kilometers.
Grey shaded area shows 95% confidence interval. Our baseline specification in the main text
assumes zero spatial lag, and is shown by the solid black dot. Effects get larger in absolute
value as more spatial lags are added. Bottom four plots: individual effects for own-cell and
spatial lags, from a regression that includes all spatial lags up to 500km. Individual coefficients
are noisy, due to relatively high spatial autocorrelation in prices. Results are only computed
for producer prices; consumer prices do not vary within country.
Factor conflict, PPI

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.01
dy/dp

dy/dp

0.03

0.00

0.00

−0.01

−0.01

−0.02

−0.02

−0.03

−0.03
own

0−100

100−200

200-300

300−400

Output conflict, PPI

400-500

own

cumul. effect at spatial lag (km)

0.02

100−200

200-300

300−400

400-500

cumul. effect at spatial lag (km)

0.02

Factor conflict, PPI

Output conflict, PPI

0.01

dy/dp

0.01

dy/dp

0−100

0.00

0.00

−0.01

−0.01

−0.02

−0.02
own

0−100

100−200

200-300

300−400

400-500

Spatial lag (km)

own

0−100

100−200

200-300

Spatial lag (km)

48

300−400

400-500

130

120

110

100
2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

ACLED Output Conflict (2010 = 100)

UCDP Factor Conflict (2010 = 100)

Figure 7: Impact of Projected Change to Maize, Rice and Wheat Prices from 2010 to 2050
130

120

110

100
2010

Year

2020

2030

2040

Year
Overall effect with climate change
Overall effect with perfect mitigation

Price projections are from the International Food Policy Research Institute (Nelson et al.,
2010). The perfect mitigation scenario assumes all greenhouse gas emissions cease in 2000 and
the climate momentum in the system is halted. Unconditional probabilities of factor conflict
and output conflict in 2010 are 2.15% and 4.9% respectively. Both are normalized to 100.

49

2050

Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics: 1989-2013
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

N

UCDP Factor Conflict
Incidence
Onset
Offset

0.027
0.014
0.535

0.162
0.119
0.499

0
0
0

1
1
1

225038
222159
6083

ACLED Output Conflict:
Incidence
Onset
Offset

0.05
0.028
0.452

0.219
0.166
0.498

0
0
0

1
1
1

173893
169953
8762

Output Conflict: Afrobarometer survey
Theft in past year
Violence in past year

0.313
0.131

0.464
0.337

0
0

1
1

67500
67533

0.633
0.072
74092
21269
0.009
519
0.24
0.396

0.482
0.138
236970
187815
0.039
299
0.427
0.489

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

1
1
11620281
11045346
0.87
1441
1
1

255725
255725
255725
255725
255575
255725
255725
255725

Conflict variables

Selected cell variables
Cropland cells
Cropland area %
Population
Urban population
Urban area %
Distance to city with pop. ≥ 500k (kms)
Luminosity 1992
Luminosity 2010

Note: See Section 3 for a description of these variables and their sources.

50

Table 2: UCDP Factor Conflict, Producer Prices and Consumer Prices
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

-0.0042
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.007

-0.0046
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.001

-0.0043
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002

-0.0024
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.020

-0.0029
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.006

-0.0027
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.012

0.0443
0.018
0.015
0.022
0.044

0.0494
0.020
0.014
0.023
0.029

0.0385
0.017
0.022
0.020
0.060

0.0023
0.002
0.134
0.001
0.116

0.0064
0.005
0.218
0.006
0.319

0.0015
0.001
0.143
0.001
0.161

0.0054
0.003
0.071
0.004
0.138

-0.0881
0.024
0.000
0.026
0.001

-0.1066
0.085
0.209
0.092
0.248

-17.2
8.6

-16.1
23.7

-20.0
10.2

-18.7
37.7

9.2
-16.5

7.2
-19.9

0.000
0.000

0.040
0.097

0.002
0.002

0.009
0.035

0.000
0.001

0.103
0.135

No
No
Yes
Yes
204820

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
204820

No
No
Yes
Yes
202297

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
202297

No
No
Yes
Yes
4631

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
4631

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value

-15.4

Country × year FE
Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
225016

-16.3

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
222132

8.3

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
5108

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer
Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Reported effects are the sum of price coefficients at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard
errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for
serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in
percentage terms.

51

Table 3: UCDP Factor Conflict, Prices and Luminosity
Factor Conflict Incidence: 1(Conflict > 0)
Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

(1)
-0.0079
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

(2)
-0.0510
0.023
0.028
0.032
0.111

(3)
-0.0102
0.003
0.000
0.003
0.001

(4)
-0.0502
0.023
0.030
0.032
0.116

(5)
-0.0083
0.003
0.005
0.003
0.008

(6)
-0.0484
0.023
0.037
0.032
0.131

Producer Price Index × Luminosity
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0049
0.002
0.005
0.002
0.007

0.0041
0.002
0.018
0.002
0.019

0.0072
0.002
0.004
0.003
0.010

0.0051
0.003
0.042
0.003
0.073

0.0050
0.003
0.076
0.003
0.098

0.0032
0.003
0.242
0.003
0.272

Consumer Price Index × Luminosity
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0040
0.002
0.085
0.003
0.196

-0.0006
0.002
0.743
0.002
0.788

-0.0060
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.027

-0.0031
0.002
0.077
0.002
0.123

-0.0060
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.032

-0.0030
0.002
0.110
0.002
0.224

-29.1
18.1
-14.7

-188.7
15.1
-2.2

-37.9
26.6
-22.3

-185.6
18.9
-11.5

-30.5
18.5
-22.2

-179.1
11.9
-11.1

1992
Yes
Yes
No
203962

1992
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

2000
Yes
Yes
No
203962

2000
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

2010
Yes
Yes
No
203962

2010
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

PPI impact (%)
PPI impact (%) × Luminosity
CPI impact (%) × Luminosity
Luminosity year
Country × year FE
Cell FE
Extra Controls
Observations

Note: The dependent variables is UCDP Factor Conflict incidence. The Producer Price Index
(PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal
standard deviations. Reported effects are the sum of price coefficients at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way
standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within
countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer
(consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms. Luminosity = 1 if any light is
visible at night from satellite images in a given cell. All specifications include a time-varying
cell-level control for population. The models estimated in (2), (4) and (6) also include controls
for interactions between each price index and four distance variables: distance (in 100km units)
to the next nearest lit cell; to the nearest port; to the nearest land border; and to the capital
city. An extended version of this table is included in the appendix as Table A3.

52

Table 4: ACLED Output Conflict, Combined Producer Prices and Consumer Prices
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Country × year FE
Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0076
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.007

0.0095
0.003
0.000
0.003
0.000

0.0090
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.001

0.0068
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004

0.0080
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0078
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0092
0.004
0.010
0.005
0.044

0.0069
0.006
0.233
0.006
0.243

0.0057
0.004
0.168
0.005
0.236

0.0072
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0013
0.006
0.824
0.008
0.864

0.0033
0.001
0.009
0.001
0.015

0.0024
0.004
0.590
0.006
0.704

-0.1271
0.018
0.000
0.019
0.000

0.0064
0.046
0.889
0.050
0.898

15.1

18.9
14.4

17.8
2.6

47.2

55.7
22.9

54.0
16.5

1.7

1.3
-23.8

1.1
1.2

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
173876

No
No
Yes
Yes
158270

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
158270

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
169933

No
No
Yes
Yes
154795

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
154795

Yes
No
N/A
Yes
7410

No
No
Yes
Yes
6774

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
6774

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Note: The dependent variables are dummies for ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in
terms of average temporal standard deviations. Reported effects are the sum of coefficients on price variables at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of
500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across
cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer
(consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

53

Table 5: ACLED Output Conflict and Disaggregated Producer Prices
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0083
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.001

0.0072
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0076
0.004
0.033
0.004
0.063

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0026
0.002
0.116
0.002
0.225

-0.0014
0.001
0.327
0.002
0.461

0.0118
0.005
0.024
0.007
0.083

PPI Impact: Food crops
PPI Impact: Cash crops
Wald test: PPI Food = PPI Cash
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value
s height
Country × year FE
Cell FE
Observations

16.6
-5.2

25.5
-5.0

1.7
2.6

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.519
0.522

Yes
Yes
173876

Yes
Yes
169933

Yes
Yes
7410

Note: The dependent variables are dummies for ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset
and offset dummies. The price indices are measured respectively in terms of sample average temporal standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of
caloric intake in the sample; cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). Reported effects are
the sum of coefficients on price variables at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for
serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for
serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in prices on the outcome variable
in percentage terms.

54

Table 6: Afrobarometer Output Conflict: Triple Difference
Theft

Violence

(1)
0.0027
0.002
0.165
0.0014
0.002
0.459
0.0041
0.002
0.086
-0.0023
0.013
0.855
-0.0447
0.015
0.004
-0.0319
0.017
0.058
0.0006
0.002
0.742

(2)
0.0026
0.002
0.188
0.0012
0.002
0.512
0.0041
0.002
0.087
0.0086
0.014
0.536
-0.0456
0.016
0.003
-0.0326
0.017
0.052
0.0017
0.002
0.422

(3)
0.0017
0.002
0.291
0.0008
0.002
0.679
0.0046
0.002
0.060
-0.0089
0.027
0.744
-0.0422
0.015
0.005
-0.0237
0.017
0.158

(4)
-0.0000
0.001
0.970
0.0011
0.001
0.368
0.0020
0.001
0.172
0.0053
0.010
0.587
-0.0229
0.010
0.017
-0.0126
0.018
0.477
-0.0005
0.002
0.744

(5)
0.0000
0.001
0.977
0.0009
0.001
0.460
0.0020
0.001
0.180
0.0019
0.011
0.866
-0.0220
0.010
0.023
-0.0116
0.018
0.512
-0.0011
0.002
0.516

(6)
-0.0003
0.002
0.875
0.0000
0.001
0.995
0.0022
0.002
0.141
-0.0212
0.021
0.317
-0.0169
0.009
0.074
-0.0082
0.018
0.642

(PPI Food − PPI Cash) × farmer
SE
p-value
Impact on farmers (%)

0.0461
0.016
0.005
14.7

0.0469
0.016
0.004
15.0

0.0430
0.016
0.007
13.7

0.0240
0.010
0.020
18.4

0.0229
0.010
0.028
17.5

0.0169
0.010
0.095
12.9

(PPI Food − PPI Cash) × trader
SE
p-value
Impact on traders (%)

0.0360
0.017
0.036
11.5

0.0367
0.017
0.032
11.7

0.0284
0.017
0.100
9.1

0.0146
0.018
0.417
11.2

0.0136
0.018
0.449
10.4

0.0105
0.018
0.560
8.0

Country × half-year fixed effects
Country × time trend
Half-year fixed effects
Controls
Area fixed effects
Observations

No
Yes
No
Yes
Country
39873

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country
39873

Yes
N/A
N/A
Yes
Cell
39036

No
Yes
No
Yes
Country
39925

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country
39925

Yes
N/A
N/A
Yes
Cell
39090

Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

Food crops

Food crops × farmer

Food crops × trader

Cash crops

Cash crops × farmer

Cash crops × trader

Treatment effects

Note: The dependent variables are binary responses to survey questions that ask whether individuals over the
previous year (i) have been victims of theft; (ii) have been victims of physical assault. The Producer Price
Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) variables are measured in terms of terms of average temporal
standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of caloric intake in the sample;
cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). Reported effects are the sum of coefficients on price variables at
t through t-4, where each t is a six-month period. Farmer indicates that the respondent is a commercial
farmer; trader indicates that the respondent is a trader, hawker or vendor. Standard errors allow for serial
and spatial correlation within 1 degree cells. PPI impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation
rise in prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

55

Table 7: Summary of Naive Regression Results
UCDP Conflict

ACLED Conflict

-0.0174
0.023
0.449
-3.6

0.0123
0.011
0.254
1.4

0.0195
0.032
0.544
4.0

0.0239
0.012
0.056
2.6

-0.0375
0.026
0.160
-7.7
0.0428
0.040
0.292
8.8

-0.0027
0.016
0.869
-0.3
0.0259
0.018
0.154
2.9

Panel A: Producer Price Index
Producer Price Index
SE
p-value
Impact (%)
Panel B: Consumer Price Index
Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
Impact (%)
Panel C: Both Indices
Producer Price Index
SE
p-value
Impact (%)
Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
Impact (%)

Note: This table summarizes results from six separate country-level regressions that each include controls for country fixed effects and countryspecific time trends. The outcome variables respectively measure the incidence of UCDP conflict events and the combined ACLED conflict events.
In Panel A, only the PPI is included; in Panel B, only the CPI is included;
in Panel C, both the PPI and the CPI are included. Reported effects are
the sum of coefficients on price variables at t, t-1 and t-2. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. Impact (%) indicates the effect of
a within-cell one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on
the outcome variable in percentage terms.

56

The Economic Origins of Conflict in Africa
Journal of Political Economy, 2020
Eoin McGuirk and Marshall Burke
Online Appendix
A

Theoretical appendix

A.1

Price stationarity

In Section 2.2, we make the assumption that |φ| < 1, or that crop prices do not exhibit a unit root.
This property generates the prediction that rural groups will engage in factor conflict following
negative price shocks; they must believe in a positive degree of mean reversion for factor conflict
to become more profitable when prices are low. A unit root would imply that price shocks are
infinitely persistent, and that prices therefore follow a random walk. If this is true, then current
shocks carry no information on future price changes, and the expected payoff to fighting will offset
the opportunity cost.
The augmented Dickey-Fuller test (Dickey and Fuller, 1979) allows for a unit root test that
controls for serial correlation. In this context, we would fit the following model for each crop j:
∆Pjt = α + βPjt−1 + ζ1 ∆Pjt−1 + ζ2 ∆Pjt−2 + . . . + ζk ∆Pjt−k + t

(A1)

The null hypothesis is that crop price Pjt follows a unit root process (β = 0 in (A1)). One
drawback of this approach is that it is underpowered to detect stationarity, i.e., to reject the null
hypothesis. Elliott et al. (1996, “ERS”) develop a more efficient procedure, whereby the time series
is first transformed via a generalized least squares (GLS) regression. The model in (A1) is then
fitted with the GLS-detrended data, providing a test with significantly greater power.
To operate this procedure, we gather price data at the monthly level from January 1980 to
October 2014 in order to maximize power. We set prices in January 2000 equal to 100. The
ERS procedure can test for reversion around either a stationary mean or a trend stationary mean.
Figure A4 and Figure A5 present PDFs and time series plots for prices of all 11 crops in the
producer index. For most crops, prices appear to exhibit mean reversion from 1980 to around 2004,
during which time beliefs about price movements over the period of our analysis are likely to have
been formed. Following structural breaks in 2004, some prices, e.g. maize, appear to continue
reverting around a trend-stationary mean, while other processes, e.g. tobacco, appear to have a
unit root. In our formal ERS test, we choose a 12 month lag structure to account for seasonality
(i.e. k = 12) and examine whether prices exhibit a degree of stationary around a mean over the full
series. We can reject a unit root for maize, rice, wheat, tea, sugar, and oil palm. Of the remaining
crops, sorghum, soybean and coffee also exhibit stationarity from 1980 to 2004. Only in the cases
of tobacco and cocoa do we fail to reject the null hypothesis of a unit root.50
50

Choosing a lag structure determined by a Ng-Perron sequential-t method (Ng and Perron, 1995) yields the same

A1

The final component of this assumption is that rural groups are aware of these facts. Given that
we are concerned with an environment in which farming decisions can be a matter of life and death,
we assume that relatively recent price movements are retained in group memory to the extent that
stationarity can be detected while present.
A.2

Allowing future conflict when LVgt = 0

In the main result of Section 2.2, we define a threshold price P̃jt below which conflict is a dominant
strategy and above which peace is maintained. In our model, peace at time t guarantees peace
forever. This assumption ensures that peace is worth one half of victory following conflict: VtP (.) =
1 V
2 Vt (.).

If we allow for the possibility of future conflict after peace at period t, then VtP (.) would take on
a lower value than 21 VtV (.). This is because VtP (.) would be equal to the value of farming

N̄
2

until

there is war (i.e. until Pjt < P̃jt ), which entails an opportunity cost. Thus, in our main model, we
effectively assume the largest possible value of VtP (.) (i.e., the value of farming

N̄
2

forever). The

goal of our model is locate the conditions under which a positive P̃jt exists. This assumption in
turn ensures that we are locating the lowest possible value of P̃jt (from (12)).
A.3

Bargaining between groups

Chassang and Padro i Miquel (2009) characterize the role of bargaining in a perfect information
environment with offensive advantages. We begin with same set up as that described in Section 2.2,
except for two differences. First, groups now begin with unequal landholdings, so that group 1
controls

N̄
2

+ τ , and group 2 controls

N̄
2

− τ.

Groups can engage in bargaining in order to avert conflict. A transfer will avert conflict if and
only if neither side has an incentive to deviate following the transfer. Only then can groups credibly
commit to peace (Fearon, 1995). Let T represent the transfer that group 1 can give group 2 to
deter an attack. The condition for group 1 to prefer this to conflict is therefore
 N̄
α
+τ −T
Pjt
− wjt (Pjt−1 ) + δVtP (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2
h
i
N̄ α
−1
V
(1 − LV )1−α − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
>π 2Pjt (
)LV + δVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2h
i
−1
V
+ (1 − π) − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV

(A2)
The left hand side is the value of group 1’s post-transfer landholding. The right hand side
represents the expected payoff from launching a unilateral attack, where again π is the probability
of victory for the attacker, and LV is the opportunity cost of conflict.
For peace to prevail, the transfer must also generate a situation in which group 2 also prefers
outcome. All results are available by request.

A2

post-transfer peace to the expected payoff from a unilateral attack. This condition is given by
 N̄
α
Pjt
− wjt (Pjt−1 ) + δVtP (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
−τ + T
2
h
i
N̄ α
−1
V
>π 2Pjt (
(1 − LV )1−α − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV + δVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2h
i
−1
V
+ (1 − π) − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV
(A3)
It follows that the transfer must satisfy
 N̄ α
− wjt (Pjt−1 ) + δVtP (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
Pjt
2
h
i
N̄ α
−1
V
>π 2Pjt (
(1 − LV )1−α − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV + δVtV (Pjt , wjt (Pjt−1 ))
2h
i
−1
V
+ (1 − π) − wjt (Pjt−1 )(1 − LV ) − wjt
(wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
)LV

(A4)
The is the condition for peace in the presence of bargaining. Two observations are noteworthy.
First, τ does not appear in the condition. The initial distribution of land does not determine
conflict. Second, the set of parameters for which there exists a transfer T that avoids conflict is
the same set of parameters for which an equal distribution of land

N̄
2

guarantees peace. Peace is

therefore only attainable if there exists no profitable unilateral deviation when both groups have
equal landholdings. This holds for any initial land distribution.
The intuitive interpretation is that bargaining allows groups who are satisfied with their peaceful
status quo to avoid war by transferring land to a dissatisfied group. Hence, bargaining can avoid
war only in situations where one group is satisfied and the other is not. In this case of perfect
information, bargaining can therefore only assuage the threat of conflict that is driven by unequal
landholdings. When condition (A4) does not hold, bargaining cannot affect the prospect of violence
caused by the first-mover advantage.
A.4

Equilibrium output conflict

If j = x = f , we can rewrite the equilibrium condition in equation (14) as
Q(LQ ) =

LQ
Pjt N̄ α
wjt ( 2 ) (1

− LQ )1−α + LQ

.

The right hand side is 0 when LQ is 0, and 1 when LQ is 1. If Q(0) = 0 and
0

Q (0) >

Pjt N̄ α
Q 1−α + LQ (1 − α)(1 −
wjt ( 2 ) ((1 − L )
P
( wjt
( N̄ )α (1 − LQ )1−α + LQ )2
jt 2

A3

LQ )−α )
,

then there is an equilibrium with positive Q(LQ ) determined by the intersection of Q(LQ ) and
LQ
Pjt N̄
( )α (1−LQ )1−α +LQ
wjt 2

. This is due to the concavity assumption in Q(LQ ) caused by congestion

effects. These conditions ensure that LQ ∈ (0, 1).
Similarly, if j = c and x = m, we can rewrite the equilibrium condition in equation (14) as
Q(LQ ) =

LQ
Pjt N̄ α
wjt ( 2 ) (1

The right hand side is 0 when LQ is 0, and

0

Q (0) >

− LQ )1−α + Pxt M̄t + LQ

1
Pxt M̄t +1

.

when LQ is 1. If Q(0) = 0 and

Pjt N̄ α
Q 1−α + P M̄ + LQ (1 − α)(1 −
xt t
wjt ( 2 ) ((1 − L )
Pjt N̄ α
( wjt ( 2 ) (1 − LQ )1−α + Pxt M̄t + LQ )2

LQ )−α )
,

then there is an equilibrium with positive Q(LQ ) determined by the intersection of Q(LQ ) and
LQ
Pjt N̄
( )α (1−LQ )1−α +Pxt M̄t +LQ
wjt 2

A.5

.

Combining factor and output conflict

In this section we allow groups and individuals to make their optimal decisions in the presence of
both factor conflict and output conflict. The goal of this analysis is to determine how the qualitative
comparative statics in Propositions 1-4 are altered by such an extension.
We propose the following timeline:
• Groups decide whether or not to launch a factor conflict attack;
• If groups do not launch such an attack, workers choose between wage labor and appropriation,
as in Section 2.3;
• If groups do launch such an attack, workers choose between wage labor and appropriation in
the presence of factor conflict.
Working backwards, we revisit individuals’ output conflict decision in the presence of factor
conflict. The equilibrium condition now takes the following form:
Pjt Q(LQ )( N̄2 )α (1 − LQ − LV )1−α
−1
= (1 − Q(LQ ))wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
Pxt LQ

(A5)

The left hand side represents the individual payoff from appropriation net of the factor conflict opportunity cost. The right hand side represents the real wage net of appropriation, as
V (.) such that
in the main analysis. Again, as indicated in equation (4), armed groups set wjt

the certainty equivalent for the marginal consumer is (1 − Q(LQ ))wt (.). We therefore interpret
−1
(1 − Q(LQ ))wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
as the real payoff from one unit of labor—either farming or soldiering—

for the marginal consumer.
A4

This can be rewritten as:
Q(LQ ) =

LQ
Pjt N̄ α
wjt ( 2 ) (1

− LQ − LV )1−α + LQ

.

(A6)

The equilibrium level of appropriation is determined by the intersection of the concave function
Q(LQ ) and the term on the right hand side of (A6), which itself is 0 when LQ = 0 and 1 when LQ = 1
(as LQ = 1 ⇒ LV = 0). This equilibrium exists as long as Q0 (0) >

Pjt N̄ α
( ) ((1−LQ −LV )1−α +LQ (1−α)(1−LQ −LV )−α )
wjt 2
P
( wjt ( N̄
)α (1−LQ −LV )1−α +LQ )2
jt 2

when LQ = 0). Equation (A6) indicates that the presence of factor conflict results in a lower equilibrium level of output conflict, as Q(LQ ) in this case intersects with the right hand term at a lower
LQ .
To determine the sign of

dLQ
dPjt ,

we apply the implicit function theorem to (A6) and obtain:

Q Pjt ( N̄ )α (1
wjt 2

L
dLQ
=−
dPjt

Q0 −

− LV − LQ )1−α + LQ


Pjt N̄
( )α
wjt 2

−2

−1 N̄ α
wjt
( 2 ) (1 − LV − LQ )1−α


(A7)

(1−LQ −LV )1−α +LQ (1−α)(1−LQ −LV )−α
P

( wjt ( N̄
)α (1−LQ −LV )1−α +LQ )2
2
jt

The denominator is negative due to the equilibrium condition.51 This implies that

dLQ
dPjt

takes the

sign of the numerator, which is positive.
Next, we revisit armed groups’ decision to seize neighboring land given Q(LQ ) and LQ (Pjt )
characterized above. The condition for peace becomes:

  α 
1−α

1−α 

N̄
−1
Q
Q
V
Q
1 − Q(L ) Pjt
1 − L (Pjt )
− 2π 1 − L − L (Pjt )
+ LV ωjt (1 − Q(LQ )wjt (Pjt−1 )Pxt
2


> δ πVtV (Pjt , wjt+1 (Pjt ), Q(LQ )) − VtP (Pjt , wjt+1 (Pjt ), Q(LQ ))
(A8)
This is the equivalent of condition (9) allowing for the appropriation of output by consumers (which
also affects future farm profits through V V (.) and V P (.)). We examine the role of each crop price
shock on this decision for all of the output conflict scenarios outlined above. As in the main analysis,
if a price shock increases the left hand side of (A8), then higher prices are conducive to peace.
Below, we consider the effect of all three price movements on output conflict allowing for factor
conflict, and on factor conflict allowing for output conflict.
Food crops: j = m = f

We first note from (A6) that when Pjt = Pf t , then

Proposition 3.
51

0

Recall that if (A6) is true, then Q <

Pjt
wjt

( N̄
)α ((1−LQ −LV )1−α +(1−α)(1−LQ −LV )−α )
2
P

( wjt ( N̄
)α (1−LQ −LV )1−α +LQ )2
jt 2

A5

.

dLQ
dPf t

> 0, as in

A rise in Pf t will reduce factor conflict (as in Proposition 1) if the following is true:

 α 

1−α 
1−α
N̄
V
Q
Q
Q
− 2π 1 − L − L (Pf t )
1 − Q(L )
1 − L (Pf t )
2
|
{z
}
added opportunity cost of conf lict (+)


N̄
+ (1 − α)LQ0 ((1 − Q(LQ ))Pf t ( )α 2π(1 − LV − LQ (Pf t ))−α − (1 − LQ (Pf t )−α
2
|
{z
}
reduced benef it of conf lict f rom diverted labor LQ0 (Pf t ) (+)

+ Q0 LQ0
|



N̄
2

α 


1−α 
1−α
− 2π 1 − LV − LQ (Pf t )
1 − LQ (Pf t )
{z
}

(A9)

reduced opp. cost of conf lict f rom appropriation (−)




d LV ωjt (1 − Q(LQ )wf t (Pf t−1 )Pf−1
t
+

dPf t
{z

|

}

0 (−)
reduced wage cost of conf lict f rom Q0 LQ0 and Pf−1
t



1
V
d δ(π − 2 )Vt (Pf t , wf t+1 (Pf t ))
>
|

dPf t
{z

added benef it f rom conf lict (+)

}

The first term is the added revenue forgone by fighting instead of farming due to dPf t – this is
the first order impact of a price shock and is the same in the main analysis, where we treat factor
and output conflict separately. The second term is a further reduction in the spoils of conflict
caused by the diversion of labor from production to output conflict. The third term is a reduction
in the opportunity cost of conflict due to the second order effect of prices on the appropriation of
output. The fourth term is a reduction in the soldiering wage premium. Finally, the right hand side
term indicates the impact of dPf t on the present value of the spoils of conflict from t + 1 onwards
(which is now lower due to the presence of output conflict).
Our main prediction in Proposition (1) is unchanged as long as (A9) holds, i.e., the net effect of
these additional second order channels (through Q0 LQ and LQ0 (Pf t )) do not offset the direct effects
identified in the main text.
Cash crops: j = c; x = m Before studying the impact of Pct on output and factor conflict, we
first allow for the presence of food stocks, as in the main analysis. Equilibrium output conflict
becomes:
Q(LQ ) =

LQ
Pct N̄ α
wct ( 2 ) (1

− LQ − LV )1−α +

This is analogous to (A6), which implies that

dLQ
dPct

Pmt
wct M̄t

+ LQ

.

> 0, as in Proposition 3.

A rise in Pct will reduce factor conflict (as in Proposition 1) if the following is true:

A6

(A10)


 α 

1−α 
1−α
N̄
Q
V
Q
Q
1 − Q(L )
− 2π 1 − L − L (Pct )
1 − L (Pct )
2
|
{z
}
added opportunity cost of conf lict (+)


N̄
+ (1 − α)LQ0 ((1 − Q(LQ ))Pct ( )α 2π(1 − LV − LQ (Pct ))−α − (1 − LQ (Pct )−α
2
|
{z
}
reduced benef it of conf lict f rom diverted labor LQ0 (Pct ) (+)

0 Q0

+Q L
|



N̄
2

α 

1−α

1−α 
V
Q
1 − L (Pct )
− 2π 1 − L − L (Pct )
{z
}
Q

(A11)

reduced opp. cost of conf lict f rom appropriation (−)




−1
V
Q
d L ωjt (1 − Q(L )wct (Pct−1 )Pmt
+

dPct
{z

|

}

reduced wage cost of conf lict f rom Q0 LQ0 (−)



1
V
d δ(π − 2 )Vt (Pct , wct+1 (Pct ))
>
|

dPct
{z

added benef it f rom conf lict (+)

}

There are two main differences between (A9) and (A11). First, the second order effects through
Q0 LQ

and LQ0 (Pjt ) are relatively lower in (A11), as output conflict responds more to dPf t than to

dPct (to understand why, see the discussion following Proposition 3 in the main text). Second, the
reduction in the soldiering wage premium comes from Q0 LQ0 only (i.e., there is no additional effect
−1
through Pmt
).

Again, if condition (A11) holds – i.e., if the second order effects of prices via output conflict
and appropriation do not offset the direct effects established in the main text – then our main
prediction in Proposition 1 is unchanged.
Import crops: j = c; x = m

Finally, we examine the role of import crop prices Pmt on a group’s

decision to engage in factor conflict. Applying the implicit function theorem to (A10), we obtain:
−2 −1
Pct N̄ α
LQ w
( ) (1 − LV − LQ )1−α + Pwmt
M̄t + LQ
wct M̄t
dLQ
ct 2
ct


=−
Pct N̄ α
dPmt
Q −LV )1−α + Pmt M̄ +LQ (1−α)(1−LQ −LV )−α
(
)
(1−L
t
wct 2
wct
Q0 −
Pjt N̄
α
Q
V 1−α Pmt
Q 2
(w (
jt

2

) (1−L −L )

+

wct

(A12)

M̄t +L )

The denominator is again negative due to the equilibrium condition, which implies that

dLQ
dPmt

takes

the sign of the numerator, which is positive. Thus, Proposition 4 holds.
In the main analysis, Proposition 2 states that rising import crop prices will increase the likelihood of factor conflict by lowering the soldiering wage premium that groups must offer to fighters.
In this extension, we must also account for the effect of dPmt on other costs and benefits of factor
conflict that operate via its effect on output conflict. The only relevant second order effect is the
A7

second one in (A9) and (A11), namely the reduced benefit of conflict conflict due to the diversion of
labor from production toward output appropriation. Taking this into account, rising import crop
prices will increase the likelihood of factor conflict if the following holds:




−1
V
Q
d L ωjt (1 − Q(L )wct (Pct−1 )Pmt
dPmt
|

{z

−1 0
reduced wage cost of conf lict f rom Pmt

}

(A13)


N̄
> (1 − α)LQ0 ((1 − Q(LQ ))Pct ( )α 2π(1 − LV − LQ (Pmt ))−α − (1 − LQ (Pmt )−α
2
|
{z
}
reduced benef it of conf lict f rom diverted labor LQ0 (Pct ) (+)

A rise in Pmt will increase the likelihood of factor conflict if the reduction in the soldiering
wage premium is greater in absolute terms than the reduction in the gains from conflict due to the
diversion of labor from production to the appropriation of food stocks.
Summary

This exercise pinpoints the conditions necessary for Propositions 1-4 to hold when

we allow for both factor conflict and output conflict in the same environment. The qualitative
prediction on output conflict (i.e., Propositions 3 and 4) remain unchanged. On factor conflict:
• A rise in the price of domestically produced crops will reduce the probability of factor conflict
as long as the resultant increase in the opportunity cost of conflict in terms of lost revenue
 α
1−α
1−α 
from production, i.e, 1−Q(LQ ) N̄2
1−LQ (Pjt )
−2π 1−LV −LQ (Pjt )
, plus the
reduced benefit of conflict due to the diversion of labor to output appropriation are together
greater than the reduced opportunity costs of conflict due to output appropriation plus the
reduced wage premium plus the added benefit of victory due to the persistence of prices.
• A rise in the price of import crops will increase the probability of factor conflict as long as
the resultant decrease in the soldiering wage premium is not offset by the reduction in the
expected benefit of factor conflict due to the diversion of labor to output conflict.
A.6

Setting wages to avoid output conflict

In our model, agricultural wages are determined exogenously. Relaxing this assumption, it is worth
characterizing the wage rate that avoids output conflict entirely.
The wage at which there would exist no output conflict must be equal to the value of output
conflict for the first-moving consumer: Q0 (0)P ( N̄2 )α L1−α . This is the highest possible return to
output conflict for consumers, as Q(LQ ) is concave. If we assume that this wage must also be paid
to infra-marginal workers, we are left with the following condition for no output conflict (where the

A8

mass of labor L = 1):
N̄ α
N̄
) − Q0 (0)P ( )α
2
2
N̄
> (1 − Q(LQ ))P ( )α (1 − LQ )1−α − (1 − LQ )(1 − Q(LQ ))wjt (Pjt−1 ).
2

P(

(A14)

The left hand side is the farm’s profit with zero output conflict (where wages are equal to the
first-mover’s gain from output conflict) and the right hand side is the farm’s profit where wages
are wjt (Pjt−1 ). Under the assumption that Q0 (0) > 1—which is reasonable given the properties of
Q(LQ )—then the left hand side is negative. This is because the marginal benefit of output conflict
for the first mover is greater than the average product of labor in the absence of output conflict,
implying that total labor costs exceed total revenue at this wage rate. It is therefore not feasible
to pay a wage that avoids entirely output conflict. Allowing for nonzero output conflict with total
labor costs (1 − LQ )(1 − Q(LQ ))wjt (Pjt−1 ) is more profitable than allowing for zero output conflict
with total labor costs Q0 (0)P ( N̄2 )α .

B
B.1

Data appendix
Price data

Table A1 presents the descriptions and sources for each raw price variable used to construct the
price indices in the analysis. For each crop price, we present the exact description provided by
the source. In the third column, we indicate whether the data came from the IMF International
Finance Statistics or the World Bank Global Economic Monitor. In the following column we
indicate whether or not the crop constituted part of the consumer index. In the final column, we
indicate whether or not the crop constituted part of the producer index, and if so, whether we
coded it as a food crop (which each occupy over 1% of calories consumed in a country over the
series), or a cash crop (the rest). For crops with more than one potential price measure (i.e., coffee
and tobacco), we compute indices using the the average value.
Testing for stationarity in the PPI and CPI

We run Haris-Tzavalis unit root tests for both

the PPI and CPI, as it is particularly suitable for cases with large N panel data. Including panel
means and time trends, we report ρ statistics of 0.73 (p-value = 0.00) and 0.65 (p-value = 0.00)
respectively, and reject the hypothesis that the panels contain unit roots.
B.2

Alternate factor conflict measure

In robustness tests, we also operate an alternative measure of factor conflict. It consists of a subset
of the Armed Conflict Location and Event Data (ACLED) project, running from 1997 to 2013
(see Raleigh et al., 2010). Like the UCDP project, ACLED records geocoded conflict events from
a range of media and agency sources. Of eight conflict event categories included in the data, we
include only battles in which non-state actors have won territory (“type 2” event in ACLED).
A9

This has the advantage of capturing events that are consistent our theoretical definition of factor
conflict. However, it comes at the expense of coverage: with a sample mean of only 0.04%, it omits
many valid factor conflict battles. Broadening the measure to incorporate other battle types would
run the risk of including events that fall within the scope of output conflict, as the threshold for
inclusion is significantly lower than that of our preferred UCDP measure (Eck, 2012).52

C

Additional results

C.1

Robustness of factor conflict results

Additional covariates

In Table A3, we cumulatively add (i) cell-level weather covariates and

oil prices × cell- and country-level production indicators; and (ii) mineral prices × cell-level mine
indicators from Berman et al. (2017) to the specification with year fixed effects. Temperature is the
cell-year mean temperature in degrees celsius, based on monthly meteorological statistics from the
US National Oceanic and Atmosphere Administration. Drought variables are aggregated Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI6) measures that indicate within cell-year deviations in precipitation
based on monthly data. Moderate drought indicates that there were at least three consecutive
months in which rainfall was more than 1 standard deviation below long term (six-month) levels;
severe drought indicates that there were at least two months during which rainfall was more than
1.5 standard deviations below long term levels; and extreme drought indicates that both of these
criteria were met in a cell-year. These data are provided by the Global Precipitation Climatology
Centre, and converted to grid format by the PRIO-GRID project (Tollefsen et al., 2012). Ross
(2015) documents a large body of evidence suggesting a link between oil production and conflict.
Although global oil prices are not believed to be causally related to global food prices (see Dillon
and Barrett, 2015), a spurious correlation could nonetheless bias our price estimates. We therefore control for two mechanisms through which oil prices can affect cell-level factor conflict. First,
higher prices in oil producing cells could increase violence by either funding insurgency (Collier
and Hoeffler, 2004) or provoking predation (Dube and Vargas, 2013). Second, higher prices in oil
producing countries could also strengthen a state’s capacity to repel violence, generating a negative
impact on conflict (Fearon and Laitin, 2003). We obtain geocoded data on the location of oil fields
in Africa from the PRIO Petroleum Dataset.53 We combine this with IMF data on world oil prices
to produce two oil variables: an oil price × cell-level dummy for the presence of an oil field and an
oil price × country-level dummy for oil producers. Finally we take the cell-level mine and mineral
price variables directly from Berman et al. (2017).
As we note in the main text, all PPI effects remain significant. Three of the CPI estimates are
significant at the 10% level with Conley SEs (though only two are with two-way clustered SEs).
We also note that the CPI effect is significant when interacted with luminosity (see Table A2 and
related discussion) and when interacted with subnational institutions (see Table A29 and related
52

This would lead to non-classical measurement error that would bias our PPI estimate toward zero.
The dataset contains information on all known on-shore oil and gas deposits throughout the world. It can be
accessed at https://www.prio.org/Data/Geographical-and-Resource-Datasets/Petroleum-Dataset
53

A10

discussion).
Additional robustness

We additionally show that the results are robust to recoding the outcome

variable as “two-sided” conflict only (Table A4), which guarantees the presence of a non-state armed
group in the data; to varying the Conley standard error kernal cutoff from 100km to 1000km in
increments of 100km (Table A5); to aggregating the cell area to 1 degree cells (i.e., by a factor of
four; Table A6) to assuage fears that the results are overstated due to the resolution of the data
(we refer the reader to Section C.5 for an explicit treatment of spatial effects); to adding to that
specification controls for the PPI in neighboring cells (Table A7); to including a cell-year estimate
of population as a control variable (Table A8), which we create by extrapolating over five-yearly
cell-level estimates provided by SEDAC (described in the main text); to estimating a conditional
fixed-effects logit model (Table A9); to weighting the CPI and PPI components by the extent to
which crops are traded by a given country (Table A10; these trade weights are defined as the sum
of imports and exports divided by total domestic production for a given crop, averaged over our
entire sample period and Winsorized to form a time invariant weight varying from 0 to 1. We also
include results with the trade weight calculated at baseline);
per hectare (Table
C.2

A11);55

54

to weighting the PPI by crop yields

and including contemporaneous price indices only (Table A12).

Robustness of output conflict results

In Table A13, we again cumulatively add (i) cell-level weather covariates and oil prices × cell- and
country-level production indicators and (ii) mineral prices × cell-level mine indicators from Berman
et al. (2017) to the specification with year fixed effects. The results are discussed in the main draft.
They suggest that the CPI effect is largely a common shock across countries. However, when we
introduce more spatial variation to the CPI by interacting it with measures of urbanization (see
Table A24 and related discussion below), we see it is significant in the presence of country × year
fixed effects.
We also show that the results are qualitatively robust to recoding the outcome variable as “riots” only (Table A15); varying the Conley standard error kernal cutoff from 100km to 1000km in
increments of 100km (Table A16); aggregating the cell area to 1 degree cells (i.e., by a factor of
54
Trade and production statistics are taken from the FAO Statistics Division, accessible at http://faostat3.fao.
org/home/E as at August 30th, 2015.
55
Crop yield in a given cell is from Ramankutty et al. (2008). It is a time-invariant estimate from circa 2000. The
index then contains:
n
X
P P Iict =
(Pjt × Njic × Y ieldjic ),
j=1

where the price and the yield are measured in the same units. This reduces the size of the PPI effect in both sets
of regressions (Tables A11 and A22); for output conflict, almost all estimates are still significant; for factor conflict,
only the offset estimate is significant with country × year FE and Conley SEs. These results are consistent with the
estimated yield components introducing additional measurement error to the PPI, which we view as plausible given
that these yield estimates are very highly interpolated/estimated for much of Africa (few countries report subnational
yield estimates, so the data product we use here is heroic in that respect). While we are reassured that the results
remain qualitative unchanged at least, we prefer our original measure, as it provides adequate spatial variation with
less measurement error.

A11

four; Table A17); adding to that specification controls for the PPI in neighboring cells (Table A18);
including a cell-year estimate of population as a control variable (Table A19); estimating a conditional fixed-effects logit model (Table A20); weighting the CPI and PPI components by the extent
to which crops are traded by a given country (Table A21); weighting the PPI by crop yields per
hectare (Table A22); and including contemporaneous price indices only (Table A23).
Is output conflict just urban protests?

Our theory above predicts that the effect of higher

consumer prices on output conflict is positive because agents will engage in such conflict as a
means of acquiring output as their real incomes fall. However, work by Bellemare (2015) and
others show that higher food prices can cause riots that may be driven as much by a desire to
provoke government policy changes than by a desire to directly appropriate property from others,
an interpretation supported by Hendrix and Haggard (2015) and Bates and Carter (2012), who find
that governments frequently alter policies in favor of consumers in the wake of price shocks. Riots
in the context above will occur in urban centers where government authorities can be expected
plausibly to respond. Output conflict, according to our theory, can happen anywhere there are
poor consumers and where there is appropriable property. We therefore interact our consumer price
index with two measures of urbanization in order to detect these differences. The first measures
the share of each cell area that is classified as urban by the SEDAC project at Columbia University
introduced above; the second captures the population share that is classified as urban. Evidence
of a significant interaction term is consistent with this protest riot explanation (although it does
not rule out the possibility that output conflict is simply more pervasive in cities). However, a
significant coefficient on the independent CPI term strongly suggests that the overall effect is not
explained fully by protest riots.
Results are given in Table A24. In column (1), both the interaction term CPI × urban area and
the CPI term are significantly different from zero. In the 90th percentile of urbanization, a standard
deviation rise in the CPI in increases output conflict by 20%; when urban area is equal to zero, the
same change still increases output conflict by 11.1%. In column (2), we add CYFEs and remove
the CPI term. We see that, while the interaction term is still significant, it is also smaller. (This
also provides important evidence of the CPI effect on output conflict in the presence of country
× year effects.) In columns (3) and (4) the interaction term CPI × urban population is used as
a substitute, and we find that its effect is statistically indistinguishable from zero irrespective of
whether CYFEs are included. Taken together, these results suggest that the main output conflict
results are not driven fully by urban protests designed to create unrest and agitate for policy
reforms. Output conflict occurs in non-urban as well as urban areas. The additional effect in
urban areas is consistent not only with the idea that consumers demonstrate to provoke policy
changes, but also with the idea that output conflict is higher in cities due to a wider prevalence of
appropriable goods.

A12

C.3

Comparisons between output and factor conflict over time periods

In Table A25, we investigate the possibility that the contrast we observe between the effects of PPI
on factor conflict and output conflict are due to differences either in the study periods or in the
data collection agencies, rather than due to the mechanisms put forward in our model. To hold the
study period and data sources constant, we must either locate an output conflict measure in the
UCDP dataset, or locate a factor conflict measure in the ACLED dataset. Given the restrictive
criteria for conclusion in the UCDP dataset, we pursue the latter strategy. The challenge is to
(i) identify large scale battles between armed groups over the control of territory in the broader
ACLED dataset while (ii) ensuring that we do not pick up output conflict events, which would bias
the PPI effect towards zero. In this light, the ACLED “Type 2” battle is suitable, as it records
battles after which non-state armed groups overtake territory. The advantage is that it captures
battles that fit our factor conflict definition, and ought to avoid incidents that fit our output conflict
definition. The disadvantage is that the incidence of these battles is somewhat rare, with a mean
of 0.41%.
Nevertheless, we proceed in Table A25 with a comparison between the main UCDP Factor
Conflict measure, the ACLED Territorial Change alternative factor conflict measure, and the main
ACLED Output Conflict measure. We present the results of two specifications for each outcome; the
first with the largest possible sample (that is, 1989-2010 for UCDP and 1997-2013 for ACLED), and
the second with the common overlap years only (1997-2010). The critical comparison is between
the PPI coefficients in Columns (2), (4) and (6). With UCDP Factor Conflict, the effect is −18.5%;
with ACLED Territorial Change, the effect is −15.0%; and with ACLED Output Conflict, the effect
is +8.9%. Moreover, the PPI and CPI effects are significantly different only in the factor conflict
regressions, and not in the output conflict regression.
The results of this test indicate strongly that our distinction between the impact of PPI on
factor and output conflict is neither an artifact of differences between the study periods nor the
data sources.
It is interesting to note the differences between the PPI impacts on ACLED Territorial Change
in the 1997-2010 sample and the 1997-2013 sample, which go from -15% to -2.6%. One explanation
could be that world food prices reached a historical peak in 2011 (see Figure A6), which precipitated
not just a wave of output conflict events, as we discuss in the paper, but also an intense wave of
factor conflict events in urban areas, such as the “Arab Spring” related violence in North Africa and
the Second Ivorian Civil war (note the 33.2% CPI effect). In the presence of even small spillovers,
this could have the effect of biasing the PPI effect on factor conflict toward zero. This is because
CPI-triggered conflict events that spillover from urban to rural areas will show up as a positive
association between the PPI and factor conflict. The reverse is not necessarily true, as conflict
originating in rural areas generally spillover into other rural areas.
While we unfortunately do not have cell-level measures of the CPI to get an accurate sense of
spillovers from CPI shocks, we can still interrogate this theory by examining the effect of the PPI
on ACLED Territorial Change in areas further away from cities. We do this by (i) aggregating
A13

to larger 1 degree (110km × 110km) cells; and (ii) interacting the PPI with a dummy variable
indicating that the (larger) cell has no urban center. We find that the PPI effect is −0.002, or
−15.4% of the (larger, 1 degree) mean, with a p-value of 0.06. Interestingly, when we restrict the
years as in column (4) to 1997-2010, we find a similar result: −0.003, or −23.7% of the mean, with
a p-value of 0.08.56
In the end, it appears that spillovers from CPI shocks may bias PPI effects on factor conflict
towards zero during the historically high price shock of 2011/12. Much of this spillover effect can
be sidestepped when we estimate the PPI effect in rural areas at least 110km (roughly) from urban
centers. Finally, even when we do not account for this (as in Table A25), it is still the case that
the PPI and CPI effects are significantly different to each other in all factor conflict regressions (in
all periods) and in no output conflict regressions.
C.4

Afrobarometer results

Food prices and self-reported poverty

In Table A26, we examine the effect of the producer

and consumer price indices on three different self-reported poverty measures. In columns (1)-(3),
the outcome variable is a poverty index that combines answers to survey questions on how often
the respondent has gone without access to food, water, health, electricity and income. We split the
25-point index so that zero indicates below or at the median score, and a value of 1 indicates above
the median. In columns (4)-(6) the outcome variable indicates that the household has frequently
gone without income over the preceding year, and in columns (7)-(9) the outcome variable indicates
that the household has frequently gone without food over the preceding year. We estimate linear
probability models for all specifications.
In column (1), we control for survey round fixed effects, country fixed effects, a country-specific
time trend, the age of the respondent, age squared, education level, gender, urban or rural primary
sampling unit, and a vector of 0.5 degree cell-level crop-specific land area shares to ensure that
the producer price index is not picking up time-invariant features of agricultural production. We
cluster standard errors at the cell level. A one standard deviation increase in the CPI raises the
probability that a respondent is above the median poverty index value by 0.9%. The equivalent
results for income poverty and food poverty in columns (4) and (7) confirm that households do not
adjust exclusively to higher food prices via a substitution effect.
In column (1) we also see that an equivalent change in the PPI has a negligible effect on the
overall poverty index, a result at odds with our prediction. One possible explanation for this
finding is that higher producer prices alleviate poverty only for those in the agricultural sector.
Our micro-level data permits a direct test of this hypothesis, as respondents are asked to list their
occupation in the first three rounds of the survey. Of the 59,871 respondents, 17,999 (30%) are
farmers of any type. This allows us to include an interaction between the PPI and an indicator
that the respondent is a farmer. We add country × period fixed effects and present alternative
specifications with country fixed effects (2) and cell fixed effects (3). The results in either case are
56

Results are available on request.

A14

more clear: higher producer prices significantly lower the probability that farmers report abovemedian poverty index scores relative to non-farmers, although the magnitude (∼ 0.5%) is not large.
Overall, these results broadly consistent with the assumptions of our theory: higher food prices
represent negative income shocks for consumers, and positive shocks for producers.57
Validation tests

In Table A27, we test for consistency between our cell-level and individual-

level measures of output conflict. Our individual measures are binary responses to survey questions
that ask whether individuals over the previous year (i) have been victims of theft; (ii) have been
victims of physical assault; (iii) have partaken in “protest marches”, which may take the form of
demonstrations or of mass output conflict in the form of riots or looting. We regress each indictor
on our cell-level ACLED Output Conflict Variable in three specifications: one bivariate, one with
survey round fixed effects and country fixed effects, and one that adds the UCDP Factor Conflict
measure in order to determine if the survey measures are also (or instead) capturing factor conflict.
In eight of the nine specifications, the survey measures correlate significantly with ACLED Output
Conflict Variable. The exception is the bivariate protest variable regression. The UCDP Factor
Conflict variable does not enter significantly in any specification.
C.5

Temporal and spatial lags

Here we explore in more detail the temporal and spatial structure of the effect of food price shocks on
conflict. Our main specification models conflict as a function of food prices in the contemporaneous
and two previous years, and our main estimates report the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged
effects. Reporting the sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects has at least two advantages.
First, it is a straightforward way to account for potential displacement and/or for persistence. For
instance, if displacement effects of food prices shocks are are large, contemporaneous and lagged
effects will have opposite sign and their sum will be close to zero; if instead the price shocks have
persistent effects, then the sum of contemporaneous and lagged effects will generally be larger
than just the contemporaneous effects (Burke et al., 2015). Second, as we explore below, when an
independent variable of interest is highly correlated over time or space, individual coefficients on
contemporaneous or lagged effects can be very noisy, but the sum of the coefficients is stable and
quite close to the “true” cumulated effect size. The choice of two lags is somewhat arbitrary, and
below we explore robustness to the inclusion of more or fewer lags.
Our main estimates also do not explicitly account for spatial spillovers. However, as recent
work in the conflict literature has emphasized (Harari and La Ferrara, 2014; Berman et al., 2017),
both conflicts and their causes could be correlated over space, and failure to account for this spatial
dependence could lead to biased estimates – or at the very least an unclear picture of how the effects
of a given conflict-inducing shock diffuse through space. Nevertheless, as noted by Berman et al.
(2017) and other authors, there are substantial difficulties in identifying spillovers. Including spatial
57

We note that the CPI effect is substantially larger when the price indices are adjusted to account for trade weights
(available on request).

A15

lags of the outcome variable introduces clear concerns about simultaneity bias, and this problem
cannot necessarily be solved by instrumenting with spatial lags of the independent variable if (as in
our case) this variable is itself highly spatially correlated. Echoing one of the approaches taken in
Harari and La Ferrara (2014), our approach instead is to focus on spatial lags of the independent
variable, as these appear to induce fewer identification concerns.
We proceed as follows. First we show the patterns of spatial and temporal autocorrelation in our
independent variable, and then explore in simulation (under a known DGP) what these magnitudes
of autocorrelation imply about how temporal and spatial lags should be estimated. We show below
why, for nearly all our results, our choices in the main text likely yield a conservative estimate of the
overall impact of food price shocks. Furthermore, we show that an increasingly common placebo
test in applied panel econometrics – the regression of current values of a dependent dependent
variable on future values of an independent variable (i.e. “leads”) – can be misleading in a setting
of high autocorrelation in the independent variable.
Observed spatial and temporal autocorrelations Figure A7 shows the observed temporal
and spatial autocorrelation in our two price variables. Average temporal correlations are calculated
across lags up to t − 4 for both CPI and PPI price variables and are quite high, particularly for PPI.
Spatial correlations are calculated by first constructing 100km annuli (concentric circles) around
every cell in our study out to 500km, and calculating the average prices in each annuli-year around
each cell. The middle panel of Figure A7 then reports the average correlation between the price in a
given cell-year and the prices in each annuli out to 500km in that year. As expected, consumer prices
(which don’t vary within country but can vary across country borders) are more highly spatially
correlated than producer prices (which do vary within country). The right panel visualizes the size
of these spatial annuli for a randomly chosen cell; in this example for a cell in Uganda, the 500km
annuli would include price information from Uganda, DR Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya, and
South Sudan. The diameter of the outer annulus is roughly the width of Kenya.
Understanding lagged effects in the presence of autocorrelation

To understand the effect

of autocorrelation in the independent variable on estimated coefficients in a temporal/spatial lag
model, we simulate a data generating process where an outcome y depends linearly on contemporaneous x and four lags of x:
yt =

t=0
X

β t xt + η t

(A15)

t−4

with βt = 5, βt−1 = 4, βt−2 = 3, βt−3 = 2, βt−4 = 1. η is a mean zero white noise term. In this
setup, t can index either temporal lags (e.g. years) or spatial lags (e.g. annuli: concentric circles
at increasing distance from an origin).
We then construct the x variables to have either high (temporal or spatial) autocorrelation
(correlations: ρxt ,xt−1 = 0.98, ρxt ,xt−4 = 0.9), or somewhat lower autocorrelation (ρxt ,xt−1 = 0.9,
ρxt ,xt−4 = 0.7), to roughly match the range of temporal and spatial autocorrelations we see in

A16

our data (Figure A7). We then take a draw of η and generate yt via Equation (A15). To mimic
increasingly-common practice in applied work, we then estimate Equation (A15) also including two
“leads” (i.e. xt+1 and xt+2 ) as regressors, which are interpreted as placebo tests. By construction
in (A15), these leads have no effect on the outcome in time t. This process is repeated 100
times separately for the high autocorrelation values and the lower autocorrelation values, and the
estimated βt are saved in each run.
Results of this simulation are shown in Figure A3. We extract three insights. First, as expected
in the presence of autocorrelation in the x variables, the estimated coefficient on any particular
lag is unbiased but quite noisy. Individual coefficient estimates in some runs have the wrong
sign, and in others are two times too large or larger, particularly in the high autocorrelation
P
simulation. Second, while individual coefficients are noisy, the cumulative effect ( t=0
t−4 β̂t is much
more precisely estimated (as shown on the right-hand-side of both figure panels), with the noise
in each individual coefficient canceling out as coefficients are summed. Third, and somewhat
surprisingly, individual coefficients on the (placebo) lead variables are often large and in some cases
larger than the contemporaneous effect, even though by construction these lead variables have no
“true” effect on the outcome. This suggests that, in the presence of temporal autocorrelation in
the independent variable, the now-standard practice of including leads in a panel regression could
lead to misplaced concern that a specification “fails” a placebo test. Our results suggest that with
reasonably high autocorrelation, these false positives could be somewhat common.
Empirical results on spatial and temporal spillovers Our main specification models conflict
in cell i as a function of food prices in the contemporaneous and two previous years in cell i. Guided
by the above simulation, we now explore how results differ when we add or subtract temporal
lags, and when we add spatial lags. For temporal lags, we estimate 6 models: a model with no
lags, a model with one lag, a model with two lags (our baseline model) and so-on up to 5 lags.
For consistency with the literature, we also include two leads as “placebo” tests. The empirical
specification that includes all five lags is thus:
f actor conf lictict = αi +

2
X
k=−5

p
βt+k
P P Iict+k

2
X

+

m
βt+k
CP Ict+k + γc × trendt + ict

(A16)

k=−5

where i denotes cell, c denotes country, and t − k denotes year. Results are shown for factor and
output conflict in Figure 5. The top four plots show the cumulative effects of prices on conflict for
models with increasing numbers of lags, for both types of conflict and both consumer and producer
prices. The bottom four plots show estimated individual coefficients in the 5-lag, 2-lead model
(Equation A16). Consistent with the simulation, individual coefficients are noisy but cumulative
effects are remarkably stable and more precisely estimated. Moreover, these results indicate that
cumulative effects from our baseline 2-lag model reported in the main text are somewhat conservative relative to models with higher numbers of lags. Estimates for the “placebo” leads are also
noisy, but in a few cases are significantly different than zero (e.g. the t + 2 lead in the CPI/output
A17

conflict regression). However, given the simulation results above, we do not conclude that our
results “fail” the placebo test; rather, it seems that this placebo test is likely uninformative in the
context of autocorrelated regressors.
To study spatial spillovers, we amend our main specification to include cumulative and lagged
prices shocks in annuli up to 500km (as depicted in the right panel in Figure A7). We focus on
PPI impacts as the CPI does not vary within country. For the model with annuli out to 500km,
the specification is thus:
f actor conf lictict = αi +

0
X

βt+k P P Iict+k +

k=−2

500 X
0
X

a
a
βt+k
P P Iict+k
+ γc × trendt + ict (A17)

a=100 k=−2

where a designates annuli in 100km increments. This yields a regression with 18 price variables.
Similar to the temporal results, the individual coefficients on the spatial lags are noisy, but their
sum is more precisely estimated and grows as increasing spatial lags are added. As shown in the
top panels of Figure 6, the overall effect of a PPI shock on conflict increases as more spatial lags
are added, and including impacts up to 500km away roughly doubles the overall effect size relative
to our baseline model with no spatial lags. This is true for both factor and output conflict. As in
the simulation, individual coefficient estimates are substantially noisier (bottom panels).
C.6

Heterogeneity by subnational institutions

We harness the richness of our subnational data by exploiting a within-country measure of historical institutional capacity first used by Michalopoulos & Papaioannou (2013). In this literature,
‘institutions”, or more specifically the extent to which actors can rely on third parties to credibly
enforce contracts and protect property rights, are thought to be a first-order determinant of peace.
Michalopoulos & Papaioannou document that the degree of political centralization within precolonial ethnic homelands is strongly related to present-day economic development (as approximated
by nighttime luminosty), controlling for country-level factors. To the extent that it persists over
time, the sophistication of precolonial jurisdictional hierarchies is a plausibly suitable measure of
institutional quality in relation to property rights.
To test this hypothesis, we interact our price indices with a dummy variable that indicates
whether or not the level of precolonial political centralization went beyond the local village. The
variable is measured at the level of an ethnic homeland (which is independent of modern day
borders) and the value attributed to a cell is determined by the location of the cell’s centroid.
We present the effect of this interaction term on factor conflict in Table A29. In the first column,
as in our similar exercise on heterogeneity by luminosity in Table 3, we include country × year fixed
effects as well as a control for population (a potential omitted variable). In the second column, we
introduce the battery of controls included in the full specifications in Table 3 (i.e., the CPI and
PPI each interacted with luminosity in 1992, distance to the nearest “lit” cell in 1992, distance to
nearest port, and distance to nearest border).

A18

In the Column (1), we show that the PPI effect is −30.3% in cells that lacked a sophisticated
jurisdictional hierarchy, and −30.3 + 23.7 = −6.6% in cells associated a higher degree of political
centralization. The PPI effect is diminished by 80% where these “better” institutions were present.
We also see a consistent result with respect to the CPI, where the effect is lower by −17.1% of the
mean in cells with better institutions. Taken together, we see evidence that the impact of both
price indices on factor conflict is closer to zero in cells with historically higher degrees of political
centralization. In the second column, the point estimates of the interaction effects remain quite
stable, but only the PPI interaction is significantly different to zero.
We repeat the exercise with output conflict as the dependent variable in Table A30. The
interactions with the PPI are not significantly different to zero. This indicates that institutions
(as they are measured here) play a role in mitigating large scale factor conflict battles, but not
in mitigating output conflict events. While we did not have a strong prior on this effect, it is
consistent with the idea that riots, theft or protests can be triggered by price shocks in many areas,
but armed battles can only be triggered by prices shocks in areas with particularly dysfunctional
institutions. Indeed, we see that in the interaction effect with the CPI is in fact positive, meaning
that CPI shocks are more likely to lead to output conflict in these cells relative to cells without
jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local level. This could be due to the relative absence of factor
conflict as an option for would-be fighters, who instead turn immediately to output conflict in the
wake of price shocks. Or, it might simply reflect the fact that there is more to appropriate in these
cells. Either way, it is clear that precolonial political centralization is associated with smaller PPI
and CPI effects on factor conflict, but not output conflict.

A19

Appendix figures

A20

Figure A1: Cell Resolution

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Note: each point is the centroid of a 0.5 × 0.5 degree cell.

A21

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

Pr(UCDP Factor Conflict = 1) Residuals

Figure A2: Impact of Prices on Factor Conflict and Output Conflict (Quadratic Fit)
.01

Producer Price Index

0

Consumer Price Index

-.01
-2

-1

0

1

2

Pr(ACLED Output Conflict = 1) Residuals

Price Index (Standard Deviations) Residuals

.02

.01

Producer Price Index

0

Consumer Price Index

-.01

-.02
-2

-1

0

1

2

Price Index (Standard Deviations) Residuals

Notes: In the upper panel, the outcome variable is UCDP Factor Conflict Incidence; in the
lower panel, the outcome is ACLED Output Conflict Incidence. The Price Index variables are
standardized with mean = 0 and (temporal) standard deviation = 1. Lags are not included
for the price indices. The regressions also include country time trends and cell fixed effects.
Quadratic fits are shown.

A22

Figure A3: Simulation of contemporaneous and lagged effects when independent
variable is autocorrelated. Dark black line shows “true” effect of contemporaneous or lagged
independent variables on the outcome, grey lines are estimated effects for lags and leads (each
line is one of 100 simulations). Cumulative effects of lags and leads are shown in small plots;
Pt
Pt+2
black dot is true cumulative effect of lags ( t−4 βt = 15) or leads ( t+1 βt = 0), grey dots are
estimated cumulative effects from simulations. Note different scale for these inset plots. Left
plots: lower autocorrelation in the independent variables. Right plots: high autocorrelation.

A23

Figure A4: Crop Price Probability Density Functions (Kernel Estimation)

A24

Figure A5: Crop Price Monthly Series (2000M01 = 100)

A25

Figure A6: FAO Global Food Price Index Series from 1990-2013

FAO Global Food Price Index

250

200

150

100
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Figure A7: Temporal and spatial autocorrelation in prices. Map at right shows an
example of the 100km annuli (concentric circles) we use to calculate spatial autocorrelation,
placed over an arbitrary location in Uganda. Annuli are re-calculated for every cell on the
continent. We study impacts out to 500km from each cell; the diameter of the outer annulus
(1000km) is roughly the width of Kenya.
Temporal correlation in prices
PPI
CPI

0.8
correlation with t

Spatial correlation in prices

Spatial annuli

1.0
correlation with own cell

1.0

0.6
0.4
0.2

CPI

South
Sudan

0.8
0.6

PPI
0.4
0.2

Annuli (km)

Kenya

0-100
100-200
200-300
300-400
400-500

DRC

0.0

Tanzania

0.0
t−4

t−3

t−2

t−1

t

own

0−100

100−200 200-300 300−400 400-500

temporal lag

spatial lag (km)

A26

Appendix Tables

A27

Table A1: Price Variables
Crop

Description (copied from source)

Source

CPI

PPI

Bananas
Barley
Cocoa

Central American and Ecuador, FOB U.S. Ports, US$ per metric ton
Canadian No.1 Western Barley, spot price, US$ per metric ton
International Cocoa Organization cash price, CIF US and European
ports, US$ per metric ton
Philippines/Indonesia, bulk, c.i.f. Rotterdam, US$ per metric ton
Robusta, International Coffee Organization New York cash price, exdock New York, US cents per pound
Other Mild Arabicas, International Coffee Organization New York cash
price, ex-dock New York, US cents per pound
U.S. No.2 Yellow, FOB Gulf of Mexico, U.S. price, US$ per metric ton
Groundnuts (peanuts), 40/50 (40 to 50 count per ounce), cif Argentina,
US$ per metric ton
Malaysia Palm Oil Futures (first contract forward) 4-5 percent FFA,
US$ per metric ton
Olive Oil, extra virgin less than 1% free fatty acid, ex-tanker price U.K.,
US$ per metric ton
Miscellaneous oranges CIF French import price, US$ per metric ton
5 percent broken milled white rice, Thailand nominal price quote, US$
per metric ton
Sorghum (US), no. 2 milo yellow, f.o.b. Gulf ports, US$ per metric ton
Chicago Soybean futures contract (first contract forward) No. 2 yellow
and par, US$ per metric ton
Free Market, Coffee Sugar and Cocoa Exchange (CSCE) contract no.11
nearest future position, US cents per pound
U.S. import price, contract no.14 nearest futures position, US cents per
pound (Footnote: No. 14 revised to No. 16)
Sunflower Oil, US export price from Gulf of Mexico, US$ per metric ton
Mombasa, Kenya, Auction Price, From July 1998, Kenya auctions, Best
Pekoe Fannings. Prior, London auctions, c.i.f. U.K. warehouses, US
cents per kilogram
Any origin, unmanufactured, general import , cif, US$ per metric ton
No.1 Hard Red Winter, ordinary protein, FOB Gulf of Mexico, US$ per
metric ton

IMF
IMF
IMF

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes (cash)

WB
IMF

Yes
Yes

Yes (cash)

IMF

Yes

Yes (cash)

IMF
IMF

Yes
Yes

Yes (food)

IMF

Yes

Yes (food)

IMF

Yes

IMF
IMF

Yes
Yes

Yes (food)

WB
IMF

Yes
Yes

Yes (food)
Yes (food)

IMF

Yes

Yes (food)

IMF

Yes

Yes (food)

IMF
IMF

Yes
Yes

Yes (cash)

WB
IMF

No
Yes

Yes (cash)
Yes (food)

Coconut oil
Coffee 1
Coffee 2
Maize
Nuts
Oil palm
Olive
A28

Orange
Rice
Sorghum
Soybean
Sugar 1
Sugar 2
Sunflower
Tea

Tobacco
Wheat

Note: See Section B.1 for details.

Table A2: UCDP Factor Conflict, Prices and Luminosity
Factor Conflict Incidence: 1(Conflict > 0)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0079
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

-0.0510
0.023
0.028
0.032
0.111

-0.0102
0.003
0.000
0.003
0.001

-0.0502
0.023
0.030
0.032
0.116

-0.0083
0.003
0.005
0.003
0.008

-0.0484
0.023
0.037
0.032
0.131

Producer Price Index × Luminosity
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0049
0.002
0.005
0.002
0.007

0.0041
0.002
0.018
0.002
0.019

0.0072
0.002
0.004
0.003
0.010

0.0051
0.003
0.042
0.003
0.073

0.0050
0.003
0.076
0.003
0.098

0.0032
0.003
0.242
0.003
0.272

Producer Price Index × Dist. to lights
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0820
0.060
0.171

0.0774
0.060
0.198

0.0774
0.060
0.196

Producer Price Index × Dist. to port
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0001
0.000
0.869

0.0001
0.000
0.835

0.0000
0.000
0.929

Producer Price Index × Dist. to border
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0016
0.001
0.175

0.0018
0.001
0.141

0.0018
0.001
0.120

Producer Price Index × Dist. to capital
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0005
0.001
0.462

-0.0005
0.001
0.487

-0.0005
0.001
0.458

Consumer Price Index × Luminosity
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0040
0.002
0.085
0.003
0.196

-0.0006
0.002
0.743
0.002
0.788

-0.0060
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.027

-0.0031
0.002
0.077
0.002
0.123

-0.0060
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.032

-0.0030
0.002
0.110
0.002
0.224

Consumer Price Index × Dist. to lights
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.1990
0.126
0.115

-0.2011
0.127
0.115

-0.2020
0.128
0.115

Consumer Price Index × Dist. to port
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0023
0.001
0.004

0.0022
0.001
0.005

0.0022
0.001
0.005

Consumer Price Index × Dist. to border
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0017
0.001
0.056

-0.0017
0.001
0.052

-0.0017
0.001
0.055

Consumer Price Index × Dist. to capital
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
PPI impact (%) × Luminosity
CPI impact (%) × Luminosity
Luminosity year
Country × year FE
Cell FE
Extra Controls
Observations

0.0000
0.001
0.988
-188.7
15.1
-2.2
1992
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

-0.0001
0.001
0.892
-185.6
18.9
-11.5
2000
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

-0.0001
0.001
0.882
-179.1
11.9
-11.1
2010
Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

-29.1
18.1
-14.7
1992
Yes
Yes
No
203962

-37.9
26.6
-22.3
2000
Yes
Yes
No
203962

-30.5
18.5
-22.2
2010
Yes
Yes
No
203962

Note: The dependent variables is UCDP Factor Conflict incidence. The Producer Price Index (PPI)
and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard
deviations. Reported effects are the sum of price coefficients at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors
allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for
serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact
indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome
variable in percentage terms. Luminosity = 1 if any light is visible at night from satellite images in a
given cell. All specifications include a time-varying cell-level control for population.

A29

Table A3: UCDP Factor Conflict Results with Year Fixed Effects and Added Controls
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0043
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002

-0.0044
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.003

-0.0058
0.001
0.000
0.002
0.001

-0.0027
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.012

-0.0027
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.013

-0.0034
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.003

0.0385
0.017
0.022
0.020
0.060

0.0388
0.017
0.022
0.021
0.068

0.0553
0.018
0.002
0.019
0.004

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0064
0.005
0.218
0.006
0.319

0.0083
0.005
0.124
0.006
0.203

0.0176
0.008
0.038
0.010
0.066

0.0054
0.003
0.071
0.004
0.138

0.0069
0.003
0.026
0.004
0.068

0.0059
0.005
0.258
0.005
0.281

-0.1066
0.085
0.209
0.092
0.248

-0.1255
0.086
0.143
0.093
0.180

-0.0969
0.178
0.586
0.190
0.611

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value

-16.1
23.7

-16.3
30.6

-21.6
65.0

-18.7
37.7

-18.6
48.1

-23.6
40.8

7.2
-19.9

7.3
-23.5

10.3
-18.1

0.040
0.097

0.019
0.053

0.007
0.017

0.009
0.035

0.003
0.015

0.079
0.098

0.103
0.135

0.067
0.091

0.398
0.431

Mine controls
Weather controls
Oil controls
Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
204820

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
204490

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
110880

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
202297

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
201967

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
109593

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
4631

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4629

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2301

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer
Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal standard
deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard
errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for
serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in
percentage terms. Weather controls are measured at the cell-level, and include Temperature, the cell-year
mean temperature in degrees celsius; moderate drought, which indicates that there were at least three consecutive months in which rainfall was more than 1 standard deviation below long term (six-month) levels;
severe drought, which indicates that there were at least two months during which rainfall was more than 1.5
standard deviations below long term levels; and extreme drought, which indicates that both of these criteria
were met in a cell-year. Oil controls include interactions between the world oil price and Oil cell, a dummy
indicating the presence of an oil field in a given cell, and oil country, a dummy indicating that there is an
oil field in a given country. Mine controls are taken from Berman et al. (2017), and include a dummy for
whether or not there is an active mine in the cell, the log of the price for the main mineral produced in a cell
over the sample period, and an interaction term.

A30

Table A4: UCDP Factor Conflict: Two-Sided Violence Only
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

-0.0043
0.001
0.001

-0.0028
0.001
0.003

0.0603
0.028
0.033

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0017
0.001
0.152

0.0011
0.001
0.194

-0.0933
0.029
0.001

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
p-value

-20.7
8.4

-24.6
9.6

10.9
-16.8

0.000

0.001

0.001

Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
Yes
204820

Yes
Yes
202893

Yes
Yes
3615

Note: The dependent variables are incidence, onset and offset dummies for the
two-sided violence component of UCDP Factor Conflict. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms
of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the
sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI
(CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer
(consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A31

Table A5: UCDP Factor Conflict: Sensitivity of Standard Errors
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
100km SE
p-value
200km SE
p-value
300km SE
p-value
400km SE
p-value
500km SE
p-value
600km SE
p-value
700km SE
p-value
800km SE
p-value
900km SE
p-value
1000km SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0042
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002

-0.0046
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000

-0.0024
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.003
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.005
0.001
0.006
0.001
0.007

-0.0029
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.005
0.001
0.007
0.001
0.007
0.001
0.006

0.0443
0.017
0.009
0.017
0.009
0.017
0.011
0.018
0.013
0.018
0.015
0.019
0.017
0.019
0.020
0.019
0.022
0.020
0.025
0.020
0.026

0.0494
0.017
0.003
0.019
0.009
0.020
0.011
0.020
0.013
0.020
0.014
0.020
0.016
0.021
0.020
0.023
0.029
0.023
0.030
0.023
0.030

Consumer Price Index
100km SE
p-value
200km SE
p-value
300km SE
p-value
400km SE
p-value
500km SE
p-value
600km SE
p-value
700km SE
p-value
800km SE
p-value
900km SE
p-value
1000km SE
p-value

0.0023
0.001
0.008
0.001
0.053
0.001
0.094
0.001
0.121
0.002
0.134
0.002
0.140
0.002
0.143
0.002
0.140
0.002
0.136
0.002
0.133

0.0015
0.001
0.010
0.001
0.057
0.001
0.098
0.001
0.127
0.001
0.143
0.001
0.158
0.001
0.170
0.001
0.171
0.001
0.174
0.001
0.174

-0.0881
0.019
0.000
0.021
0.000
0.023
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.026
0.001

Wald test: PPI = CPI
100km p-value
200km p-value
300km p-value
400km p-value
500km p-value
600km p-value
700km p-value
800km p-value
900km p-value
1000km p-value
Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
No
Yes
Yes
204820

0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.002
No
Yes
Yes
202298

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.001
No
Yes
Yes
5352

Yes
N/A
Yes
225038

Yes
N/A
Yes
222159

Yes
N/A
Yes
6083

Note: Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a given
radius.
A32

Table A6: UCDP Factor Conflict: One Degree Aggregation
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0089
0.003
0.004
0.004
0.022

-0.0045
0.003
0.189
0.003
0.174

-0.0061
0.002
0.011
0.003
0.037

-0.0037
0.003
0.219
0.003
0.174

0.0163
0.024
0.503
0.029
0.576

0.0208
0.017
0.230
0.019
0.268

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0025
0.004
0.546
0.004
0.560

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value

-12.5

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
N/A
Yes
53968

-6.4
-3.5

0.0016
0.003
0.599
0.003
0.604
-13.6

0.728
0.731
No
Yes
Yes
54010

-8.2
3.5

-0.1444
0.026
0.000
0.028
0.000
2.5

0.254
0.225
Yes
N/A
Yes
53844

No
Yes
Yes
53887

3.2
-22.5
0.000
0.000

Yes
N/A
Yes
3404

No
Yes
Yes
3571

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI)
are measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients
displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard
errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Twoway standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one
standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in
percentage terms. Each cell is 110km × 110km at the equator.

A33

Table A7: UCDP Factor Conflict: One Degree Aggregation with Spatial Spillovers
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0075
0.004
0.052
0.004
0.050

-0.0064
0.004
0.092
0.004
0.082

-0.0051
0.003
0.087
0.003
0.062

-0.0046
0.003
0.085
0.003
0.072

0.0153
0.028
0.585
0.030
0.615

0.0291
0.030
0.335
0.031
0.347

Producer Price Index in neighboring cells
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0023
0.005
0.672
0.006
0.691

0.0024
0.006
0.686
0.005
0.637

-0.0016
0.004
0.699
0.004
0.709

0.0013
0.005
0.782
0.004
0.760

0.0018
0.024
0.942
0.026
0.946

-0.0084
0.029
0.774
0.030
0.782

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0029
0.004
0.498
0.004
0.507

PPI impact (%)
PPI impact in neighboring cells (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value

-10.6
-3.2

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
N/A
Yes
53968

-9.0
3.4
-4.0

0.0014
0.003
0.654
0.003
0.651
-11.4
-3.7

0.538
0.555
No
Yes
Yes
54010

-10.3
2.8
3.1

-0.1443
0.027
0.000
0.029
0.000
2.4
0.3

0.145
0.148
Yes
N/A
Yes
53844

No
Yes
Yes
53887

4.5
-1.3
-22.5
0.000
0.000

Yes
N/A
Yes
3404

No
Yes
Yes
3571

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The
Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured in terms of average
temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1
and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km.
Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells
within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer
(consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms. Each cell is 110km × 110km at the
equator.

A34

Table A8: UCDP Factor Conflict with Control for Population
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0041
0.002
0.007

-0.0046
0.001
0.001

-0.0023
0.001
0.020

-0.0028
0.001
0.007

0.0452
0.022
0.038

0.0498
0.022
0.026

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
ln Population
SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0023
0.001
0.119

0.0015
0.001
0.140

-0.0865
0.026
0.001

-0.0108
0.009
0.236

0.0004
0.009
0.968

-0.0017
0.005
0.704

0.0067
0.005
0.147

-0.0327
0.244
0.893

0.2151
0.198
0.279

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
p-value

-15.3

-17.2
8.6

-16.2

-19.6
10.7

8.5

9.3
-16.2

Country × Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
N/A
Yes
224158

0.000
No
Yes
Yes
203962

0.002
Yes
N/A
Yes
221276

No
Yes
Yes
201441

0.001
Yes
N/A
Yes
5104

No
Yes
Yes
4627

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI)
are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The
coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Standard
errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells
within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage
terms. Ln Population varies at the cell-year level.

A35

Table A9: UCDP Factor Conflict: Conditional Fixed Effects Logit
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

-0.0871
0.089
0.328

-0.0823
0.055
0.136

0.3461
0.117
0.003

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

-0.0132
0.120
0.913

-0.0102
0.116
0.930

-0.7986
0.143
0.000

Wald test: PPI = CPI
p-value

0.671

0.629

0.000

Time trend
Cell fixed effects
Pseudo-R squared
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.002
37268

Yes
Yes
0.003
32532

Yes
Yes
0.033
3907

Note: All regressions are estimated with a conditional logit estimator. The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are
measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients
displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Standard errors
allow for serial and spatial correlation at the country level.

A36

Table A10: UCDP Factor Conflict with Trade Weights on Price Indices
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

-0.0050
0.002
0.010

-0.0059
0.002
0.006

-0.0025
0.001
0.045

-0.0027
0.001
0.050

0.0441
0.017
0.009

0.0391
0.015
0.008

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0016
0.001
0.209

0.0014
0.001
0.237

0.0011
0.001
0.231

0.0009
0.001
0.315

-0.0730
0.030
0.015

-0.0659
0.028
0.017

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
p-value

-18.6
6.0

-21.8
5.1

-17.2
7.8

-18.5
5.9

8.2
-13.7

7.3
-12.3

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.001

0.007

0.007

Trade weight
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Avg
Yes
Yes
204666

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
204666

Avg
Yes
Yes
202151

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
202151

Avg
Yes
Yes
4614

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
4614

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset
dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are
measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Both are
weighted by the extent to which the component crops are traded internationally.
Trade weights are defined as the sum of imports and exports divided by total domestic production for a given crop. In columns (1), (3) and (5), the trade weights
are averaged over our entire sample period. In columns (2), (4) and (6), the are
measured at baseline (1988). In both cases they are Winsorized to form a time invariant weight varying from 0 to 1. Trade and production statistics are taken from
the FAO Statistics Division, accessible at http://faostat3.fao.org/home/E as at
August 30th, 2015. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at
t, t-1 and t-2. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial
correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a
one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable
in percentage terms.

A37

Table A11: UCDP Factor Conflict with Yield Weights on PPI
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index × Yield
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0007
0.001
0.282
0.001
0.371

-0.0012
0.001
0.162
0.001
0.163

-0.0007
0.000
0.158
0.001
0.240

-0.0011
0.001
0.126
0.001
0.131

0.0431
0.023
0.067
0.028
0.120

0.0308
0.020
0.124
0.021
0.135

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0011
0.002
0.511
0.002
0.494

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
Conley p-value
Two-way p-value

-2.5

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Yes
N/A
Yes
225016

-4.5
3.9

0.0008
0.001
0.464
0.001
0.488
-4.5

0.203
0.192
No
Yes
Yes
204820

-7.9
5.3

-0.0635
0.024
0.008
0.025
0.013
8.1

0.127
0.143
Yes
N/A
Yes
222132

No
Yes
Yes
202297

5.8
-11.9
0.006
0.009

Yes
N/A
Yes
5108

No
Yes
Yes
4631

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured
respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Producer Price Index ×
Yield further weights each component crop by its estimated yield per hectare. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard
errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells
within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise
in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A38

Table A12: UCDP Factor Conflict without Lags
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

Country × year FE
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0035
0.001
0.003

-0.0040
0.001
0.000

-0.0021
0.001
0.008

-0.0024
0.001
0.001

0.0221
0.017
0.189

0.0134
0.016
0.393

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI = CPI
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0018
0.001
0.180
-12.9

-14.6
6.6

0.0004
0.001
0.693
-14.3

0.000
N/A
Yes
225016

Yes
Yes
204820

-16.6
2.6

-0.0031
0.023
0.890
4.1

0.014
N/A
Yes
222132

Yes
Yes
202297

2.5
-0.6
0.620

N/A
Yes
5108

Yes
Yes
4631

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and offset
dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are
measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across
cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard
deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A39

Table A13: ACLED Output Conflict with Year Fixed Effects and Added Controls
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0090
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.001

0.0082
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.001

0.0046
0.002
0.061
0.003
0.107

0.0078
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0073
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.001

0.0056
0.002
0.018
0.003
0.040

0.0057
0.004
0.168
0.005
0.236

0.0051
0.004
0.206
0.005
0.274

0.0205
0.006
0.000
0.007
0.002

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0013
0.006
0.824
0.008
0.864

0.0014
0.006
0.813
0.008
0.853

-0.0002
0.008
0.976
0.009
0.978

0.0024
0.004
0.590
0.006
0.704

0.0016
0.004
0.716
0.006
0.794

-0.0048
0.006
0.401
0.006
0.451

0.0064
0.046
0.889
0.050
0.898

0.0005
0.045
0.991
0.049
0.992

-0.2591
0.087
0.003
0.092
0.005

17.8
2.6

16.3
2.8

9.2
-0.5

27.4
8.4

25.8
5.7

19.6
-16.8

1.3
1.4

1.1
0.1

4.5
-57.3

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
158270

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
158015

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
110880

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
154795

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
154542

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
108945

No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
6774

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
6765

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
3711

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Mine controls
Weather controls
Oil controls
Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal
standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley
standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors
allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI)
impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome
variable in percentage terms. Weather controls are measured at the cell-level, and include Temperature,
the cell-year mean temperature in degrees celsius; moderate drought, which indicates that there were at
least three consecutive months in which rainfall was more than 1 standard deviation below long term (sixmonth) levels; severe drought, which indicates that there were at least two months during which rainfall
was more than 1.5 standard deviations below long term levels; and extreme drought, which indicates that
both of these criteria were met in a cell-year. Oil controls include interactions between the world oil price
and Oil cell, a dummy indicating the presence of an oil field in a given cell, and oil country, a dummy indicating that there is an oil field in a given country. Mine controls are taken from Berman et al. (2017),
and include a dummy for whether or not there is an active mine in the cell, the log of the price for the
main mineral produced in a cell over the sample period, and an interaction term.

A40

Table A14: ACLED Output Conflict with Added Controls
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0086
0.003
0.001

0.0047
0.003
0.096

0.0075
0.002
0.001

0.0056
0.003
0.037

0.0050
0.005
0.355

0.0187
0.007
0.005

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0107
0.004
0.015

0.0001
0.007
0.989

0.0061
0.004
0.098

-0.0023
0.005
0.651

-0.1318
0.031
0.000

-0.2173
0.074
0.003

17.2
21.3

9.4
0.2

26.4
21.6

19.7
-8.2

1.1
-29.2

4.1
-48.1

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
158015

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
110880

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
154543

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
108948

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
7800

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
4538

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Mine controls
Weather controls
Oil controls
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and
offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index
(CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley
standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km.
Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a
one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms. Weather controls are measured at the cell-level, and
include Temperature, the cell-year mean temperature in degrees celsius; moderate drought, which indicates that there were at least three consecutive months in
which rainfall was more than 1 standard deviation below long term (six-month)
levels; severe drought, which indicates that there were at least two months during
which rainfall was more than 1.5 standard deviations below long term levels; and
extreme drought, which indicates that both of these criteria were met in a cellyear. Oil controls include interactions between the world oil price and oil cell, a
dummy indicating the presence of an oil field in a given cell, and oil country, a
dummy indicating that there is an oil field in a given country. Mine controls are
taken from Berman et al. (2017), and include a dummy for whether or not there
is an active mine in the cell, the log of the price for the main mineral produced
in a cell over the sample period, and an interaction term between the two.

A41

Table A15: ACLED Output Conflict, Riots Only
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

A42

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0105
0.002
0.000

0.0110
0.002
0.000

0.0086
0.002
0.000

0.0084
0.002
0.000

0.0108
0.004
0.006

0.0074
0.006
0.204

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0057
0.001
0.000

0.0026
0.001
0.019

-0.1550
0.022
0.000

48.7

51.0
26.5

64.1

62.9
19.2

2.3

1.6
-33.1

Yes
N/A
Yes
173876

No
Yes
Yes
158270

Yes
N/A
Yes
172443

No
Yes
Yes
156940

Yes
N/A
Yes
2698

No
Yes
Yes
2762

Note: The dependent variables are dummies for the incidence, onset and offset
of ACLED riots. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index
(CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and
t-2. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one
standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable
in percentage terms.

Table A16: ACLED Output Conflict: Sensitivity of Standard Errors
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
100km SE
p-value
200km SE
p-value
300km SE
p-value
400km SE
p-value
500km SE
p-value
600km SE
p-value
700km SE
p-value
800km SE
p-value
900km SE
p-value
1000km SE
p-value

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0076
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002

0.0095
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000

0.0068
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001

0.0080
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.004
0.001
0.005
0.001
0.007
0.001
0.007
0.001
0.006

0.0092
0.003
0.004
0.003
0.006
0.003
0.008
0.004
0.009
0.004
0.010
0.004
0.013
0.004
0.014
0.004
0.016
0.004
0.018
0.004
0.019

0.0069
0.017
0.003
0.019
0.009
0.020
0.011
0.020
0.013
0.020
0.014
0.020
0.016
0.021
0.020
0.023
0.029
0.023
0.030
0.023
0.030

Consumer Price Index
100km SE
p-value
200km SE
p-value
300km SE
p-value
400km SE
p-value
500km SE
p-value
600km SE
p-value
700km SE
p-value
800km SE
p-value
900km SE
p-value
1000km SE
p-value
Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0072
0.001
0.008
0.001
0.053
0.001
0.094
0.001
0.121
0.002
0.134
0.002
0.140
0.002
0.143
0.002
0.140
0.002
0.136
0.002
0.133
Yes
N/A
Yes
173893

No
Yes
Yes
158270

0.0033
0.001
0.010
0.001
0.057
0.001
0.098
0.001
0.127
0.001
0.143
0.001
0.158
0.001
0.170
0.001
0.171
0.001
0.174
0.001
0.174
Yes
N/A
Yes
169953

No
Yes
Yes
154796

-0.1271
0.019
0.000
0.021
0.000
0.023
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.024
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.000
0.026
0.001
Yes
N/A
Yes
8762

No
Yes
Yes
7810

Note: Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a given
radius.

A43

Table A17: ACLED Output Conflict: One Degree Aggregation
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0052
0.004
0.191
0.005
0.318

0.0172
0.004
0.000
0.004
0.000

0.0116
0.003
0.001
0.004
0.007

0.0210
0.004
0.000
0.004
0.000

0.0091
0.005
0.044
0.005
0.100

0.0051
0.008
0.522
0.008
0.540

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0371
0.004
0.000
0.005
0.000

0.0237
0.003
0.000
0.004
0.000

-0.1598
0.013
0.000
0.013
0.000

3.8

12.5
27.0

13.0

23.6
26.5

1.7

0.9
-29.2

Yes
N/A
Yes
41701

No
Yes
Yes
41735

Yes
N/A
Yes
41608

No
Yes
Yes
41644

Yes
N/A
Yes
5240

No
Yes
Yes
5407

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and
offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index
(CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley
standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km.
Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of
a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome
variable in percentage terms. Each cell is 110km × 110km at the equator.

A44

Table A18: ACLED Output Conflict: One Degree Aggregation with Spatial Spillovers
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0056
0.005
0.267
0.005
0.291

0.0053
0.005
0.282
0.005
0.321

0.0111
0.004
0.006
0.004
0.007

0.0110
0.003
0.002
0.004
0.007

-0.0041
0.005
0.438
0.006
0.476

0.0009
0.005
0.861
0.005
0.872

Producer Price Index in neighboring cells
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0005
0.006
0.939
0.007
0.947

0.0147
0.006
0.017
0.006
0.021

0.0009
0.005
0.855
0.006
0.872

0.0123
0.006
0.027
0.006
0.046

0.0268
0.008
0.001
0.011
0.016

0.0055
0.013
0.667
0.014
0.694

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
PPI impact in neighboring cells (%)
CPI impact (%)
Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

0.0348
0.004
0.000
0.005
0.000

0.0218
0.003
0.000
0.004
0.000

-0.1615
0.014
0.000
0.015
0.000

4.0
-0.3

3.9
10.7
25.3

12.5
1.1

12.3
13.8
24.4

-0.7
4.9

0.2
1.0
-29.5

Yes
N/A
Yes
41701

No
Yes
Yes
41735

Yes
N/A
Yes
41608

No
Yes
Yes
41644

Yes
N/A
Yes
5240

No
Yes
Yes
5407

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies.
The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t,
t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km.
Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells
within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer
(consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms. Each cell is 110km × 110km at
the equator.

A45

Table A19: ACLED Output Conflict with Control for Population
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)
Country × Year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0076
0.003
0.007

0.0093
0.003
0.000

0.0068
0.002
0.004

0.0079
0.002
0.000

0.0092
0.005
0.049

0.0074
0.006
0.207

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
ln Population
SE
p-value

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0066
0.002
0.000

0.0031
0.001
0.023

-0.1026
0.021
0.000

0.0026
0.017
0.881

-0.0491
0.017
0.005

-0.0011
0.011
0.917

-0.0175
0.012
0.161

0.2891
0.248
0.244

0.7885
0.245
0.001

15.1

18.5
13.0

23.9

28.0
10.9

2.0

1.6
-22.7

Yes
N/A
Yes
173213

No
Yes
Yes
157607

Yes
N/A
Yes
169275

No
Yes
Yes
154137

Yes
N/A
Yes
7403

No
Yes
Yes
6767

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and
offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index
(CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and
t-2. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one
standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable
in percentage terms. Ln Population varies at the cell-year level.

A46

Table A20: ACLED Output Conflict: Conditional Logit
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
SE
p-value

0.0292
0.020
0.139

0.0304
0.019
0.107

-0.0000
0.016
0.998

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
SE
p-value

-0.0221
0.021
0.301

-0.0161
0.019
0.394

0.0492
0.020
0.013

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.3646
0.150
0.015

0.1572
0.106
0.138

-0.6686
0.170
0.000

Wald test: PPI food = PPI Cash
p-value

0.073

0.114

0.035

Time trend
Cell fixed effects
Pseudo-R squared
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.063
42092

Yes
Yes
0.058
37870

Yes
Yes
0.148
5462

Note: All regressions are estimated with a conditional logit estimator. The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price
Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t,
t-1 and t-2. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of caloric intake in the
sample; cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). Standard errors allow for serial and spatial
correlation at the country level.

A47

Table A21: ACLED Output Conflict with Trade Weights
Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

A48

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
SE
p-value

0.0084
0.002
0.000

0.0084
0.002
0.000

0.0073
0.002
0.002

0.0065
0.002
0.000

0.0062
0.002
0.001

0.0052
0.002
0.001

0.0083
0.005
0.088

0.0065
0.004
0.111

0.0075
0.004
0.040

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
SE
p-value

-0.0006
0.002
0.753

-0.0005
0.002
0.819

-0.0002
0.002
0.943

-0.0000
0.002
0.985

0.0002
0.002
0.895

0.0003
0.002
0.868

0.0092
0.008
0.222

0.0088
0.008
0.251

0.0073
0.008
0.337

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0040
0.001
0.001

0.0039
0.001
0.001

0.0032
0.001
0.002

0.0018
0.001
0.015

0.0018
0.001
0.011

0.0015
0.001
0.011

-0.1037
0.017
0.000

-0.1022
0.017
0.000

-0.0996
0.016
0.000

PPI impact: food (%)
PPI impact: cash (%)
CPI impact (%)

16.6
-1.2
7.9

16.6
-0.9
7.7

14.5
-0.3
6.3

23.0
-0.1
6.4

21.8
0.8
6.2

18.3
1.1
5.3

1.8
2.0
-23.0

1.4
1.9
-22.6

1.7
1.6
-22.0

Trade weight
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Avg
Yes
Yes
158151

BL 1996
Yes
Yes
158151

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
158151

Avg
Yes
Yes
154677

BL 1996
Yes
Yes
154677

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
154677

Avg
Yes
Yes
6769

BL 1996
Yes
Yes
6769

BL 1988
Yes
Yes
6769

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The Producer Price Index
(PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Both are
weighted by the extent to which the component crops are traded internationally. Trade weights are defined as the sum of imports and exports divided by total domestic production for a given crop. In columns (1), (3) and (5), the trade weights are
averaged over our entire sample period. In columns (2), (4) and (6), the are measured at baseline (1988). In both cases they are
Winsorized to form a time invariant weight varying from 0 to 1. Trade and production statistics are taken from the FAO Statistics Division, accessible at http://faostat3.fao.org/home/E as at August 30th, 2015. The coefficients displayed capture the
sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells
within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the
outcome variable in percentage terms.

Table A22: ACLED Output Conflict with Yield Weights on PPI
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Producer Price Index × Yield
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.0074
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.001

0.0082
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0067
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004

0.0073
0.002
0.003
0.002
0.003

0.0041
0.002
0.088
0.003
0.164

0.0030
0.004
0.423
0.004
0.420

Consumer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value
PPI impact (%)
CPI impact (%)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

0.0088
0.002
0.000
0.002
0.000

0.0045
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

-0.1215
0.017
0.000
0.018
0.000

14.7

16.2
17.4

23.5

25.8
15.8

0.9

0.7
-26.9

Yes
N/A
Yes
173876

No
Yes
Yes
158270

Yes
N/A
Yes
169933

No
Yes
Yes
154795

Yes
N/A
Yes
7410

No
Yes
Yes
6774

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset
dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Producer Price
Index × Yield further weights each component crop by its estimated yield per hectare.
The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley
standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Twoway standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across
cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation
rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A49

Table A23: ACLED Output Conflict without Lags
Incidence
1(Conflict > 0)

Onset
1(Conflict Begins)

Offset
1(Conflict Ends)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
SE
p-value

0.0058
0.002
0.006

0.0066
0.002
0.005

0.0057
0.002
0.001

0.0061
0.002
0.001

0.0059
0.003
0.075

0.0018
0.004
0.670

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
SE
p-value

-0.0015
0.002
0.420

-0.0023
0.002
0.152

-0.0010
0.002
0.511

-0.0015
0.001
0.282

0.0128
0.007
0.065

0.0142
0.007
0.038

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value
PPI impact: food (%)
PPI impact: cash (%)
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI food = PPI cash
p-value
Country × year FE
Country × time trend
Cell FE
Observations

0.0036
0.002
0.042

0.0019
0.001
0.170

-0.0444
0.016
0.006

11.6
-3.0

13.0
-4.5
7.2

20.1
-2.0

21.5
-3.0
6.7

1.3
25.5

0.4
28.1
-9.8

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.291

0.050

Yes
N/A
Yes
173876

No
Yes
Yes
158270

Yes
N/A
Yes
169933

No
Yes
Yes
154795

Yes
N/A
Yes
7410

no
Yes
Yes
6774

Note: The dependent variables are dummies for ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and
offset dummies. The price indices are measured respectively in terms of sample average temporal standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of caloric intake in the sample; cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). The coefficients displayed capture
the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial
correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation
within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI impact indicates the
effect of a one standard deviation rise in prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A50

Table A24: ACLED Output Conflict, Producer Prices and Consumer Prices: Urban
Riots
ACLED Incidence: 1(Conflict > 0)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
SE
p-value

0.0066
0.002
0.002

0.0044
0.002
0.052

0.0096
0.002
0.000

0.0076
0.003
0.004

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
SE
p-value

-0.0021
0.002
0.275

-0.0027
0.002
0.214

-0.0023
0.002
0.240

-0.0028
0.002
0.197

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0056
0.002
0.001

Consumer Price Index × urban area
SE
p-value

0.2501
0.043
0.000

0.0073
0.002
0.000
0.2526
0.042
0.000

Consumer Price Index × urban population
SE
p-value
CPI impact (%) at urban area = 0
CPI impact (%) at urban area 90th pctile

11.1
20.0

Yes
No
Yes
0.376
158168

0.0000
0.000
0.119

14.6
15.2

0.0
0.6

Yes
No
Yes
0.373
158270

N/a
Yes
Yes
0.397
158270

0.0
9.0

CPI impact (%) at urban pop = 0
CPI impact (%) at urban pop 90th pctile
Country × time trend
Country × year fixed effects
Cell FE
R squared
Observations

0.0000
0.000
0.138

N/a
Yes
Yes
0.400
158168

Note: The dependent variables are dummies for ACLED Output Conflict incidence,
onset and offset dummies. The price indices are measured respectively in terms
of sample average temporal standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each
represent at least 1% of caloric intake in the sample; cash crops are the rest (see
Table A1). The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within
a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within
cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI impact indicates
the effect of a one standard deviation rise in prices on the outcome variable in
percentage terms. Urban area is the percentage of a given cell area classified as
urban; urban population is the percentage of a given cell’s population classified
as living in urban areas.

A51

Table A25: Comparison of Effects on Output Conflict and Factor Conflict Incidence
UCDP
Factor Conflict

ACLED
Territorial Change

ACLED
Output Conflict

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

-0.0046
0.001
0.001

-0.0050
0.001
0.001

-0.0001
0.000
0.644

-0.0006
0.000
0.155

0.0095
0.003
0.000

0.0045
0.003
0.137

Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

0.0023
0.001
0.116

0.0012
0.002
0.481

0.0014
0.001
0.015

0.0007
0.001
0.215

0.0072
0.002
0.000

-0.0012
0.002
0.462

-17.2
8.6

-18.5
4.4

-2.6
33.2

-15.0
17.0

18.9
14.4

8.9
-2.3

0.000

0.002

0.007

0.038

0.498

0.125

1989-2010
Yes
Yes
204820

1997-2010
Yes
Yes
130340

1997-2013
Yes
Yes
158270

1997-2010
Yes
Yes
130340

1997-2013
Yes
Yes
158270

1997-2010
Yes
Yes
130340

PPI Impact
CPI impact (%)
Wald test: PPI (total) = CPI
p-value
Sample
Country × time trend
Cell fixed effects
Observations

Note: All three dependent variables measure conflict incidence: 1(Conflict > 0). The dependent variable
Territorial Change is taken from the ACLED project, and is equal to 1 if a battle takes place in which
territorial control is transferred. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are
measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1 and t-2. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and
spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard
deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A52

Table A26: Afrobarometer: Prices and Poverty
Poverty: index

Producer Price Index
SE
p-value

A53

PPI impact (%)
PPI impact × farmer (%)
CPI impact (%)
Country × time trend
Country × period fixed effects
Controls
Area FE
Survey round fixed effects
Observations

Poverty: food

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0029
0.001
0.026

0.0019
0.002
0.335

0.0024
0.003
0.354

0.0016
0.001
0.041

0.0012
0.001
0.256

0.0006
0.002
0.756

0.0030
0.001
0.016

0.0025
0.001
0.093

0.0028
0.003
0.263

-0.0023
0.001
0.022

-0.0020
0.001
0.030

-0.0004
0.001
0.579

-0.0003
0.001
0.609

-0.0009
0.001
0.379

-0.0010
0.001
0.318

0.7
-0.3

0.8
-0.3

N/A
Yes
Yes
Country
Yes
41091

N/A
Yes
Yes
Cell
Yes
41079

Producer Price Index × farmer
SE
p-value
Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

Poverty: income

0.0040
0.002
0.025
0.6

0.0025
0.001
0.029
0.4
-0.5

0.5
-0.4

0.9
Yes
No
Yes
Country
Yes
66946

0.3

0.0038
0.001
0.003
0.2
-0.1

0.1
-0.0

0.4
N/A
Yes
Yes
Country
Yes
41165

N/A
Yes
Yes
Cell
Yes
41153

Yes
No
Yes
Country
Yes
66543

0.9
1.1

N/A
Yes
Yes
Country
Yes
40892

N/A
Yes
Yes
Cell
Yes
40880

Yes
No
Yes
Country
Yes
66836

Note: The dependent variables are as follows: Poverty: index indicates that a household has an above-median score on a 25-point
poverty index that measures access to food, water, health, electricity and income; Poverty: income indicates that a household
has frequently gone without income over the preceding year; Poverty: food indicates that a household has frequently gone without food over the preceding year. Columns (1), (4) and (67) have larger sample sizes as data on occupation is not available in
all rounds. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average
temporal standard deviations. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1, t-2, t-3 and t-4, where
each t is a six-month period. Standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within 1 degree cells. PPI (CPI) Impact
indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

Table A27: Afrobarometer: Output Conflict Validation Tests
Theft

ACLED Output Conflict
SE
p-value

A54

Country fixed effects
Survey round fixed effects
R squared
Observations

Protest

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.0758
0.012
0.000

0.0447
0.011
0.000

0.0428
0.012
0.000

0.0594
0.010
0.000

0.0251
0.007
0.000

0.0223
0.007
0.001

0.0106
0.009
0.252

0.0166
0.007
0.013

0.0167
0.007
0.014

UCDP Factor Conflict
SE
p-value
ACLED Output Conflict (%)
UCDP Factor Conflict (%)

Violence

0.0104
0.022
0.641

0.0165
0.021
0.437

-0.0027
0.016
0.867

24.2

14.3

13.7
3.3

45.4

19.2

17.1
12.6

7.8

12.2

12.2
-2.0

No
No
0.006
67500

Yes
Yes
0.021
67500

Yes
Yes
0.022
67500

No
No
0.006
67533

Yes
Yes
0.023
67533

Yes
Yes
0.024
67533

No
No
0.000
67028

Yes
Yes
0.021
67028

Yes
Yes
0.021
67028

Note: The dependent variables are binary responses to survey questions that ask whether individuals over the
previous year (i) have been victims of theft; (ii) have been victims of physical assault; (iii) have partaken in
“protest marches”. The coefficients displayed capture the sum of impacts over the previous year. Standard
errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within 1 degree cells.

Table A28: Afrobarometer Output Conflict: Triple Difference with Non-Commercial Farmer
Theft

Violence

(1)
0.0031
0.002
0.144
-0.0011
0.001
0.285
0.0039
0.002
0.104
-0.0110
0.013
0.397
-0.0051
0.011
0.653
-0.0246
0.017
0.148
0.0005
0.002
0.800

(2)
0.0030
0.002
0.165
-0.0011
0.001
0.280
0.0039
0.002
0.104
-0.0010
0.014
0.942
-0.0045
0.011
0.688
-0.0248
0.017
0.139
0.0015
0.002
0.481

(3)
0.0019
0.002
0.257
-0.0014
0.001
0.177
0.0044
0.002
0.072
-0.0227
0.027
0.393
-0.0048
0.012
0.688
-0.0170
0.017
0.307

(4)
-0.0002
0.001
0.889
0.0006
0.001
0.476
0.0020
0.001
0.160
0.0001
0.010
0.994
0.0080
0.009
0.401
-0.0077
0.017
0.649
-0.0005
0.002
0.759

(5)
-0.0001
0.001
0.941
0.0006
0.001
0.509
0.0020
0.001
0.167
-0.0033
0.012
0.776
0.0081
0.010
0.398
-0.0069
0.017
0.684
-0.0010
0.002
0.528

(6)
-0.0005
0.002
0.777
0.0004
0.001
0.647
0.0023
0.001
0.126
-0.0263
0.022
0.235
0.0056
0.009
0.527
-0.0050
0.017
0.767

(PPI Food − PPI Cash) × farmer
SE
p-value
Impact on farmers (%)

0.0041
0.012
0.732
1.3

0.0035
0.012
0.768
1.1

0.0034
0.012
0.785
1.1

-0.0073
0.010
0.453
-5.6

-0.0075
0.010
0.447
-5.7

-0.0052
0.009
0.568
-4.0

(PPI Food − PPI Cash) × trader
SE
p-value
Impact on traders (%)

0.0285
0.017
0.101
9.1

0.0287
0.017
0.094
9.2

0.0214
0.017
0.211
6.8

0.0098
0.017
0.571
7.5

0.0089
0.017
0.605
6.8

0.0073
0.017
0.670
5.6

Country × time trend
Half-year fixed effects
Country × half-year fixed effects
Controls
Area fixed effects
Observations

Yes
No
No
Yes
Country
39873

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Country
39873

N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cell
39036

Yes
No
No
Yes
Country
39925

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Country
39925

N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cell
39090

Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Producer Price Index:
SE
p-value
Consumer Price Index
SE
p-value

Food crops

Food crops × farmer

Food crops × trader

Cash crops

Cash crops × farmer

Cash crops × trader

Treatment effects

Note: The dependent variables are binary responses to survey questions that ask whether individuals over the
previous year (i) have been victims of theft; (ii) have been victims of physical assault. The Producer Price
Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) variables are measured in terms of terms of average temporal
standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of caloric intake in the sample;
cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). The coefficients displayed capture the sum of price impacts at t, t-1,
t-2, t-3 and t-4, where each t is a six-month period. Farmer indicates that the respondent is a commercial
farmer; trader indicates that the respondent is a trader, hawker or vendor. Standard errors allow for serial
and spatial correlation within 1 degree cells. PPI impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation
rise in prices on the outcome variable in percentage terms.

A55

Table A29: UCDP Factor Conflict: Precolonial Institutions
Incidence:
1(Conflict > 0)
(1)

(2)

Producer Price Index
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0082
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.003

-0.0570
0.025
0.021
0.034
0.095

Producer Price Index × Precolonial political centralization
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0064
0.002
0.003
0.002
0.010

0.0056
0.002
0.016
0.003
0.053

Consumer Price Index × Precolonial political centralization
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0046
0.003
0.075
0.003
0.170

-0.0031
0.003
0.249
0.003
0.352

-30.3
23.7
-17.1

-210.7
20.8
-11.5

Yes
Yes
No
203962

Yes
Yes
Yes
199584

PPI impact (%)
PPI impact (%) × Precolonial political centralization
CPI impact (%) × Precolonial political centralization
Country × year FE
Cell FE
Extra Controls
Observations

Note: The dependent variables are UCDP Factor Conflict incidence, onset and
offset dummies. The Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index
(CPI) are measured respectively in terms of average temporal standard deviations. Conley standard errors allow for serial and spatial correlation within a
radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within
cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices
on the outcome variable in percentage terms. Precolonial political centralization is a proxy for institutional development, and is taken from Michalopoulos
& Papaionnou (2013). It is equal to 1 if a cell is located in an ethnic territory
in which the pre-colonial jurisdictional hierarchy went beyond the local level.

A56

Table A30: ACLED Output Conflict: Precolonial Institutions
Incidence:
1(Conflict > 0)
(1)

(2)

Producer Price Index: Food crops
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0061
0.003
0.035
0.003
0.057

0.0305
0.030
0.309
0.036
0.397

Producer Price Index: Food × Precolonial political centralization
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0016
0.003
0.593
0.003
0.657

-0.0013
0.003
0.652
0.003
0.712

Producer Price Index: Cash crops
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

-0.0040
0.002
0.015
0.002
0.039

0.0017
0.007
0.806
0.008
0.831

Producer Price Index: Cash × Precolonial political centralization
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0021
0.002
0.329
0.003
0.423

0.0021
0.002
0.307
0.002
0.347

Consumer Price Index × Precolonial political centralization
Conley SE
p-value
Two-way SE
p-value

0.0127
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.000

0.0115
0.002
0.000
0.003
0.000

12.1
3.1
-8.0
4.2

60.6
-2.5
3.4
4.1

25.3

22.7

Yes
Yes
No
157607

Yes
Yes
Yes
154224

PPI
PPI
PPI
PPI

impact:
impact:
impact:
impact:

food
food
cash
cash

(%)
(%) × Precolonial political centralization
(%)
(%) × Precolonial political centralization

CPI impact (%) × Precolonial political centralization
Country × year FE
Cell FE
Extra Controls
Observations

Note: The dependent variables are ACLED Output Conflict incidence, onset and offset dummies. The
Producer Price Index (PPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) are measured respectively in terms
of average temporal standard deviations. Food crops are crops that each represent at least 1% of
caloric intake in the sample; cash crops are the rest (see Table A1). Conley standard errors allow
for serial and spatial correlation within a radius of 500km. Two-way standard errors allow for serial correlation within cells and spatial correlation across cells within countries. PPI (CPI) impact
indicates the effect of a one standard deviation rise in producer (consumer) prices on the outcome
variable in percentage terms. Precolonial political centralization is a proxy for institutional development, and is taken from Michalopoulos & Papaionnou (2013). It is equal to 1 if a cell is located in
A57
an ethnic territory in which the pre-colonial jurisdictional
hierarchy went beyond the local level.

