                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE LABOR OF DIVISION:
          RETURNS TO COMPULSORY HIGH SCHOOL MATH COURSEWORK

                                       Joshua Goodman

                                      Working Paper 23063
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23063


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 2017, Revised September 2018




This paper benefited from the feedback of many people, including Janet Currie, Ed Glaeser,
Jonah Rockoff, Johannes Schmieder, and Miguel Urquiola, as well as presentation audiences at
Columbia, Harvard, the American Economic Association, and the NBER Education Program. For
data access and support, I am grateful to Thomas Bailey at the Community College Research
Center at Teachers College, Columbia University. Melanie Rucinski provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Joshua Goodman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Labor of Division: Returns to Compulsory High School Math Coursework
Joshua Goodman
NBER Working Paper No. 23063
January 2017, Revised September 2018
JEL No. I24,I26,J24,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

Despite great focus on and public investment in STEM education, little causal evidence connects
quantitative coursework to students’ economic outcomes. I show that state changes in minimum
high school math requirements substantially increase Black students’ completed math coursework
and their later earnings. The marginal student’s return to an additional math course is 10 percent,
roughly half the return to a year of high school, and is partly explained by a shift toward more
cognitively skilled occupations. White students’ coursework and earnings are unaffected.
Rigorous standards for quantitative coursework can close meaningful portions of racial gaps in
economic outcomes.


Joshua Goodman
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joshua_goodman@hks.harvard.edu
1   Introduction

National efforts to improve the mathematical and scientific skills of Americans date back to at least

the 1958 National Defense Education Act, which used federal funds to spur curricular changes

intended to help the U.S. compete with the perceived superiority of the Soviet Union’s scientific

capabilities. Though STEM education has been a national imperative for at least six decades,

recent efforts have been particularly focused on the need for individuals to be well-educated in

math and science in order to succeed in a rapidly changing job market. A large literature has

documented substantial and increasing economic returns to skill that may stem from skill-biased

technological change (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). Cognitive skills and

mathematical skills in particular have shown high returns, although very recent evidence suggests

a slowdown in demand for such skills perhaps because of the rapid substitution of computers for

many routine tasks (Autor et al., 2003; Deming, 2017; Beaudry et al., 2016; Castex and Dechter,

2014; Autor and Dorn, 2013).

    Racial gaps in mathematical skills are strikingly high. Over the last few decades, Black 17 year-

olds have generally scored about one standard deviation below their White counterparts on the

National Assessment of Education Progress. Conditional on being employed, Blacks are less likely

than Whites to report that their jobs require the use of high school level math on at least a weekly

basis (Autor and Handel, 2013). The labor market return to and racial gaps in cognitive skills are

both sufficiently high that they together account for large proportions of racial gaps in economic

outcomes (Neal and Johnson, 1996; Fryer, 2011). We nonetheless have relatively little evidence

about whether typical STEM education interventions can change students’ skills and economic

outcomes.

    I provide clear evidence that math coursework can impact earnings in economically mean-

ingful ways. To do so, I construct an original, nationally representative time series of high school

transcripts containing detailed information on students’ completed coursework. I then exploit as a

source of exogenous variation in math coursework the differential timing of state increases in high

school graduation requirements triggered by the 1983 report “A Nation at Risk”. A difference-in-

difference framework with state and cohort fixed effects shows these reforms increased the num-


                                                  1
ber of yearlong math courses Black high school graduates completed by 0.35, consisting primarily

of basic courses like pre-algebra and algebra. Black students in public schools and heavily mi-

nority schools saw the biggest increases, consistent with changed minimum requirements most

affecting those with low ex ante levels of math achievement. White students’ coursework was

substantially less affected by these reforms.

   Applying the same difference-in-difference strategy to Census data shows that these math

reforms increased the adult earnings of Black high school graduates by between three and four

percent. This implies the Mincerian return to an additional yearlong math course for the marginal

student was about 10 percent, or half the apparent return to a year of high school for such students.

Earnings did not increase for White students, whose math coursework was largely unchanged, or

for Black high school dropouts, whose coursework was also likely unaffected by new graduation

requirements. Reforms did not affect educational attainment, but Blacks’ increased earnings are

partly explained by a shift toward occupations with higher cognitive skill requirements. Earnings

increases are associated with increased coursework only in math and not in other subjects.

   These results have three major implications. First, state-level minimum requirements can

meaningfully change students’ educational experiences, particularly for those students with low

ex ante achievement. Second, coursework, particularly in math, can explain a large fraction of

the return to a year of schooling. Third, closing racial gaps in math coursework can contribute

substantially to the closing of racial gaps in earnings and other economic outcomes. The reforms

studied here closed the majority of the Black-White gap in the number of overall math courses

completed and reduced by one-tenth or more the Black-White gaps in annual earnings and oc-

cupational cognitive skill. Given that these reforms largely increased coursework in basic math,

interventions successful at closing racial gaps in more advanced math coursework might further

reduce gaps in economic outcomes.

   This research illuminates one channel through which returns to schooling may operate. Economists

have been quantifying the association between years of schooling and earnings for at least fifty

years, starting with simple multivariate regression models with few controls (Becker and Chiswick,

1966; Mincer, 1974) and continuing with more complex approaches that generally confirm sub-



                                                 2
stantial returns to schooling (Card, 2001; Heckman et al., 2006). The use of compulsory schooling

law changes as exogenous variation in educational attainment produces results largely consis-

tent with earlier non-experimental literature (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2001; Oreopoulos, 2006),

although these results may be sensitive to empirical specification (Stephens and Yang, 2014; Dev-

ereux and Hart, 2010). More recent research estimates large returns to college education through

regression discontinuity designs around admissions thresholds (Hoekstra, 2009; Zimmerman, 2014).

Most of this work estimates returns to the total amount of time spent in school rather than the al-

location of existing school time.

   The reforms studied here provide evidence that changes in the amount of time spent in spe-

cific courses, namely math courses, can be a significant determinant of the labor market return

to a year of schooling. Though identifying returns to specific courses and curricula is generally

difficult because of endogenous selection, quantitative high school coursework and college ma-

jors are consistently associated with higher earnings (Altonji et al., 2012). Recent work exploiting

degree program admissions thresholds in international contexts shows that quantitative college

majors have a positive impact on earnings (Hastings et al., 2013; Kirkeboen et al., 2016). The only

evidence on returns to individual college courses comes from the literature on remediation, which

has little discernible impact on earnings perhaps because it diverts students from college-level

courses into more basic courses (Martorell and McFarlin Jr, 2011; Scott-Clayton and Rodriguez,

2015).

   Similarly little evidence exists on returns to high school coursework, with early attempts to

identify returns to math coursework based on identification strategies likely only partial success-

ful at dealing with selection bias (Altonji, 1995; Levine and Zimmerman, 1995; Rose and Betts,

2004). More recent work has exploited test-scored based eligibility thresholds to show that dou-

bling instructional time in basic math courses improves both short-run achievement and medium-

run educational attainment for struggling students (Taylor, 2014; Cortes et al., 2015). Only two

other papers use quasi-experimental variation in high school coursework to identify earnings im-

pacts, both focusing on advanced courses that affect college trajectories. Jackson (2014) finds that

targeted cash incentives to students and teachers in low-income urban schools increases Advanced



                                                 3
Placement course-taking and performance, college persistence, and wages. Joensen and Nielsen

(2009) use a Danish high school reform to estimate a roughly 30 percent earnings increase from an

advanced math curriculum, partly due to increased college attainment. This work complements

those papers by showing earnings returns to lower level math coursework even in the absence of

significant increases in college attainment.



2   Reforms to Required Math Coursework

The increased graduation requirements that serve here as the exogenous source of variation in stu-

dent coursework were prompted largely by the publication in April 1983 of “A Nation at Risk,”

the final report of the National Commission on Excellence in Education (Gardner et al. 1983). The

commission had been convened to address perceived declines in the quality of education experi-

enced by American high school students. The first two sentences of the report read: “Our Nation

is at risk. Our once unchallenged preeminence in commerce, industry, science, and technologi-

cal innovation is being overtaken by competitors throughout the world.” The report continued

by mentioning Japan, South Korea and Germany as countries making technological advances in

industries where America had historically been dominant, concluding that “Learning is the indis-

pensable investment required for success in the ’information age’ we are entering.”

    The commission identified as one of the primary causes of perceived educational decline the

fact that “Secondary school curricula have been homogenized, diluted, and diffused to the point

that they no longer have a central purpose.” Noting that American high school students earned

25 percent of their credits in “physical and health education, work experience outside the school,

remedial English and mathematics, and personal service and development courses,” the commis-

sion proposed that state and local graduation requirements be strengthened dramatically. Specif-

ically, the commission recommended that “all students seeking a diploma be required to lay the

foundations in the Five New Basics by taking the following curriculum during their 4 years of

high school: (a) 4 years of English; (b) 3 years of mathematics; (c) 3 years of science; (d) 3 years of

social studies; and (e) one-half year of computer science.”

    The vast majority of states reacted to the commission’s recommendations by increasing the

                                                  4
minimum number of courses in various subjects required for students to receive a high school

diploma, though not necessarily to the levels that the commission had recommended. I collected

documents on historical high school graduation requirements from the Education Commission of

the States, much though not all of which information is also available through various versions

of the US Department of Education’s “Digest of Education Statistics.” I constructed for each state

and for each graduating cohort of 1982 through 1994 the minimum number of math, science,

social studies, English and other courses a student would need to complete in order to receive a

high school diploma, where “course” refers to a full year of study.

       Though many states enacted increases in multiple types of coursework simultaneously, I fo-

cus largely on increased requirements in math, the subject most commonly addressed by these

reforms. Figure 1 shows the timing of math reforms. Only six states enacted reforms applying to

cohorts graduating high school prior to 1987. The bulk of the reforms are roughly evenly split be-

tween cohorts graduating in 1987, 1988, and 1989, with only one state enacting reforms after that

period. This timing stems from state policymakers responding relatively quickly to “A Nation at

Risk” by legislating increased graduation requirements in year Y (generally 1983, 1984, or 1985)

to apply to students entering high school that year and thus graduating in year Y+4. Compared

to the graduating cohort of 1982, the 1994 cohort faced higher minimum math requirements in 40

states, including Washington, DC. In contrast, science requirements increased in 32 states, social

studies requirements in 23 states and English requirements in 18 states.1

       Figure 2 shows the geography of pre- and post-reform math requirements. In 1982, the vast

majority of states allowed students to graduate high school with zero or one completed math

courses, while only a handful of states required a two course minimum and none required three.

By 1994, the vast majority of states required at least two math courses, and a number required

three. Specifically, 31 of the reforming states increased their graduation requirements to two math

courses, from either one (24 states) or zero (seven states). Only nine states increase their require-

ments to three math courses.2 The vast majority of states that enacted reforms thus set their new
   1
    Figure A.1 shows the timing of these non-math reforms.
   2
    See Table A.1, which categorizes states by their pre- and post-reform numbers of math courses required for gradu-
ation.




                                                         5
minima lower than the commission’s recommendation of three required math courses.

      Variation in the timing of reforms is not closely related to geography. Figure 3 maps the tim-

ing of math reforms, with darker shades representing later reforms. Nearly every region of the

country contains both early- and late-reforming states and nearly every state borders another that

reformed its math requirements in a different year. Variation in the timing of math reforms, cou-

pled with the fact that such variation is not spatially concentrated, will help identify the causal

impact of such reforms on coursework and labor market outcomes.



3     Data and Summary Statistics

No single data set exists that would allow linkage of math reform timing to information on high

school coursework and labor market outcomes for students in high school around the years of

these reforms. The few longitudinal studies that follow students from high school to the labor

market (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, High School and Beyond, National Education

Longitudinal Study) cover too few graduating cohorts to be useful, while most traditional data sets

used by labor economists (Census, Current Population Survey, Panel Survey of Income Dynamics)

contain little or no information on high school coursework. I therefore use two separate data sets,

a time series of high school transcript studies that I construct and Census data containing labor

market outcomes. The transcript data allow estimation of a first stage impact of the reforms on

coursework, while the Census data allow estimation of the reduced form impact of the reforms on

earnings. The ratio of these two estimates can be thought of as the instrumental variables estimate

of the impact of math coursework on earnings, for the marginal student whose coursework is

affected by such reforms.


3.1     The Transcript Data

The primary challenge in estimating how these reforms affected students’ coursework is that no

data set contains detailed information on students’ coursework by high school cohort and state.

The federal government does, however, collect a national sample of high school transcripts every



                                                  6
few years through the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). One of the earliest such

collections occurred for the cohort graduating high school in 1982, in the High School and Beyond

Survey (HSB). Three more waves followed for the graduating cohorts of 1987, 1990 and 1994,

in transcript studies associated with the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP).

For each of these waves, NCES collects from high schools around the country a set of student

transcripts listing completed coursework, as well as each high school’s handbook of course de-

scriptions. The latter allows NCES to uniformly code courses that might have different names in

different high schools, according to a scheme known as the Secondary School Taxonomy.

    I compile these four transcript collections into a single data set of students for whom I can

identify both state of high school attendance and year of graduation.3 The resulting data set con-

tains the 1982 wave as a purely pre-reform sample, the 1990 and 1994 waves as purely post-reform

samples, and the 1987 wave as a mixture of states that had and had not yet enacted reforms. Be-

cause the 1990 and 1994 waves include only high school graduates, I exclude dropouts from the

earlier waves in order to make the samples comparable over time. My primary analysis focuses

on Black and White students because other subgroups, such as Hispanic and Asian students, are

concentrated in a small number of states and are disproportionately born outside of the United

States, making later matching to Census respondents difficult.

    For each student, the transcript data allow measurement of the number of courses for which

the student received credit in various subject areas.4 I categorize math courses as “basic”, which

includes vocational math, pre-algebra, algebra and geometry courses, or “advanced”, which in-

cludes anything beyond geometry, such as algebra II, pre-calculus, calculus and statistics. I also

compute the total number of completed courses in subjects outside of math. Apart from race and

gender, no demographic information is collected consistently across the four waves of transcript

data. I use as one proxy for family and community characteristics the proportion of each school’s

transcripts collected from Black or Hispanic students. I also observe whether a student’s high

school is public or private.
   3
     To my knowledge, this is the first such use of this data, perhaps because accessing the state identifiers requires
obtaining a restricted-use license from NCES and because the 1982 wave requires complex crosswalks to infer state
identifiers.
   4
     NCES provides a standardized unit of credit, called a Carnegie unit, that represents a standard full-year course.


                                                          7
      For reasons described below in more detail, I exclude from the main analysis sample students

who attended high school in the 11 states that did not enact math reforms. The final transcript

data set consists of about 9,000 Black students and 41,000 White students who graduated high

school in 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994, from states that enacted math reforms at some point during

this time period.


3.2     Census Data

Because the NAEP waves of the transcript data do not follow students beyond high school, I turn

to the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 Census, a 1-in-20 national random sample of

the US population.5 . The main outcomes of interest in the Census are respondents’ educational

attainment, occupation and total personal earned income in the past calendar year (1999). Educa-

tional attainment is reported as a categorical variable, from which I generate indicators for having

completed high school, some college, a two-year college degree and a four-year college degree.

I also generate a continuous measure of years of education by imputing 10 years to high school

dropouts, 12 to high school graduates, 13 to those with some college, 14 to those with two-year

degrees and 16 to those with four-year degrees.

      The Census classifies occupations into nearly 500 categories according to the Standard Occu-

pational Classification scheme. I merge these occupations with a measure of the cognitive and

mathematical skills required for each occupation, which I derive from the federal government’s

Occupational Network Database (O-Net). O-Net contains for each occupation measures of the

importance of various cognitive abilities such as number facility, deductive reasoning and oral

comprehension. Each ability is measured on a scale of one to five. Given the high correlation

between these measures within occupations, I average across all abilities for each occupation and

standardize the result across the entire population of respondents to have mean zero and standard

deviation one. I refer to this as each occupation’s cognitive skill. I similarly construct a measure

of each occupation’s mathematical skill by limiting this calculation to sub-measures that mention

math or numbers explicitly.
  5
      I access the data through http://usa.ipums.org/usa/ (Ruggles et al. 2015)



                                                       8
      For an earnings measure, I focus on total personal earned income, which includes both wages

and earnings from a respondent’s business or farm. Limiting the analysis to total wages yields

very similar results. I recode the few individuals with negative earnings as having zero earnings.

I explore the impact of the math reforms on both mean earnings, which includes all respondents,

and the natural logarithm of earnings, which includes only those with non-zero earnings. I also

explore the impact of math reforms on the distribution of earnings.

      Unlike the transcript data, the Census data records neither respondents’ year of high school

graduation nor the states in which they attended high school. I assign respondents to high school

cohorts assuming they would have graduated the year they turned 18, the median and modal high

school graduation age for Americans. I assume respondents attended high school in their states

of birth, rather than their current state of residence, to avoid bias from potentially endogenous

migration. Though an imperfect measure of state of high school, state of birth is clearly exogenous

to such reforms.6 PUMS data from the 1990 Census shows that 84% of Black 15 year-olds and

78% of White 15 year-olds still live in their state of birth, implying potential measurement error

generated by using state of birth is likely small. This measurement error implies I may be slightly

underestimating the impacts of these reforms on earnings.

      Assigning respondents their state of birth as a proxy for state of high school means that foreign-

born Census respondents cannot be included in the analysis sample. This excludes a high fraction

of Hispanic and Asian respondents, making it unlikely that the Census sample is comparable to

the transcript sample, given that the latter includes but cannot separately identify students who

are foreign-born but graduate from American high schools. I thus focus my analysis on Black

and White respondents for whom the two samples are comparable, showing results for Hispanic

respondents, the only other subgroup of substantial size, in supplementary analyses.

      I take two other steps to make the Census sample more comparable to the transcript sample.

First, I limit the Census sample to those students who turned 18 between 1975 and 1994. Though

the transcript sample’s high school cohorts begin in 1982 and end in 1994, the Census data allows

me to construct a longer pre-period in which to study potential differential trends among states. I
  6
      All respondents in the final Census sample were born prior to the “Nation at Risk” report’s publication.




                                                            9
show in later robustness checks that the longer pre-period improves the precision of the reforms’

estimated earnings impacts but does not affect their magnitude. Second, I limit the Census sample

to high school graduates, given that the transcript sample includes only such students. I show that

math reforms do not affect high school completion rates so that this choice does not generate se-

lection bias, and for completeness also present estimated impacts of these reforms on the earnings

of high school dropouts.

      As with the transcript sample, I exclude from the Census sample students who attended high

school in states that did not enact math reforms. The final transcript data set consists of about

280,000 Black adults and 1.8 million White adults who likely graduated from high school between

1975 and 1994 from states that enacted math reforms at some point during this time period.

      I also use data from the 2001 through 2015 American Community Surveys (ACS) , which are

administered annually to a random sample of Americans and are designed to mimic the decennial

census except for a smaller sample size. The ACS data provides two pieces of information. First, it

allows me to see whether the earnings impacts observed in the 2000 Census appear in later years.

Second, unlike the Census, the 2008 and later waves of the ACS ask high school graduates whether

they received a traditional high school diploma or instead earned a General Equivalency Diploma

(GED), an alternative credential earned through a set of standardized exams. This allows me to

study whether increased stringency of high school graduation requirements diverted students

toward an alternative pathway not subject to such requirements.


3.3    Summary Statistics

Summary statistics for the transcript and Census samples are shown respectively in panels A

and B of Table 1. The means shown are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each

cohort receives equal weight. The top two rows of each panel show the minimum number of math

courses required for high school graduation by a given individual’s state in 1982 and 1994. For

both Blacks and Whites, the number of required math courses more than doubled over this time

period from roughly one to 2.3. That the means of these variables are nearly identical across the

transcript and Census samples suggests the two samples have a similar geographic distribution


                                                10
of respondents.

   During this time period, both Black and White students completed an average of three math

courses by the end of high school. The composition of this coursework differed greatly by race,

with a higher fraction of Black students’ coursework coming from basic math courses. Though

not shown here, Black students completed an average of 1.2 very basic courses like consumer

math, vocational math and pre-algebra, nearly double the 0.7 such courses completed by White

students. Black students also completely substantially fewer advanced courses (0.6) than White

students (0.9). Black high school graduates during this time period were completing a similar

quantity of math coursework to White high school graduates but in substantially less advanced

topics. Both Black and White students completed about 20 additional courses in subjects outside

of math.

   The Census data shows that Black respondents have much lower educational attainment than

Whites, even conditional on being high school graduates. Only 18 percent of Black high school

graduates in this sample have completed a four-year college degree, about half the rate at which

Whites earn such degrees. Annual earnings for Black high school graduates in 1999 average

$22,400, compared to $31,400 for Whites. Conditional on reporting an occupation, Black high

school graduates work in occupations whose required cognitive skill is 0.1 standard deviation be-

low the mean, or nearly 0.4 standard deviations less than the occupations of White high school

graduates. The gap in occupational math skill is similar.

   Among those who graduated high school in the 1980s and surrounding years, Blacks lagged

behind Whites in both the amount of advanced math coursework completed and longer-run out-

comes such as educational attainment, earnings and the cognitive and mathematical skill required

by their occupations. The remainder of the paper attempts to estimate whether these gaps in math

coursework and labor market outcomes are simply correlations driven by other underlying factors

or whether math coursework itself can have a causal impact on labor market outcomes.




                                                11
4     State Reforms and Math Coursework

4.1     Empirical Strategy

I use as a source of exogenous variation in completed math coursework the differential timing

across states of the reforms induced by “A Nation at Risk”. Though most states’ reforms were one

course increases, some states enacted apparently stronger reforms by moving from no statewide

minima to two- and three-course minima. I exploit only the differential timing of the reforms

and not their differing magnitudes for two reasons. First, the transcript data show that states

with no initial requirements, such as California, had very few students graduating with no com-

pleted math coursework. This is likely due to local school districts setting minima higher than

state requirements. Whether California’s increase from zero to two courses is a stronger reform

than Virginia’s increase from one to two courses is thus unclear. Second, some states issue mul-

tiple types of high school diplomas that distinguish students by the difficulty of their completed

coursework. Although I categorize states by the lowest requirements that allow graduation from

high school, reforms to higher types of diplomas sometimes occurred simultaneously, clouding

the issue of precisely how strong each state’s reform was. The timing of the reforms is much less

ambiguous.

      In order to identify the impacts of math reforms solely off of the timing of such changes, I ex-

clude students who attended high school in the 11 states that did not enact math reforms. Those

states are heavily clustered geographically, as seen in Figure 3, and many have constitutions that

specifically prohibit the state, rather than local school districts, from imposing high school course-

work requirements. These two factors increase the likelihood that including these states could

introduce bias in my estimates through endogeneity of the decision to adopt math reforms at all.

Identifying causal estimates by using only the 40 math reforming states (including Washington,

DC) requires only the assumption that the timing of reforms is uncorrelated with the timing of

other state-level factors that affect labor market outcomes. Robustness checks below confirm the

plausibility of this assumption by showing that my central estimates are unchanged by control-

ling for contemporaneous reforms to other aspects of education policy and for changing state



                                                   12
economic conditions. Inclusion of state-specific time trends rules out the possibility that reform

timing is related to trends in important outcomes during the pre-reform period.

   Given the four available waves of transcript data, this means comparing changes in course-

work between states whose increased requirements first applied to the cohorts of 1987 or earlier

(“early-reforming”) and states whose increased requirements first applied to the cohorts of 1988

through 1990 (“late-reforming”). Figure 4 shows the average number of completed math courses

by state reform wave and high school cohort. As shown in panel A, Black high school graduates

in the 1982 cohort completed very similar amounts of math coursework in both early- and late-

reforming states, just under 2.6 courses. For the 1987 cohort, that number increased substantially

in early-reforming states but much less so in late-reforming states. By the 1990 cohort, Black high

school graduates in late-reforming states had caught up to their counterparts in early-reforming

states, with no further increases apparent once the reform period had ended.

   For Black students, the timing of the math reforms is closely connected to changes in completed

math coursework, with increases in such coursework appearing only once a given graduating

cohort in a given state is treated by the new requirements. Panel B shows that White students’

math coursework is much less clearly connected to reform timing. White high school graduates

in the 1982 cohort completed somewhat different amounts of math coursework in early- and late-

reforming states. Changes in those amounts do coincide with reform timing, with slopes between

cohorts steeper at the expected times, but not nearly as clearly as for Black students. Increases in

math coursework grow in all states throughout this time period and even after the reform period

is over. State reforms thus seem substantially more influential for the math coursework of Black

students than the math coursework of White students.

   To more rigorously quantify the impacts of state reforms on math coursework, I run simple,

baseline regression specifications of the form


               M athCoursesisc = α1 M athRef ormsc + γF emaleisc + µc + νs + isc                (1)


where M athCourses represents various measures of math coursework completed by student i

in state s and high school cohort c and M athRef orm indicates whether that student was subject

                                                 13
to an increased math requirement. State and cohort fixed effects (µc and νs ) are included so that

the coursework impact α1 is identified from the differential timing of within-state changes in math

reform status. State fixed effects eliminate bias from the possibility that reform timing is connected

to state-level factors that themselves affect math coursework. Cohort fixed effects eliminate bias

from the possibility that reform timing is connected to nationwide shocks at a given point in time,

such as national economic fluctuations or educational trends.

      Race and gender are the only two individual characteristics I consistently observe over the

multiple waves of transcript data and in the Census data. I run most regressions separately by

race, given both clearly documented racial gaps in educational outcomes and the lack of other

proxies for childhood socioeconomic disadvantage. I include a gender indicator in all regressions.

When pooling regressions by race, I include a full set of interactions between gender and race.

Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are clustered by state to allow for within-state serial

correlation in the error term , a concern raised by the now well-known result of Bertrand et al.

(2004). Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort receives

equal weight to account for different sample sizes across the four transcript studies.7

      To separate the impact of math reforms from reforms to other subjects, I also present variations

on the first stage equation 1 of the form:


 M athCoursesisc = α1 M athRef ormsc + α2 N onM athRef ormssc + γF emaleisc + µc + νs + isc (2)


Here, N onM athRef orms represents the total number of other subjects whose minimum gradua-

tion requirements were increased for students in a given state and high school cohort. These other

subjects include science, social studies, English and “non-core” classes, which include increase re-

quirements outside of the four core academic subjects. The variable N onM athRef orms therefore

takes values from zero (for states that only enacted math reforms) to four (for state that reformed

every subject).
  7
      Using these weights improves precision but has little effect on point estimates.




                                                            14
4.2     Empirical Results

Estimates from equations 1 and 2, shown in Table 2, confirm the visual evidence from Figure

4. Black high school graduates subject to state reforms completed 0.35 more high school math

courses than they otherwise would have. This represents a 14 percent increase relative to the

2.54 courses the 1982 cohort completed and suggests the reforms explain half of the increase over

this time period in Black students’ math coursework. That estimated impact is highly statistically

significant, with an F-statistic of 28, suggesting the reforms provide a strong source of variation in

math coursework for Black students. The impact of reforms on White students was substantially

weaker, raising the number of completed courses by a statistically insignificant 0.14.

      Nearly all of the increased math coursework triggered by the reforms for Black students was

concentrated in basic math courses such as pre-algebra, algebra and geometry. For Black students,

reforms increased the number of basic math courses completed by a highly statistically signifi-

cant 0.28, the majority of which came from additional pre-algebra courses. These reforms explain

roughly all of the increase over this time period in Black students’ basic math coursework but very

little of the rise in advanced math courses, which increase by a small and statistically insignificant

0.07. For White students, the rise in completed math coursework was similarly concentrated in

basic courses, which increased by 0.11, while the number of completed advanced math courses

was nearly unchanged.

      The estimated impacts of math reforms on math coursework are robust to controlling for the

number of non-math reforms occurring simultaneously. Reassuringly, the non-math reforms do

not predict increases in math coursework. As panel D of Table 2 shows, only non-math reforms

predict increases in non-math coursework. Controlling for both sets of reforms simultaneously

thus allows me to isolate the long-run impacts of math coursework from the impacts of non-math

coursework.

      For Black and White students, the estimated math coursework impacts generated by the base-

line specification (Equation 1) are robust to a variety of alternative choices, as shown in Table

A.2. Other educational reforms and economic conditions do not appear to explain the increases

in math coursework, given the stability of estimates to inclusion of controls for the number of re-


                                                 15
forms in non-math subjects, an exit exam indicator, and the state unemployment rate in the year of

high school graduation. Inclusion of state-specific linear time trends also leaves estimates largely

unchanged, as does adding observations from the 11 states that did not enact math reforms dur-

ing this time period. Excluding from the sample the five most populous states for Blacks and

Whites only slightly diminishes the point estimates, suggesting that impacts are widespread and

not driven by a small number of large states.

   In contrast, what initially appears to be a large impact of reforms on Hispanic students’ math

coursework turns out to be driven by the five states where over 80 percent of such students are

concentrated. Using only the remaining 35 states suggests little impact on Hispanic students’

coursework but small sample size makes such point estimates very imprecise. As such, it is un-

clear what effect, if any, these reforms had on Hispanic students’ math coursework.

   To supplement these mean impacts, Table 3 explores the impact of reforms on the distribution

of the number of math courses completed. In 1982, 35 percent of Black students and 27 percent of

White students were graduating having completed fewer math courses than the new state mini-

mums would later require for the lowest type of high school diploma. By 1994, nearly no students

appear to graduate with such few math courses. The math reforms themselves appear to be re-

sponsible for about 10 percentage points of that decrease, for both Black and White students.

   The reforms did not simply induce students to graduate with the new minimum number of

math courses. For Black students, the reforms increased by 17 percentage points the proportion

graduating with more completed math courses than the state required. White students’ rate of ex-

ceeding state minima rose by six percentage points. This may be driven by the some states making

simultaneous reforms to requirements for higher types of diplomas. It may also indicate that state

reforms triggered local school districts to increase their own requirements further, perhaps to dis-

tinguish themselves from the state minimum. As panel B shows, the effects of all of these reforms

was to increase by 11 percentage points the fraction of Black students graduating with a full four

years of math coursework. This explains two-thirds of the increase in that fraction over this time

period.

   The reforms’ effects on math coursework appear at most slightly stronger for Black males



                                                16
than females, as shown in Table A.3. Completed math coursework among Black students in the

1982 cohort did not differ by gender. The reforms induced Black males and females to complete

respectively 0.41 and 0.31 more math courses than they would have otherwise. Relative to Black

females, a somewhat higher proportion of Black males’ increased coursework came from basic

math courses. Neither difference by gender is, however, statistically distinguishable from zero.

Point estimates for impacts on White students by gender are even closer in magnitude and are

also statistically indistinguishable.

   The transcript data allow me to explore two forms of heterogeneity by school type, which I do

in Table 4 by interacting the reform indicator in the baseline specification with school types and

controlling directly for school type. First, reform impacts are driven entirely by public schools and

are statistically indistinguishable from zero in private schools, perhaps because state reforms did

not legally apply to non-public schools. Second, for Black students, reform impacts were larger in

“non-White” schools, those with a higher concentration of Black and Hispanic students than the

median school that year. Both of these forms of heterogeneity by school type may stem from pre-

existing differences across schools in levels of completed math coursework. Among Black students

in the 1982 cohort, those who attended private schools and White schools were already completing

substantially more math coursework than their public school and non-White school counterparts.

State reforms had the largest impact in schools with the most room for improvement.

   In summary, state-level reforms to the minimum number of math courses required for high

school graduation had large impacts on the completed coursework of Black students and much

smaller impacts on White students. Nearly all of the increase came from basic math courses such

as pre-algebra, algebra and geometry. Effects were concentrated in public schools and indistin-

guishable from zero in private schools. Among Black students, the reforms had stronger effects

in schools with higher proportions of minority students. The large increase in basic math course-

work among Black students, particularly in largely minority schools, is consistent with reforms to

minimum requirements having their greatest impact on students who ex ante would have been

predicted to complete the least amount and quality of math coursework.




                                                 17
5       State Reforms and Labor Market Outcomes

5.1       Empirical Strategy

To identify the impact of math reforms on labor market outcomes, I apply the same empirical

strategy to the Census data as I did to the transcript data, exploiting the differential timing of the

reforms. I again run simple baseline specifications of the form:


                    Earningsisc = β1 M athRef ormsc + γF emaleisc + κc + λs + φisc ,                                (3)


as well as modified specifications controlling for non-math reforms:


    Earningsisc = β1 M athRef ormsc + β2 N onM athRef ormssc + γF emaleisc + κc + λs + φisc . (4)


Here, Earnings represents the annual earnings (in 1999) or natural logarithm of those earnings

for individual i who was born in state s and turned 18 in year c. All independent variables are the

same as in the transcript regressions, so that β1 identifies the reduced form impact of the reforms

from within-state changes in earnings, controlling for cohort-specific shocks.8 I again run most

analyses separately by race, control for gender, cluster standard errors by state and use sampling

weights standardized so that each cohort receives equal weight.9

        Before estimating earnings impacts, I explore math reforms’ impact on educational attainment,

the sign of which is theoretically ambiguous. Imposing stricter graduation requirements, such as

exit exams, can make it harder for students, particularly disadvantaged ones, to complete high

school (Dee and Jacob, 2007). More rigorous high school curricula could, however, improve col-

lege enrollment and completion rates. The math reforms studied here appear to have neither of

these effects. Table 5 uses all Census respondents, including high school dropouts, and outcomes

indicating achievement of at least a given level of educational attainment. The top row shows
    8
     Even when I use the natural logarithm of earnings as an outcome, these are not typical Mincer earnings regressions
because they do not control for educational attainment or for experience explicitly. Labor market experience is approx-
imated by the cohort fixed effects, which are equivalent to controlling for a nationwide age profile in earnings. I omit
educational attainment because it is potentially endogenous to the reforms and to parallel the transcript regressions as
closely as possible.
   9
     Unweighted regressions yield very similar results in all of the analyses that follow.


                                                          18
little evidence that math reforms increase high school dropout rates, with point estimates close

to zero and the 95 percent confidence interval ruling out increases in the dropout rate larger than

1.6 percentage points for Black respondents. Subsequent rows show little evidence of impact on

college enrollment, college completion or years of education completed.10 Panel B, which uses

the 2008-15 ACS respondents, shows no indication that reforms induce students to complete high

school with a GED rather than a traditional diploma.

    Given that these reforms do not appear to affect high school completion rates, focusing subse-

quent analyses on adults with at least a high school degree should not generate selection bias. I

focus on high school graduates for two reasons. First, this makes point estimates across the Census

and transcript samples comparable, given that the latter consists only of high school graduates.

Second, most students drop out of high school within their first two years, so that increases in

minimum math coursework requirements have less scope to affect their course choices. I there-

fore separately analyze the earnings impacts for high school dropouts, whose coursework likely

is unchanged by these reforms.

    Figure 5 shows average annual earnings by state reform wave and cohort.11 As shown in panel

A, Black high school graduates in the 1975-1983 cohorts had very similar earnings in both early-

and late-reforming states. A gap opens up between the two sets of states precisely when early-

reforming states begin to implement their reforms. Black high school graduates in the 1984-1987

cohorts have substantially higher earnings in early-reforming states than in late-reforming states.

That earnings difference closes for subsequent cohorts, all of whom were subject to reforms.

    For Black students, the timing of the math reforms appears closely connected to earnings.

Panel B shows no such pattern for White students. White high school graduates in early-reforming

states have slightly lower earnings than those in late-reforming states for nearly all cohorts before,

during and after the reforms. Consistent with the evidence on math coursework, state reforms
   10
      The Census data does not record the field in which a student earned his or her college degree. The ACS records
this starting in 2008. Reduced form regressions using as an outcome an indicator for holding a college degree in a
STEM field show no evidence that math reforms affected students’ major choices. This is unsurprising, given that the
additional courses induced by the reforms were in basic math and that the marginal student affected is unlikely to
either attend college or, if attending, to major in a STEM field.
   11
      Because earnings are measured in 1999 for cohorts of different ages, this figure resembles a wage-experience profile
with the horizontal axis reversed.




                                                           19
seem substantially more influential for the earnings of Blacks than the earnings of Whites.


5.2      Empirical Results

Regression estimates in Table 6 confirm the visual evidence. Being subject to math reforms in-

creases earnings of Black high school graduates by an economically and statistically significant 3.3

percent. This impact is not driven by a changing probability of having non-zero earnings, which

can generate selection bias with a logarithmic specification. A specification that uses earnings as

an outcome, and therefore includes those with zero earnings, shows that reforms increase Black

high school graduates’ annual earnings by $635. Relative to the 1982 cohort’s annual earnings of

$21,760, this represents a 2.9 percent increase. Both specifications thus yield estimated impacts

of similar magnitude. Non-math reforms have little impact on earnings and controlling for such

reforms increases the estimated earning impact of math reforms to 4.5 percent.

       While math reforms increased Black high school graduates’ math coursework and subsequent

earnings, groups whose coursework did not change substantially saw no earnings increase. For

White high school graduates, the estimated impact of math reforms on earnings is close to zero and

precise enough to rule out increases larger than 0.8 percent. Similarly, Black and White high school

dropouts saw no apparent increase in earnings.12 The only group whose earnings rose clearly

in response to the math reforms was also the only group whose math coursework rose clearly

in response to those reforms, making it unlikely that differential trends by race or educational

attainment can explain these results.

       I explore this further in Table A.5, which shows that estimated earnings impacts generated by

the baseline specification are robust to a variety of alternative specifications. As with the course-

work results, controlling for other educational reforms and economic conditions leave earnings

impacts largely unchanged or, if anything, slightly larger. Inclusion of state-specific linear time

trends slightly increases these estimates. Adding observations from the 11 states that did not en-

act math reforms during this time period increases the earnings impacts from 3.3 to 3.9 percent

and from $635 to $1,140. Limiting the Census sample to the 1982-1994 cohorts, to more closely re-
  12
       See Table A.4.



                                                  20
semble the transcript sample, changes little about these estimates. All specifications suggest that

math reforms raised earnings of Black high school graduates by between three and four percent

and had little impact on Whites’ earnings.13

    The impact of math reforms on Black high school graduates’ earnings is driven by changes in

the middle of the Black income distribution, not the high end of the distribution. I run equation

3 using as outcomes indicators for having annual earnings above various multiples of $5,000. I

report the resulting coefficients and confidence intervals in Figure 6. There is no evidence that

math reforms affect the probability of a Black high school graduate being at the high end of the

earnings distribution. Instead, changes are driven by increases in the probability of being in the

middle of the distribution, with the largest impact a 1.5 percentage point increase in the proba-

bility of earning over $30,000. This seems consistent with reforms inducing additional basic math

coursework that appears to pay off for middle-skilled workers, rather than advanced coursework

that might pay off for high-skilled workers. Reforms appear not to affect the distribution of White

high school graduates’ earnings. Including high school dropouts in these samples reduces the

estimated impacts but suggests similar shifts in the overall distribution of earnings.14

    Though math reforms did not alter educational attainment, one channel through which they

raised Blacks’ earnings appears to be through increased cognitive skills, as proxied by occupa-

tional skill measures. Table 7 shows that Black high school graduates subject to these reforms

reported working in occupations requiring 0.04 standard deviations more cognitive skill. Using

occupational mathematical skill yields a similar estimate. As with earnings, no changes in occupa-

tional skill are observed for White high school graduates or Black or White high school dropouts.15

For Black high school graduates in this sample, a one standard deviation increase in occupational

cognitive skill is associated with increased earnings of about $6,200, conditional on state and co-

hort. This implies that a 0.04 standard deviation increase in such skill should translate to a roughly
   13
      Earnings impacts on Hispanics are very imprecisely estimated zeroes. Figure A.2 also makes clear that, unlike for
Blacks and Whites, the earnings profile of Hispanics differed greatly in the pre-period by reform timing. Hispanic adults
in early-reforming states earned thousands of dollars more than their counterparts in late-reforming states. Earnings
estimates are also difficult to compare to coursework estimates given the large numbers of Hispanics in the transcript
sample who are likely excluded from the Census sample due to birth outside of the U.S.
   14
      See Figure A.3.
   15
      See Table A.6 for impacts on high school dropouts’ occupational skills.




                                                           21
$250 increase in annual earnings, or over one-third of the observed effect of the reforms. Given

that both occupation and occupational skill are measured with error here and that occupational

skill is itself a noisy measure of individual skill, this may be a lower bound on the fraction of the

earnings effect explained by occupational upgrading.

   As with math coursework, the reforms do not appear to have had clear differential effects

by gender. Table A.7 shows that, for Black high school graduates, reforms had positive impacts

on earnings and occupational cognitive skill for both men and women. Impacts were larger for

male earnings relative to female earnings but larger for female occupational skills relative to male

occupational skills. The differences in impact by gender for all outcomes and subgroups are,

however, statistically insignificant.

   To estimate explicitly the extent to which these math reforms closed racial gaps in educational

and labor market outcomes, I pool Black and White high school graduates and run regressions

interacting math reforms with race, of the form:


Yisc = γ1 M athRef ormsc +γ2 M athRef orm∗Blacksc +γ3 Blackisc +γ4 N onM athRef ormssc +ζF emaleisc +ψc +δs +υ

                                                                                                  (5)

The coefficient on the Black indicator, γ3 , can be thought of as the average within-state Black-

White gap in a given outcome. The math reform coefficient, γ1 , estimates the impact of reforms

on Whites, while the interaction term, γ2 , estimates the extent to which the reforms affected the

relevant Black-White gap. Table 8 shows the results of these regressions.

   Comparison of the interaction term to the Black indicator suggests that math reforms closed

two-thirds (0.14 courses) of the 0.21 Black-White gap in total math courses completed. As noted

earlier, all of this stemmed from increased coursework in basic math, with reforms having no

apparent impact on the 0.38 Black-White gap in advanced math courses. The reforms also closed

economically meaningful portions of labor market gaps. Using earnings as an outcome, math

reforms closed about 40 percent ($4,210) of the roughly $10,000 Black-White annual earnings gap.

Using the logarithm of earnings as an outcome suggests math reforms reduced by nearly one-

tenth (two percent) the 26 percent gap in annual earnings. The reforms also closed by more than



                                                 22
one-tenth (0.06 standard deviations) the 0.42 standard deviation gap in occupational cognitive

skill.

    Finally, I turn to more recent data from the 2001-15 ACS to see whether the earnings impacts

observed in the 2000 Census appear in later years. To improve precision given those smaller sam-

ple sizes, I group the ACS waves every five years and replace cohort fixed effects in my baseline

specification with cohort by survey year fixed effects. Table 9 shows the results of these regres-

sions, with the first column replicating prior results from the Census data for purposes of compar-

ison. Two important facts emerge from this analysis.

    First, the positive earnings impact observed for Black respondents in the Census data is also

apparent in the early years of the ACS data, though less precisely estimated. Second, the positive

earnings impact for Blacks is no longer apparent in the most recent decade’s worth of data, with

point estimates negative and confidence intervals that rule out effects as large as those seen in

earlier years. Though the precision of these later estimates does not rule out economically mean-

ingful impacts of math reforms, additional math coursework may have been more highly valued

in the labor market of the late 1990s and early 2000s than in the labor market of later years, when

demand for quantiative skills in particular appears to have leveled off (Beaudry et al., 2016). The

impact of high school coursework may also diminish with age, either as skills depreciate or as

untreated individuals improve their skills through other means.



6    Conclusion

The math coursework reforms studied here induced Black students to complete about 0.35 ad-

ditional math courses and raised their earnings by 3.3 percent, suggesting each additional math

course had a labor market return of about 10 percent. The Census data suggests the Mincerian

return to an additional year of high school for Black students is about 21 percent.16 Math course-

work explains roughly half of the apparent labor market return to a year of high school for such
   16
      This figure comes from comparing the earnings of Black respondents whose highest level of completed schooling
is either ninth or twelfth grade, conditional on gender, state of birth and cohort. This earnings gap is 64 percent, or
about 21 percent for each of those three years completed. Using those who completed only tenth or eleventh grade as
the baseline yields similar estimates of the return to a year of high school. The comparable estimate for Whites is about
15 percent.


                                                           23
students. Increased earnings can be partly but not wholly explained by shifts toward more cogni-

tively intensive occupations, suggesting real improvements in human capital and productivity. In

this sense, the curricular reforms succeeded at least somewhat in achieving the goal of “A Nation

at Risk,” helping Black students leave high school with better labor market skills. As such, this

paper provides clear evidence that curricular reform has the potential to help close the racial and

socioeconomic earnings gaps that are the focus of so much research and public policy.

   The increased graduation requirements studied here did not, however, have much impact on

the majority of students. There is little evidence that higher minimum course requirements im-

proved the productivity of most workers or their capacity to enter the math-intensive occupations

that preoccupied the authors of “A Nation at Risk.” These increased requirements did not increase

advanced math course completion or affect the probability of entering highly paid occupations in

math-intensive fields like engineering. The new graduation requirements generally specified only

the number of courses necessary and not the minimum set of skills students would need in order

to graduate. As such, the reforms focused on the amount of time spent in class rather than the spe-

cific content learned. For relatively low-skilled groups of students, additional basic math courses

may have had value, but high-skilled students would have benefited little from them and likely

were already fulfilling the new minimum requirements.

   More recent efforts have begun to focus not on the number of math courses completed by stu-

dents but on the specific content to which students are exposed. High school exit exams that pro-

liferated as a result of No Child Left Behind test such content. Subsequent state reforms to gradu-

ation requirements have increasingly identified specific courses required for students to complete.

Recognition of racial and socioeconomic gaps in math coursework have prompted some states

and districts to adopt “Algebra for All” policies that mandate or strongly encourage completion

of algebra courses. Efforts to broaden participation in advanced math coursework has led to a

more than tripling of the numbers of students taking Advanced Placement Calculus exams over

the last 20 years. Future research may be able to identify whether such subsequent curricular

interventions have labor market impacts that resemble the ones estimated here.




                                                24
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist. 2001. How large are human-capital externalities? Evidence
  from compulsory-schooling laws. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15. MIT Press,
  9–74.

Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
  ment and earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics 4:1043–1171.

Altonji, Joseph. 1995. The effects of high school curriculum on education and labor market out-
  comes. Journal of Human Resources 30, no. 3:409–438.

Altonji, Joseph, Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir. 2012. Heterogeneity in human capital investments:
  High school curriculum, college major, and careers. Annual Review of Economics 4, no. 1:185–223.

Autor, David and David Dorn. 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
 the US labor market. American Economic Review 103, no. 5:1553–1597.

Autor, David and Michael Handel. 2013. Putting tasks to the test: Human capital, job tasks, and
 wages. Journal of Labor Economics 31, no. S1:S59–S96.

Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane. 2003. The skill content of recent technological
 change: An empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4:1279–1333.

Beaudry, Paul, David A Green, and Benjamin M Sand. 2016. The great reversal in the demand for
  skill and cognitive tasks. Journal of Labor Economics 34, no. S1:S199–S247.

Becker, Gary and Barry Chiswick. 1966. Education and the distribution of earnings. American
  Economic Review 56, no. 1/2:358–369.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How much should we trust
  differences-in-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 1:249–275.

Card, David. 2001. Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
  problems. Econometrica 69, no. 5:1127–1160.

Castex, Gonzalo and Evgenia Kogan Dechter. 2014. The changing roles of education and ability in
  wage determination. Journal of Labor Economics 32, no. 4:685–710.

Cortes, Kalena, Joshua Goodman, and Takako Nomi. 2015. Intensive math instruction and edu-
  cational attainment: Long-run impacts of double-dose algebra. Journal of Human Resources 50,
  no. 1:108–158.

Dee, Thomas and Brian Jacob. 2007. Do high school exit exams influence educational attainment
 or labor market performance? In Standards-based reform and the poverty gap: Lessons for No Child
 Left Behind, ed. Adam Gamoran. Brookings Institution Press.

Deming, David. 2017. The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 132, no. 4:1593–1640.



                                               25
Devereux, Paul and Robert Hart. 2010. Forced to be rich? Returns to compulsory schooling in
 Britain. Economic Journal 120, no. 549:1345–1364.

Fryer, Roland. 2011. Racial inequality in the 21st century: The declining significance of discrim-
  ination. In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4, Part B, eds. David Card and Orley Ashenfelter.
  Elsevier, 855 – 971.

Gardner, David, Yvonee Larsen, William Baker, and Anne Campbell. 1983. A nation at risk: The
 imperative for educational reform. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office .

Hastings, Justine, Christopher Neilson, and Seth Zimmerman. 2013. Are some degrees worth
 more than others? Evidence from college admission cutoffs in Chile. Working Paper 19241,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Heckman, James, Lance Lochner, and Petra Todd. 2006. Earnings functions, rates of return and
 treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond. Handbook of the Economics of Education
 1:307–458.

Hoekstra, Mark. 2009. The effect of attending the flagship state university on earnings: A
 discontinuity-based approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 4:717–724.

Jackson, C Kirabo. 2014. Do college-preparatory programs improve long-term outcomes? Eco-
  nomic Inquiry 52, no. 1:72–99.

Joensen, Juanna Schrøter and Helena Skyt Nielsen. 2009. Is there a causal effect of high school
  math on labor market outcomes? Journal of Human Resources 44, no. 1:171–198.

Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. 1992. Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
  demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 1:35–78.

Kirkeboen, Lars, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. 2016. Field of study, earnings, and self-
  selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 3:1057–1111.

Levine, Phillip and David Zimmerman. 1995. The benefit of additional high-school math and
  science classes for young men and women. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 13, no. 2:137–
  149.

Martorell, Paco and Isaac McFarlin Jr. 2011. Help or hindrance? The effects of college remediation
 on academic and labor market outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93, no. 2:436–454.

Mincer, Jacob A. 1974. Schooling, experience, and earnings. NBER Books .

Neal, Derek and William Johnson. 1996. The role of premarket factors in black-white wage differ-
 ences. Journal of Political Economy 104, no. 5:869–895.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2006. Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education
  when compulsory schooling laws really matter. American Economic Review 96, no. 1:152–175.

Rose, Heather and Julian Betts. 2004. The effect of high school courses on earnings. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 86, no. 2:497–513.


                                                26
Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek. 2015. In-
  tegrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS): Version 6.0 [dataset]. University of Minnesota,
  Minneapolis, available at http://usa.ipums.org/usa .

Scott-Clayton, Judith and Olga Rodriguez. 2015. Development, discouragement, or diversion?
  New evidence on the effects of college remediation policy. Education Finance and Policy 10,
  no. 1:4–45.

Stephens, Melvin and Dou-Yan Yang. 2014. Compulsory education and the benefits of schooling.
  American Economic Review 104, no. 6:1777–1792.

Taylor, Eric. 2014. Spending more of the school day in math class: Evidence from a regression
  discontinuity in middle school. Journal of Public Economics 117:162–181.

Zimmerman, Seth. 2014. The returns to college admission for academically marginal students.
  Journal of Labor Economics 32, no. 4:711–754.




                                              27
                                  Figure 1: Timing of Math Reforms



                     40
                             Cumulative reforms
                             New reforms
                     30
  Number of states

                     20
                     10
                     0




                          1982                1987             1990                  1994

                                           High school class

Notes: The figure above shows the number of states first enacting math reforms for a given grad-
uating high school cohort (gray bars), as well as the cumulative number of states enacting such
reforms by that high school cohort (solid line).




                                                28
                  Figure 2: Math Courses Required for High School Graduation




                               (A) High School Class of 1982




      None
      1 course
      2 courses
      3 courses




                               (B) High School Class of 1994




      None
      1 course
      2 courses
      3 courses




Notes: The figure above shows the minimum number of math courses required by each state to
graduate from high school in 1982 and 1994.

                                             29
                          Figure 3: Timing of Math Reforms by State




      No reform
      1984-86
      1987
      1988
      1989-90




Notes: The figure above shows the first high school cohort subject to increased math course re-
quirements in each state.




                                              30
                                                  Figure 4: Math Coursework, by Reform Wave




                                                               (A) Black students

                                     3.4
            Math courses completed

                                     3.2
                                     3
                                     2.8




                                                                                         Reform wave
                                                                                               1984-87
                                     2.6




                                                                                               1988-90

                                           1982                    1987           1990              1994

                                                                  High school class


                                                               (B) White students
                                     3.4
            Math courses completed

                                     3.2
                                     3
                                     2.8




                                                                                         Reform wave
                                                                                               1984-87
                                                                                               1988-90
                                     2.6




                                           1982                    1987           1990              1994

                                                                  High school class



Notes: The figure above shows the average number of math courses high school graduates com-
pleted for credit, by high school cohort and reform wave. The first reform wave comprises states
enacting math reforms between 1984 and 1987 and the second wave between 1988 and 1990. Panel
A includes Black students and panel B includes White students. Data come from the high school
transcript studies described in the text, with averages computed using sampling weights stan-
dardized so that each cohort receives equal weight.


                                                                     31
                                                   Figure 5: Annual Earnings, by Reform Wave




                                                                  (A) Black adults

                                       25
            Annual earnings ($000's)

                                       20




                                               Reform wave
                                                        1984-87
                                       15




                                                        1988-90

                                            1975                       1984      1987          1994

                                                                   High school class


                                                                  (B) White adults
            Annual earnings ($000's)

                                       35
                                       30
                                       25




                                               Reform wave
                                                        1984-87
                                       20




                                                        1988-90

                                            1975                       1984      1987          1994

                                                                   High school class



Notes: The figure above shows the average income earned in 1999 by those with at least a high
school degree, by high school cohort and reform wave. The first reform wave comprises states
enacting math reforms between 1984 and 1987 and the second wave between 1988 and 1990. Panel
A includes Black adults and panel B includes White adults. Data come from the 5-Percent Public
Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census, with averages computed using sampling weights
standardized so that each cohort receives equal weight.


                                                                      32
                                     Figure 6: Impact of Math Reform on Earnings Distribution




                                                   (A) Black high school graduates
                                    .03
            Impact of math reform

                                    .02
                                    .01
                                    0
                                    -.01




                                           5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75

                                                         Pr(Income exceeds $ X,000)


                                                   (B) White high school graduates
                                    .03
            Impact of math reform

                                    .02
                                    .01
                                    0
                                    -.01




                                           5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75

                                                         Pr(Income exceeds $ X,000)



Notes: The figures above show the impact of the math reforms on the probability of earning at
least the listed earned income. The sample consists of high school graduates from the 5-Percent
Public Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census, with panels A and B showing Black and
White respondents respectively.



                                                                33
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                    Black                      White                          All
                                                     (1)                        (2)                           (3)
(A) Transcript data
Math courses required, 1982                          1.02                        0.81                        0.83
Math courses required, 1994                          2.32                        2.32                        2.32
Total math courses                                   3.01                        3.08                        3.07
Basic math courses                                   2.43                        2.14                        2.19
Advanced math courses                                0.58                        0.94                        0.89
Non-math courses                                     19.5                        20.0                        19.9

N                                                   8,950                      40,940                       49,890

(B) Census data
Math courses required, 1982                           0.99                       0.82                        0.84
Math courses required, 1994                           2.36                       2.29                        2.30
Four-year college degree                              0.17                       0.32                        0.29
Earnings, 1999 ($000s)                                22.4                       31.4                        30.0
Occupational cognitive skill                         -0.09                       0.27                        0.23
Occupational math skill                              -0.05                       0.22                        0.19

N                                                  280,299                   1,753,217                    2,033,516
 Notes: The table shows mean values of key variables, computed using sampling weights standardized so that each
 class receives equal weight. Data in panel A come from the NCES transcript studies described in the text. The
 sample in panel A consists of high school graduates from the classes of 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994, graduating high
 school from states enacting math reforms. Data in panel B come from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of
 the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample in panel B consists of high school graduates from the classes of 1975-1994, born in
 states enacting math reforms. Annual earnings are total personal earned income from calendar year 1999, measured
 in thousands of dollars. Occupational cognitive and math skills are standardized measures of the skills required by
 the respondent’s occupation.




                                                         34
                                            Table 2: Math Coursework

                                                Black                        White                         All
                                          (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)
(A) Total math courses
Math reform                            0.354∗∗∗    0.317∗∗∗           0.141     0.181∗          0.179∗∗      0.210∗∗
                                        (0.067)     (0.068)          (0.084)   (0.104)          (0.076)      (0.092)
Non-math reforms                                     0.023                      -0.020                        -0.016
                                                    (0.027)                    (0.025)                       (0.021)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    2.54 → 3.23                 2.71 → 3.39                  2.69 → 3.37
(B) Basic math courses
Math reform                            0.282∗∗∗    0.303∗∗∗         0.112∗∗    0.133∗∗          0.147∗∗∗    0.170∗∗∗
                                        (0.062)     (0.078)         (0.048)    (0.053)           (0.047)     (0.046)
Non-math reforms                                    -0.013                      -0.010                        -0.012
                                                    (0.036)                    (0.015)                       (0.014)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    2.17 → 2.46                 2.01 → 2.21                  2.03 → 2.25
(C) Advanced math courses
Math reform                              0.072       0.014            0.029     0.049            0.032        0.040
                                        (0.076)     (0.090)          (0.070)   (0.095)          (0.064)      (0.085)
Non-math reforms                                     0.036                      -0.010                        -0.004
                                                    (0.030)                    (0.021)                       (0.018)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    0.37 → 0.77                 0.70 → 1.18                  0.65 → 1.12
(D) Non-math courses
Math reform                            0.880∗∗∗      0.048            0.204     -0.367           0.304       -0.277
                                        (0.264)     (0.455)          (0.253)   (0.395)          (0.236)     (0.370)
Non-math reforms                                    0.512∗∗                     0.282∗                      0.296∗
                                                    (0.213)                    (0.161)                      (0.161)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                   18.12 → 20.33               18.75 → 20.89               18.67 → 20.81

N                                               8,940                        40,940                      49,890
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients in each panel and column come from regressions of full-year courses completed for credit on an indicator
 for being subject to increased math requirements, high school state and cohort fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators.
 Even-numbered columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social studies, and non-core
 subjects. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort receives equal weight.
 Basic math courses include pre-algebra, algebra I and geometry, while advanced math courses are those beyond
 geometry. Data come from the NCES transcript studies described in the text. The sample consists of those graduating
 high school in 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994 from states enacting math reforms. Also shown is the mean value of the
 outcome for the 1982 and 1994 cohorts. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 students as required by NCES.




                                                           35
                                 Table 3: Distribution of Math Coursework

                                                 Black                      White                       All
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)            (6)
(A) Relative to new minimum
Below new minimum                      -0.110∗∗∗ -0.105∗∗          -0.096∗∗∗ -0.103∗∗         -0.100∗∗∗ -0.106∗∗
                                        (0.038)    (0.039)          (0.027)    (0.045)         (0.027)    (0.041)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                   0.35 → 0.04                 0.27 → 0.02                0.28 → 0.02

At new minimum                           -0.060     -0.057           0.036      0.038           0.021      0.022
                                         (0.046)    (0.052)         (0.029)    (0.045)         (0.030)    (0.043)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    0.28 → 0.25                0.25 → 0.22                0.25 → 0.23

Above new minimum                       0.169∗∗∗ 0.162∗∗∗           0.060∗     0.065∗          0.078∗∗   0.084∗∗
                                         (0.032)    (0.035)         (0.031)    (0.038)         (0.030)    (0.034)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    0.37 → 0.71                0.48 → 0.75                0.46 → 0.75

(B) Total math courses
2+ math courses                         0.052∗∗    0.063∗          0.057∗∗∗   0.067∗∗         0.057∗∗∗   0.066∗∗
                                        (0.021)    (0.034)          (0.019)    (0.029)         (0.017)    (0.027)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                   0.84 → 0.98                 0.84 → 0.99                0.84 → 0.99

3+ math courses                         0.147∗∗∗ 0.139∗∗∗           0.074∗     0.092∗          0.087∗∗   0.102∗∗
                                         (0.041)    (0.043)         (0.037)    (0.049)         (0.037)    (0.047)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    0.43 → 0.78                0.50 → 0.84                0.49 → 0.83

4+ math courses                         0.112∗∗∗ 0.101∗∗∗            0.028      0.041          0.045∗     0.055∗
                                         (0.034)    (0.027)         (0.026)    (0.036)         (0.025)    (0.032)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                    0.14 → 0.31                0.23 → 0.42                0.22 → 0.40

N                                                8,940                      40,940                     49,890
Control for non-math reforms                N            Y             N             Y            N             Y
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients in each panel and column come from regressions of indicators for completed amounts of math course-
 work on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements, high school state and cohort fixed effects, and
 race-by-sex indicators. Even-numbered columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social
 studies, and non-core subjects. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort re-
 ceives equal weight. Data come from the NCES transcript studies described in the text. The sample consists of those
 graduating high school in 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994 from states enacting math reforms. Also shown is the mean value
 of the outcome for 1982 and 1994 cohorts. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 students as required by NCES.




                                                         36
                            Table 4: Math Coursework Impacts by School Type

                                                               Black                  White                     All
                                                                (1)                    (2)                      (3)
(A) By sector
Math reform * public school                                  0.374∗∗∗                 0.143∗                  0.185∗∗
                                                              (0.069)                 (0.082)                 (0.075)
Math reform * private school                                   -0.308                  -0.064                  -0.058
                                                              (0.252)                 (0.120)                 (0.120)

p (public = private)                                           0.01                    0.02                     0.01
1982 cohort mean, public schools                               2.51                    2.63                     2.61
1982 cohort mean, private schools                              3.40                    3.23                     3.24

(B) By racial composition
Math reform * white school                                     0.154                   0.138                  0.159∗
                                                              (0.106)                 (0.091)                 (0.088)
Math reform * non-white school                               0.379∗∗∗                  0.144                 0.208∗∗∗
                                                              (0.070)                 (0.092)                 (0.076)

p (white = non-white)                                          0.05                    0.94                     0.48
1982 cohort mean, white schools                                2.72                    2.70                     2.70
1982 cohort mean, non-white schools                            2.53                    2.72                     2.67

N                                                              8,940                  40,940                  49,890
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients in each panel and column come from regressions of the listed measure of full-year courses completed
 for credit on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements, high school state and cohort fixed effects,
 and race-by-sex indicators. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort receives
 equal weight. Non-white schools are those with a higher proportion of black and Hispanic students than the median
 school that year. Beneath each pair of coefficients is the p-value from a test of the equality of the two coefficients
 shown. Data come from the NCES transcript studies described in the text. The sample consists of those graduating
 high school in 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994 from states enacting math reforms. Also shown is the mean value of the
 outcome for the 1982 cohort for each school type. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 students as required by
 NCES.




                                                          37
                                       Table 5: Educational Attainment

                                                  Black                       White                       All
                                            (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)             (6)
(A) 2000 Census
High school degree                        -0.004           0.001     -0.001            0.003     -0.001           0.003
                                         (0.006)          (0.007)    (0.003)          (0.004)   (0.003)          (0.003)
1982 cohort mean                                   0.80                        0.90                       0.88

Some college                              -0.006           0.001     -0.004            -0.001    -0.006           -0.003
                                         (0.005)          (0.009)    (0.004)          (0.006)   (0.004)          (0.005)
1982 cohort mean                                   0.46                        0.60                       0.57

Two-year college degree                   0.002            0.004     -0.002            -0.004    -0.003           -0.005
                                         (0.004)          (0.006)    (0.004)          (0.007)   (0.003)          (0.006)
1982 cohort mean                                   0.19                        0.36                       0.33

Four-year college degree                  0.004           0.010∗∗    -0.002           -0.003     -0.002          -0.002
                                         (0.004)          (0.005)    (0.003)          (0.006)   (0.002)          (0.005)
1982 cohort mean                                   0.12                        0.27                       0.25

Years of education                        -0.004       0.027         -0.012       -0.005         -0.015       -0.007
                                         (0.020)      (0.033)        (0.017)     (0.025)        (0.013)      (0.022)
1982 cohort mean                                 12.49                      13.29                       13.16

N                                                 352,774                   1,960,368                  2,313,142
(B) 2008-15 ACS
Earned GED                                -0.003           -0.003    -0.001            -0.002    -0.001           -0.001
                                         (0.002)          (0.002)    (0.001)          (0.002)   (0.001)          (0.002)
1982 cohort mean                                    0.04                       0.05                       0.05
N                                                 520,213                   3,193,274                  3,713,487

Control for non-math reforms                N               Y           N               Y          N               Y
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Each coefficient comes from a separate regression of a measure of educational attainment on an indicator for be-
 ing subject to increased math requirements, birth state and cohort fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. Even-
 numbered columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social studies, and non-core subjects.
 Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Outcomes in
 the first four rows are indicators for having obtained at least the specified level of educational attainment. Years of
 education is generated by imputing 10 years to high school dropouts, 12 to high school graduates, 13 to those with
 some college, 14 to those with two-year college degrees and 16 to those with four-year college degrees. Data in panel
 A come from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census and in panel B from the 2008-15
 waves of the American Community Survey. The sample consists of the high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in
 states enacting math reforms. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for the 1982 cohort.



                                                            38
                       Table 6: Labor Market Earnings of High School Graduates

                                        Black                            White                         All
                                 (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)        (5)               (6)
(A) Ln(earnings)
Math reform                   0.033∗∗           0.045∗∗         -0.004         0.003        0.002             0.010
                              (0.014)           (0.020)        (0.006)        (0.013)      (0.005)           (0.012)
Non-math reforms                                 -0.007                        -0.004                         -0.004
                                                (0.009)                       (0.004)                        (0.004)
1982 cohort mean                         9.94                            10.20                        10.16
N                                      238,038                         1,563,067                    1,801,105

(B) Earnings ($000s)
Math reform                   0.635∗∗           0.839∗∗         -0.071          0.554       0.083           0.776∗
                              (0.284)           (0.361)        (0.160)         (0.394)     (0.147)          (0.405)
Non-math reforms                                 -0.116                       -0.302∗∗                     -0.343∗∗
                                                (0.170)                        (0.130)                      (0.155)
1982 cohort mean                        24.57                            34.70                        33.19
N                                      280,299                         1,753,217                    2,033,516
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients comes from of a measure of earnings on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements,
 birth state and class fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights stan-
 dardized so that each class receives equal weight. Outcomes are total personal earned income in calendar year 1999
 (measured in thousands of dollars) and the logarithm of that income. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use Micro-
 data Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample consists of high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states enacting
 math reforms and who completed a high school degree. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for the 1982
 cohort.




                                                          39
                          Table 7: Occupational Skills of High School Graduates

                                        Black                           White                             All
                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)
(A) Cognitive skill
Math reform                   0.043∗∗         0.058∗∗∗           -0.001         0.005           0.006             0.014
                              (0.018)          (0.021)          (0.006)        (0.012)         (0.006)          (0.011)
Non-math reforms                              -0.008∗∗                          -0.003                           -0.004
                                               (0.004)                         (0.003)                          (0.003)
1982 cohort mean                        -0.08                            0.31                              0.26
N                                      129,791                          972,730                         1,102,521

(B) Math skill
Math reform                   0.037∗∗         0.055∗∗∗           -0.010         -0.004         -0.002             0.007
                              (0.015)          (0.019)          (0.008)        (0.011)         (0.007)          (0.011)
Non-math reforms                              -0.010∗∗                          -0.003                           -0.005
                                               (0.004)                         (0.003)                          (0.003)
1982 cohort mean                        -0.06                            0.24                              0.20
N                                      129,791                          972,730                         1,102,521
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients come from a regression of a standardized measure of occupational skill on an indicator for being subject to
 increased math requirements, birth state and class fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. Regressions are weighted
 by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use
 Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample consists of high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states
 enacting math reforms and who completed a high school degree. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for
 the 1982 cohort.




                                                          40
               Table 8: Racial Gaps in Math Coursework and Labor Market Outcomes

                           Number         Basic       Advanced                                          Occupational
                           of math        math          math          Earnings                           cognitive
                           courses       courses       courses         ($000s)       Ln(earnings)           skill
                              (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)                 (6)
Math reform                 0.179∗       0.142∗∗∗        0.037          -0.067            0.007              0.000
                            (0.098)       (0.048)       (0.089)         (0.391)          (0.013)            (0.010)
Math reform * Black         0.137∗∗      0.125∗∗         0.013         4.210∗∗∗          0.020∗            0.057∗∗∗
                            (0.063)       (0.059)       (0.064)         (0.231)          (0.010)            (0.007)
Black                      -0.212∗∗∗     0.165∗∗∗      -0.377∗∗∗      -10.214∗∗∗        -0.256∗∗∗          -0.419∗∗∗
                            (0.047)       (0.037)       (0.039)         (0.361)          (0.010)            (0.015)

N                            49,890       49,890        49,890        2,033,516        1,801,105           1,255,383
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Each column is a separate regression of the given outcome on an indicator for being subject to increased math require-
 ments, an indicator for being Black, the interaction of those two, and state and class fixed effects. Each column also
 controls for the number of reforms to science, English, social studies, and non-core subjects. Regressions are weighted
 by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Data in columns 1-3 come from the NCES
 transcript studies described in the text. Data in columns 4-6 come from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample
 of the 2000 U.S. Census and include high school graduates from the 1975-1994 cohorts born in states enacting math
 reforms. All samples include only black and white respondents.




                                                          41
                                                        Table 9: Labor Market Earnings Over Time

     Earnings year(s)                                   1999                          2000-04                       2005-09                      2010-14
                                                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)          (7)             (8)
     (A) Black respondents
     Ln(earnings)                              0.033∗∗     0.045∗∗           0.037∗∗      0.048∗           -0.015      -0.020            -0.007      -0.008
                                               (0.014)     (0.020)           (0.018)     (0.028)           (0.013)     (0.019)           (0.020)     (0.021)
     N                                               238,038                       104,239                       213,703                       208,306

     Earnings                                  0.635∗∗     0.839∗∗             0.546       1.184           -0.637       -0.581           -0.038       0.164
                                               (0.284)     (0.361)            (0.460)     (0.821)          (0.399)     (0.430)           (0.384)     (0.428)
     N                                               280,299                        119,543                      263,184                       283,131

     (B) White respondents




42
     Ln(earnings)                               -0.004        0.003            -0.008      -0.008           0.004       -0.005            -0.010      -0.018∗
                                               (0.006)       (0.013)          (0.008)     (0.010)          (0.007)     (0.009)           (0.008)      (0.009)
     N                                               1,563,067                      872,236                     1,622,018                      1,534,578

     Earnings                                   -0.071        0.554            -0.081      0.343            0.433       0.462             0.113       -0.023
                                               (0.160)       (0.394)          (0.239)     (0.299)          (0.273)     (0.305)           (0.299)     (0.347)
     N                                               1,753,217                      979,494                     1,863,911                     1,845,443

     Control for non-math reforms                 N               Y              N              Y             N               Y             N              Y
      Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01). Each coefficient comes from a
      regression of a measure of earnings on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements, birth state fixed effects, and a female indicator.
      Regressions in column 1-2 include high school class fixed effects, with data from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census.
      Regressions in columns 3-8 include high school class by survey year fixed effects, with data from the 1-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of the
      2001-15 American Community Surveys. Even-numbered columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social studies, and non-
      core subjects. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Outcomes are total personal earned
      income in the listed calendar year (measured in thousands of 1999 dollars) and its natural logarithm. The sample consists of high school graduates from
      the cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states enacting math reforms.
                                                   Figure A.1: Non-Math Reforms



                                  (A) Science reforms                                            (B) Social studies reforms
                      40




                                                                                          40
                                  Cumulative reforms                                                  Cumulative reforms
   Number of states




                                                                       Number of states
                      30




                                                                                          30
                                  New reforms                                                         New reforms
                      20




                                                                                          20
                      10




                                                                                          10
                      0




                                                                                          0
                           1982          1987     1990     1994                                1982          1987     1990    1994

                                      High school class                                                   High school class


                                  (C) English reforms                                                 (D) Non-core reforms
                      40




                                                                                          40
                                  Cumulative reforms                                                  Cumulative reforms
   Number of states




                                                                       Number of states
                      30




                                                                                          30
                                  New reforms                                                         New reforms
                      20




                                                                                          20
                      10




                                                                                          10
                      0




                                                                                          0




                           1982          1987     1990     1994                                1982          1987     1990    1994

                                      High school class                                                   High school class



Notes: The figure above shows the number of states first enacting coursework reforms for a given
graduating high school cohort (gray bars), as well as the cumulative number of states enacting
such reforms by that high school cohort (solid line). Non-core reforms refer to an increase in
required coursework other than math, science, social studies or English.




                                                                  43
                                                 Figure A.2: Hispanic Earnings, by Reform Wave
                                     35
                                     30
          Annual earnings ($000's)

                                     25
                                     20




                                             Reform wave
                                                     1984-87
                                                     1988-90
                                     15




                                          1975                         1984       1987           1994

                                                                   High school class


Notes: The figure above shows the average income earned in 1999 by Hispanic high school grad-
uates, by high school cohort and reform wave. The first reform wave comprises states enacting
math reforms between 1984 and 1987 and the second wave between 1988 and 1990. Earnings data
come from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census, with averages
computed using sampling weights standardized so that each cohort receives equal weight.




                                                                      44
                                    Figure A.3: Impact of Math Reform on Earnings Distribution




                                                           (A) Black adults
                                    .02
            Impact of math reform

                                    .01
                                    0
                                    -.01
                                    -.02




                                           5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75

                                                         Pr(Income exceeds $ X,000)


                                                           (B) White adults
                                    .02
            Impact of math reform

                                    .01
                                    0
                                    -.01
                                    -.02




                                           5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75

                                                         Pr(Income exceeds $ X,000)



Notes: The figures above show the impact of the math reforms on the probability of earning at
least the listed earned income. The sample consists of respondents from the 5-Percent Public
Use Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census, with panels A and B showing Black and White
respondents respectively.



                                                                45
                                                 Table A.1: State Reforms to Math Requirements


                                                          Post-Reform Math Courses Required
                                          0           1                     2                            3
                                       CO, IA,              1987: CA                             1987: FL
Pre-Reform Math Courses Required



                                   0   MA, MI,              1988: AR, IL                         1988: CT
                                       NE, WY               1989: ME, VT, WA, WI
                                                            1984:   ND
                                                            1985:   AL, AK, DC, WV
                                   1               MN       1986:   NV                           1989: PA
                                                            1987:   AZ, DE, NC, OK, TN
                                                            1988:   GA, ID, MO, OH, OR, UT, VA
                                                            1989:   IN, KS, MS, NH, RI, SD
                                                                                                 1987:   KY, SC
                                                                                                 1988:   TX
                                   2                        HI, MT, NY                           1989:   LA, MD
                                                                                                 1990:   NM




                                                                       46
                      Table A.2: Robustness Checks of Math Coursework Impacts

                                                       Black            White              All           Hispanic
                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
(A) Math courses
Baseline specification                                0.354∗∗∗           0.141           0.179∗∗          0.641∗∗∗
                                                       (0.067)          (0.084)          (0.076)           (0.077)
With education and economic controls                  0.338∗∗∗           0.139           0.174∗           0.515∗∗
                                                       (0.085)          (0.110)          (0.096)           (0.234)
With state linear time trends                         0.360∗∗∗          0.166∗           0.201∗∗          0.704∗∗∗
                                                       (0.080)          (0.087)          (0.079)           (0.106)
N                                                       8,940           40,940           49,890             6,800

Including 11 non-reforming states                     0.375∗∗∗         0.182∗∗          0.214∗∗∗          0.643∗∗∗
                                                       (0.080)         (0.082)           (0.073)           (0.116)
N                                                      10,310          51,500            61,820             7,700

Excluding 5 most populous states                      0.286∗∗∗           0.117            0.148             0.068
                                                       (0.082)          (0.100)          (0.092)           (0.179)
N                                                       5,580           24,670           30,810             1,260
(B) Basic math courses
Baseline specification                                0.282∗∗∗         0.112∗∗          0.147∗∗∗          0.355∗∗∗
                                                       (0.062)          (0.048)          (0.047)           (0.083)
With education and economic controls                  0.353∗∗∗         0.129∗∗          0.173∗∗∗          0.279∗∗
                                                       (0.092)          (0.048)          (0.039)           (0.118)
With state linear time trends                         0.310∗∗∗         0.142∗∗∗         0.179∗∗∗          0.419∗∗∗
                                                       (0.073)          (0.052)          (0.050)           (0.109)
N                                                       8,940           40,940           49,890             6,800

Including 11 non-reforming states                     0.290∗∗∗         0.144∗∗∗         0.171∗∗∗          0.356∗∗∗
                                                       (0.075)          (0.052)          (0.049)           (0.115)
N                                                      10,310           51,500           61,820             7,700

Excluding 5 most populous states                      0.265∗∗∗           0.042            0.083             0.049
                                                       (0.094)          (0.050)          (0.051)           (0.139)
N                                                       5,580           24,670           30,810             1,260
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 The top row in each panel comes from regressions of math coursework completed on an indicator for being subject
 to increased math requirements, high school state and class fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. The second row
 adds to the baseline specification the number of reforms in non-math subjects, an exit exam indicator, and the state
 unemployment rate in the year of high school graduation. The third row adds to the baseline specification state-
 specific linear time trends. The fourth row adds to the baseline specification the 11 states that did not enact math
 reforms. The fifth row excludes from the baseline specification the five most populous states for each demographic
 subgroup. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Data
 come from the NCES transcript studies described in the text. The sample consists of those graduating high school in
 1982, 1987, 1990 and 1994. Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 students as required by NCES.

                                                         47
                             Table A.3: Math Coursework Impacts by Gender

                                                  Black                      White                       All
                                            (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
(A) Math courses
Male students                            0.406∗∗∗    0.353∗∗∗        0.174∗      0.182∗         0.216∗∗     0.218∗∗
                                          (0.090)     (0.104)        (0.097)     (0.105)        (0.089)     (0.093)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                      2.53 → 3.23                2.81 → 3.39                2.78 → 3.37
N                                                3,990                      20,180                     24,170

Female students                          0.309∗∗∗    0.285∗∗∗         0.106       0.174         0.143∗      0.197∗
                                          (0.071)     (0.072)        (0.087)     (0.114)        (0.078)     (0.100)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                      2.55 → 3.23                2.62 → 3.40                2.61 → 3.37
N                                                4,960                      20,760                     25,720

(B) Basic math courses
Male students                            0.350∗∗∗    0.346∗∗∗        0.106∗       0.092        0.154∗∗∗     0.147∗∗∗
                                          (0.063)     (0.062)        (0.053)     (0.060)        (0.051)      (0.050)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                      2.15 → 2.55                2.05 → 2.24                2.06 → 2.28
N                                                3,990                      20,180                     24,170

Female students                          0.227∗∗∗     0.273∗∗        0.115∗∗    0.166∗∗∗       0.138∗∗∗     0.187∗∗∗
                                          (0.078)     (0.112)        (0.051)     (0.054)        (0.050)      (0.051)
1982 → 1994 cohort means                      2.18 → 2.40                1.97 → 2.19                2.00 → 2.22
N                                                4,960                      20,760                     25,720

Control for non-math reforms                N              Y            N            Y             N             Y
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients in each panel and column come from regressions of the listed measure of full-year courses completed
 for credit on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements, high school state and cohort fixed effects,
 and race-by-sex indicators. Even-numbered columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social
 studies, and non-core subjects. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort
 receives equal weight. Basic math courses include pre-algebra, algebra I and geometry. Data come from the NCES
 transcript studies described in the text. The sample consists of those graduating high school in 1982, 1987, 1990 and
 1994 from states enacting math reforms. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for the 1982 and 1994 cohorts.
 Sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10 students as required by NCES.




                                                          48
                      Table A.4: Labor Market Earnings of High School Dropouts

                                         Black                          White                         All
                                 (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)         (5)             (6)
(A) Ln(earnings)
Math reform                     0.000             0.000          -0.015       -0.019        -0.011           -0.014
                               (0.040)           (0.041)        (0.015)       (0.021)       (0.015)         (0.020)
Non-math reforms                                  0.000                        0.002                         0.001
                                                 (0.011)                      (0.008)                       (0.008)
1982 cohort mean                        9.32                             9.71                        9.61
N                                      40,546                           132,947                     173,494

(B) Earnings ($000s)
Math reform                    -0.585             -0.647         -0.039         0.204       -0.193           0.000
                               (0.421)           (0.534)        (0.322)       (0.432)       (0.219)         (0.303)
Non-math reforms                                  0.034                        -0.129                        -0.104
                                                 (0.188)                      (0.144)                       (0.104)
1982 cohort mean                       11.23                             18.31                       16.27
N                                      64,487                           174,687                     239,174
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients comes from of a measure of earnings on an indicator for being subject to increased math requirements,
 birth state and class fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights stan-
 dardized so that each class receives equal weight. Outcomes are total personal earned income in calendar year 1999
 (measured in thousands of dollars) and the logarithm of that income. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use Micro-
 data Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample consists of high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states enacting
 math reforms and who dropped out of high school. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for the 1982 cohort.




                                                           49
                            Table A.5: Robustness Checks of Earnings Impacts

                                                       Black            White                All           Hispanic
                                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)              (4)
(A) Ln(earnings)
Baseline specification                                0.033∗∗            -0.004            0.002             0.007
                                                      (0.014)           (0.006)           (0.005)           (0.024)
With education and economic controls                  0.045∗∗            -0.001            0.005             0.008
                                                      (0.019)           (0.010)           (0.010)           (0.030)
With state linear time trends                         0.035∗∗            0.002             0.007             0.009
                                                      (0.014)           (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.023)
N                                                     238,038          1,563,067         1,801,105          109,494

Including 11 non-reforming states                     0.039∗∗∗           -0.006            0.000             -0.009
                                                       (0.011)          (0.010)           (0.009)           (0.008)
N                                                     283,884          2,158,195         2,442,079          138,054

HS cohorts of 1982-1994                               0.035∗∗            0.003             0.008              0.005
                                                      (0.014)           (0.005)           (0.005)            (0.023)
N                                                     149,666           939,479          1,089,145           77,358
(B) Earnings
Baseline specification                                0.635∗∗            -0.071            0.083             -0.092
                                                      (0.284)           (0.160)           (0.147)           (0.790)
With education and economic controls                   0.613∗            0.368             0.462             1.482
                                                      (0.321)           (0.324)           (0.341)           (1.367)
With state linear time trends                         0.670∗∗            0.067             0.146             0.160
                                                      (0.313)           (0.181)           (0.154)           (0.706)
N                                                     280,299          1,753,217         2,033,516          125,924

Including 11 non-reforming states                     1.140∗∗∗           1.155             1.405∗            -0.007
                                                       (0.306)          (0.777)           (0.706)           (0.538)
N                                                     334,972          2,415,166         2,750,138          158,994

HS cohorts of 1982-1994                                0.650∗            0.052             0.125              0.341
                                                      (0.367)           (0.206)           (0.186)            (0.731)
N                                                     175,225          1,047,609         1,222,834           88,783
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 The top row of coefficients in each panel comes from a separate regression of a measure of earnings on an indicator
 for being subject to increased math requirements, birth state and cohort fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. The
 second row adds to the baseline specification the number of reforms in non-math subjects, an exit exam indicator, and
 the state unemployment rate in the year of high school graduation. The third row adds to the baseline specification
 state-specific linear time trends. Regressions are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each cohort
 receives equal weight. Outcomes are total personal earned income in calendar year 1999 (measured in thousands of
 dollars) and the natural logarithm of that income. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use Microdata Sample of the
 2000 U.S. Census. The sample in the first three rows of each panel consists of high school graduates from the cohorts
 of 1975-1994 born in states enacting math reforms. The fourth row of each panel limits the baseline specification to
 the high school cohorts of 1982-1994.
                                                          50
                         Table A.6: Occupational Skills of High School Dropouts

                                        Black                             White                          All
                                 (1)               (2)            (3)                (4)         (5)             (6)
(A) Cognitive skill
Math reform                    -0.060             -0.062         -0.019             -0.019      -0.028          -0.026
                              (0.056)            (0.055)        (0.022)            (0.032)     (0.023)         (0.032)
Non-math reforms                                   0.001                            0.000                       -0.001
                                                 (0.013)                           (0.008)                     (0.008)
1982 cohort mean                         0.93                              -0.39                        -0.50
N                                       20,994                            83,416                       104,410

(B) Math skill
Math reform                    0.004              -0.000         -0.029             -0.034      -0.021          -0.022
                              (0.059)            (0.058)        (0.019)            (0.023)     (0.021)         (0.029)
Non-math reforms                                   0.002                            0.002                       0.001
                                                 (0.009)                           (0.007)                     (0.007)
1982 cohort mean                         -0.82                             -0.35                        -0.45
N                                       20,994                            83,416                       104,410
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients come from a regression of a standardized measure of occupational skill on an indicator for being subject to
 increased math requirements, birth state and class fixed effects, and race-by-sex indicators. Regressions are weighted
 by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use
 Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample consists of high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states
 enacting math reforms and who dropped out of high school. Also shown is the mean value of the outcome for the
 1982 cohort.




                                                           51
                              Table A.7: Labor Market Outcomes by Gender

                                                 Black                       White                        All
                                           (1)             (2)         (3)             (4)        (5)             (6)
(A) Years of education
Male students                             0.012      0.066∗          0.005       0.020          0.004       0.023
                                         (0.032)     (0.037)        (0.016)     (0.024)        (0.013)     (0.021)
1982 cohort mean                                12.30                      13.20                      13.06
N                                             162,160                    973,126                    1,135,286

Female students                           -0.018       -0.009        -0.030      -0.031        -0.032∗      -0.036
                                         (0.021)      (0.039)       (0.023)     (0.033)        (0.019)     (0.028)
1982 cohort mean                                 12.65                     13.38                      13.26
N                                              190,614                    987,242                   1,177,856
(B) Ln(earnings)
Male students                            0.041∗     0.065∗∗          -0.004      0.018          0.003      0.028∗∗
                                         (0.020)     (0.025)        (0.006)     (0.012)        (0.006)     (0.013)
1982 cohort mean                                10.09                      10.51                      10.46
N                                             104,927                     813,682                   918,609

Female students                           0.026         0.027        -0.004        -0.013       0.001            -0.010
                                         (0.020)       (0.024)      (0.011)       (0.021)      (0.010)          (0.019)
1982 cohort mean                                   9.82                        9.85                       9.84
N                                                133,111                     749,385                    882,496
(C) Cognitive skill
Male students                             0.024       0.042∗         -0.002        0.001        0.002            0.009
                                         (0.023)     (0.024)        (0.007)       (0.011)      (0.007)          (0.010)
1982 cohort mean                                -0.20                          0.34                       0.27
N                                              73,674                        566,765                    640,439

Female students                          0.047∗      0.057∗∗         -0.004        0.003        0.005            0.013
                                         (0.024)     (0.027)        (0.009)       (0.014)      (0.009)          (0.015)
1982 cohort mean                                -0.07                          0.24                       0.19
N                                              89,983                        524,961                    614,944

Control for non-math reforms                N              Y           N               Y          N               Y
 Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses (* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01).
 Coefficients in each panel and column come from regressions of labor market outcomes on an indicator for being
 subject to increased math requirements, birth state and cohort fixed effects, and race indicators. Even-numbered
 columns also control for the number of reforms to science, English, social studies, and non-core subjects. Regressions
 are weighted by sampling weights standardized so that each class receives equal weight. Outcomes are years of
 education attained, the natural logarithm of total personal earned income in calendar year 1999, and a standardized
 measure of the cognitive skill required by a respondent’s occupation. Data come from the 5-Percent Public Use
 Microdata Sample of the 2000 U.S. Census. The sample consists of the high school cohorts of 1975-1994 born in states
 enacting math reforms. Panel A includes all individuals while panels B and C exclude high school dropouts. Also
 shown is the mean value of the outcome for the 1982 cohort.
                                                           52
