NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS AMERICAN HEALTH CARE UNIQUELY INEFFICIENT? EVIDENCE FROM
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
Margaret Kyle
Heidi L. Williams
Working Paper 23068
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23068

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

We are grateful to Jane Choi for excellent research assistance, and to Amitabh Chandra, Dan
Fetter, Amy Finkelstein, and Jon Skinner for helpful comments. Research reported in this
publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging and the NIH Common Fund, Office
of the NIH Director, through grant U01-AG046708 to the NBER; the content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or
NBER. Financial support from NSF Grant 1151497 and the Intellectual Property and Markets for
Technology Chair at MINES ParisTech is also gratefully acknowledged. Kyle thanks Pfizer for
access to the IMS data used. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Margaret Kyle and Heidi L. Williams. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient? Evidence from Prescription Drugs
Margaret Kyle and Heidi L. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 23068
January 2017
JEL No. H51,I1,O3
ABSTRACT
Alan Garber and Jonathan Skinner (2008) famously conjectured that the US health care system
was “uniquely inefficient” relative to other countries. We test this idea using cross-country data
on prescription drug sales newly linked with an arguably objective measure of relative therapeutic
benefits, or drug quality. Specifically, we investigate how higher and lower quality drugs diffuse
in the US relative to Australia, Canada, Switzerland, and the UK. Our tabulations suggest that
lower quality drugs diffuse more in the US relative to high quality drugs, compared to each of our
four comparison countries –consistent with Garber and Skinner’s conjecture.

Margaret Kyle
MINES ParisTech (CERNA)
and PSL Research University
60 boulevard Saint Michel
75006 Paris
France
margaret.kyle@mines-paristech.fr
Heidi L. Williams
Department of Economics, E52-440
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER
heidiw@mit.edu

Is American Health Care Uniquely Inefficient?
Evidence from Prescription Drugs
By Margaret Kyle and Heidi Williams∗

Such comparisons are complicated by at
least two factors. First, obtaining consistent measures of healthcare utilization
across countries in a way that holds the
quality of health care services constant is
challenging. For example, a given cardiovascular surgery procedure in the US may
be higher or lower quality than an administration of the same procedure in Canada.
Given data constraints, these measurement
issues are difficult to overcome. Second, differential levels of medical technology diffusion across countries do not tell us whether
the US is using “too much” or “too little”
medical care from a social perspective.

The US spends more on health care per
capita than any other developed country,
yet this higher spending is not associated
with better health outcomes. In an influential article, Alan Garber and Jonathan
Skinner (2008) argued this “unique inefficiency” may be due to institutional features
of the US health care system – specifically, a
predominantly fee-for-service system of reimbursement coupled with few supply-side
constraints – fueling the rapid adoption and
diffusion of medical technologies with small
or unknown benefits.
In practice, testing this proposition is difficult. In their Journal of Economic Literature review, Amitabh Chandra and Skinner (2012) argue that “less effective” treatments diffuse more widely in the US than
in other countries but cite only limited
data from a few case studies. For example, they note that the US and the UK
have similar use of intensive care unit (ICU)
beds for conditions such as cardiac surgery
that clearly indicate post-surgical ICU care.
However, ICU bed use rates are higher in
the US relative to the UK for elderly people (over age 85), for whom they argue ICU
days are likely to be less cost-effective.

In this paper, we use cross-country data
on prescription drug sales newly linked
with an arguably objective measure of drug
“quality” to make progress on this question. Our data allows us to observe drug
sales across countries at the package level
– e.g. sales of bottles of 30 10mg tablets
of Lipitor – providing a relatively consistent measure of utilization across countries.
Our drug quality measure, developed by
France’s public health agency, has the goal
of quantifying a drug’s improvement over
existing therapies. While this measure has
limitations, it arguably makes progress on
understanding the welfare implications of
cross-country differences in drug diffusion.

∗ Kyle:
MINES ParisTech (CERNA) and PSL
Research University, V329, 60 boulevard Saint
Michel, 75272 Paris Cedex 06 France (e-mail:
margaret.kyle@mines-paristech.fr); Williams: Department of Economics, MIT, 50 Memorial Drive, E52440, Cambridge MA 02142 (e-mail: heidiw@mit.edu).
We are grateful to Jane Choi for excellent research assistance, and to Amitabh Chandra, Dan Fetter, Amy
Finkelstein, and Jon Skinner for helpful comments. Research reported in this publication was supported by
the National Institute on Aging and the NIH Common
Fund, Office of the NIH Director, through grant U01AG046708 to the NBER; the content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or NBER. Financial
support from NSF Grant 1151497 and the Intellectual
Property and Markets for Technology Chair at MINES
ParisTech is also gratefully acknowledged. Kyle thanks
Pfizer for access to the IMS data used.

We use these data to document how
higher and lower quality drugs diffuse in
the US relative to four comparison countries: Australia, Canada, Switzerland, and
the UK. Our tabulations provide evidence
that lower quality drugs diffuse more in the
US relative to high quality drugs, compared
to our four comparison countries. These
patterns are consistent with Garber and
Skinner’s (2008) assertion that US health
care may indeed be “uniquely inefficient.”
1

2

I.

Data

Our data on drug sales is drawn from the
MIDAS dataset produced by IMS Health, a
market research firm. This data is sourced
from audits of retail pharmacies, hospitals, and other sales channels, and includes
sales to both private and public purchasers.
These data record quarterly unit sales and
revenues at the “package” level – e.g. sales
of bottles of 30 10mg tablets of Lipitor –
from 2000-2013.
Our drug quality measure is from Haute
Autorité de Santé (HAS), France’s public health authority. This data is available for drugs currently sold in France
or whose sale in France stopped within
the past three years.1 The HAS data include two quality measures: SMR (service
médical rendu/actual benefit), an absolute
rating of drug importance that determines
whether reimbursement in France is justified; and ASMR (amélioration du service
médical rendu/improvement in actual benefit), a relative rating of therapeutic value
compared to existing treatments. Importantly, these SMR and ASMR scores are assigned independent of price, which is negotiated after these scores are assigned. That
is, SMR and ASMR scores are not costeffectiveness evaluations, but rather are assessments of clinical value.
For two reasons, we focus in this short
paper on the ASMR measure rather than
the SMR measure. First, most drugs are
in practice included in a single SMR category, whereas drugs are relatively more
distributed across the five ASMR ratings
– ASMR I/Major, ASMR II/Important,
ASMR III/Moderate, ASMR IV/Minor,
and ASMR V/No improvement. Second,
tabulations of the SMR measure against an
outside quality measure – a flag for whether
the drug was granted “priority review” at
the US Food and Drug Administration –
suggested little correlation, whereas the
expected positive correlation emerged between ASMR ratings and FDA priority review flags. To economize on space, we aggregate ASMR into two categories: more
1 Our

version of the data is from 2 June 2016.

(I/II/III) and less (IV/V) important.
We make three sample restrictions. First,
we restrict attention to drugs with an
ASMR rating. Second, some of our comparisons of interest require restricting attention
to drugs launched in both the US and in a
given comparison country; in these analyses, we restrict attention to drugs launched
in the year 2000 or later in both countries,
so that we focus on a sample of drugs for
which our IMS sales data (which starts in
2000) measures the beginning of the diffusion curve. Finally, we restrict attention to brand-name (non-generic) drugs, as
an analysis of the dynamics of brand and
generic diffusion over time was beyond the
scope of this short paper.
We link the HAS ASMR ratings to nongeneric drugs recorded by the IMS MIDAS
data as sold in France by merging on product name. Specifically, we first attempt a
straight match of local French IMS product names with HAS product names. For
any unmatched IMS product names we attempted a manual match to HAS product
names. We then assign the ASMR rating
for a given French product name to all observations in the IMS data with the same international product name and/or molecule
name. Of the around 2,000 non-generic
products that the IMS data records as being sold in France between 2000-2013, 60%
are matched to the HAS data.
Our comparison countries are Australia,
Canada, Switzerland, and the UK. Of note
is that our HAS drug quality measures are
only available for drugs commercialized in
France, which complicates the UK comparison in the following sense. Drug approval
procedures in the European Union (EU) –
either centralized or via mutual recognition
– mean that the cost of launch elsewhere
in Europe conditional on launch in France
is lower than the cost of launch in the US.2
Hence, we expect drugs launched in the UK
to have more similarity to France in our
sample than one would expect from a random sample of drugs sold globally.3
2 Costs of obtaining marketing authorization elsewhere in Europe is low, although pricing and reimbursement negotiations may add to launch costs.
3 Regulatory authorities in all five of the countries we

IS AMERICAN HEALTH CARE UNIQUELY INEFFICIENT?

II. Preliminary results:
Cross-country drug launches

Our main analyses compare patterns of
drug diffusion conditional on launch for the
sub-sample of molecules sold in both the US
and the relevant comparison country. In order to understand selection into that sample, we here first briefly summarize patterns
of product launches across countries.4
Higher quality (ASMR I/II/III) drugs are
almost always launched in both countries.
When higher quality drugs are not launched
in both countries, they are almost always
only launched in the US: in no comparison
are more than 5% of higher quality drugs
only launched in the comparison country.
Lower quality (ASMR IV/V) drugs are
somewhat more likely to be launched only
in the US relative to Canada (14% in the US
vs. 5% in Canada) and Australia (14% in
the US vs. 10% in Australia), and slightly
less likely relative to Switzerland (8% in the
US vs. 13% in Switzerland) or the UK (3%
in the US vs. 16% in the UK).
In terms of launch timing, higher quality
drugs are most often launched in the same
month in the US and any of the four
comparison countries (79-92%). When not
launched simultaneously, higher quality
drugs are almost always launched first in
the US: in no comparison are more than
5% of higher quality drugs first launched in
the comparison country. For lower quality
drugs the share of simultaneous launches
is slightly lower (66-78%), and when not
launched simultaneously drugs are roughly
equally likely to be first launched in the
US versus any of the comparison countries.
III. Main results:
Cross-country drug diffusion

Our key research question of interest is:
how do higher- and lower-quality drugs difanalyze have harmonized requirements and share some
data as part of the approval process as well as in assessing good manufacturing practices. However, obtaining a
marketing authorization in non-EU countries is not subject to reciprocity agreements between these countries.
4 Because international product names can differ
across countries, this comparison is at the molecule level.

3

fuse over time in the US relative to our
comparison countries? We measure diffusion by sales of standard units (that is,
quantities rather than revenues), and again
focus our quality metric on a comparison
of more (ASMR I/II/III) and less (ASMR
IV/V) important drugs. We analyze diffusion over the first six years after a product
is launched, during which time a new product should generally not face any generic
competition.
We start by analyzing a specification
which pools our four comparison countries
across all six post-launch years of diffusion.
Specifically, for molecule m in country c in
year t relative to the drug’s launch in country c we estimate:

(1) (standard units)mct = δm + ζt + νc


+ γ (US)c · (high quality)m


+ α (US)c · (low quality)m

where δm are molecule fixed effects, ζt are
fixed effects for years relative to the drug’s
launch in country c, and νc are country
fixed effects. We report 95% confidence
intervals based on robust standard errors.
Our interest is in a test for equality of the γ
and α coefficients, which tests whether low
quality drugs diffuse more than high quality drugs in the US relative to our comparison countries. Our estimate of γ is 36.61
(standard error 7.307) and our estimate of
α is 64.05 (standard error 6.790). The pvalue from an F-test for equality of these
two coefficients is 0.005. This suggests that
the US is uniquely inefficient in the sense
that low quality drugs diffuse more quickly
compared to high quality drugs in the US
relative to our comparison countries.
The same pattern holds qualitatively if
we compare the US against each of our comparison countries individually (γ < α in all
four comparisons), although the difference
in coefficients is only statistically significant
for the UK and Switzerland. All of these
results are strengthened if we omit ASMR
III (the “intermediate”) quality category, in
which case the analogous p-values for all

4

Sales in standard units (millions)
relative to Australia
0
50
100
150

200

Figure 1: Diffusion:
US and Australia

−50

comparisons – the pooled country comparison, and all four individual country comparisons – is less than 0.001.
To provide a graphical version of these
results, we plot country-specific diffusion
curves for molecule m in country c in year
t relative to the drug’s launch in country c
based on this specification:

1

(2) (standard units)mct =
δm + ψ(US)c


+ φ (US)c · (high quality)m
+

6
X

2

3
4
Years since launch
High quality
Low quality

5

6

5

6

5

6

95% CI
95% CI

αt (relative year)t

t=1

Figure 2: Diffusion:
US and Canada



βt (high quality)m · (relative year)t

t=1

Based on these estimates, we plot two diffusion curves. First, we plot a diffusion curve
for lower quality drugs based on ψ + γt in
each year t relative to the country-specific
year of launch. Second, we plot a diffusion curve for higher quality drugs based on
ψ + φ + γt + νt in each year t relative to the
country-specific year of launch. The diffusion curve for lower quality drugs is plotted
in each of Figures 1 through 4 in darker
colored red coefficients (with dashed 95%
confidence interval bars), and the diffusion
curve for higher quality drugs is plotted in
lighter colored blue coefficients (with solid
95% confidence interval bars).
While the confidence intervals for low
and high quality drugs are overlapping in
this more disaggregated comparison, qualitatively the overall patterns are remarkably
consistent: with the exception of the year
of and first year after launch in the Australia and Canada, lower quality drugs consistently diffuse more in the US relative to
higher quality drugs, judged relative to any
of the four comparison countries.

Sales in standard units (millions)
relative to Canada
0
50
100
150

t=1
6
X


+
νt (US)c ·(high quality)m ·(relative year)t

−50



γt (US)c · (relative year)t

1

2

3
4
Years since launch
High quality
Low quality

95% CI
95% CI

Figure 3: Diffusion:
US and Switzerland
150

6
X

Sales in standard units (millions)
relative to Switzerland
50
100

+

200

t=1

0

+

6
X

1

2

3
4
Years since launch
High quality
Low quality

95% CI
95% CI

IS AMERICAN HEALTH CARE UNIQUELY INEFFICIENT?

of fueling the rapid adoption and diffusion
of medical technologies with small or unknown benefits.
Our hope is that the newly linked data
developed in this paper can in the future be
combined with an analysis of policy changes
in order to analyze the potential roles of
specific factors in explaining the higher diffusion of lower quality drugs in the US relative to other countries.

0

Sales in standard units (millions)
relative to UK
50
100

150

Figure 4: Diffusion:
US and UK

1

2

3
4
Years since launch
High quality
Low quality

IV.

5

5

6

REFERENCES
95% CI
95% CI

Conclusions

A number of papers have documented
trends in the international diffusion of
pharmaceuticals, including Danzon, Wang
and Wang (2005), Kyle (2007), Kyle and
Qian (2014), and Cockburn, Lanjouw and
Schankerman (2016). These papers have
attempted to quantify the influence of factors such as intellectual property rights and
price control policies on firms’ decisions to
launch new drugs globally. To the best
of our knowledge, this short paper is the
first to analyze the international diffusion
of pharmaceuticals separately by a measure
of drugs’ therapeutic quality. While our
drug quality measure is of course imperfect – in particular, while it is independent
of price, assignment of these measures happens in the shadow of price negotiations –
it arguably takes a step forward in understanding the welfare implications of crosscountry differences in drug diffusion.
Our analysis compares drug diffusion in
the US relative to a small number of
comparison countries – Australia, Canada,
Switzerland, and the UK – separately by
drug quality levels. Our tabulations suggest
that low quality drugs diffuse more quickly
compared to high quality drugs in the US
relative to these four comparison countries.
That difference is statistically significant,
and – as expected – is even stronger if
we exclude drugs of “intermediate” quality
levels. These patterns are consistent with
Alan Garber and Jonathan Skinner’s (2008)
assertion that the US health care system
may be “uniquely inefficient” in the sense

Chandra, Amitabh, and Jonathan
Skinner. 2012. “Technology Growth
and Expenditure Growth in Health
Care.” Journal of Economic Literature,
50(3): 645–80.
Cockburn, Iain, Jean Lanjouw, and
Mark Schankerman. 2016. “Global
Diffusion of New Drugs: The Role of
Patent Policy, Price Controls and Institutions.” American Economic Review,
106(1): 136–164.
Danzon, Patricia M., Richard Wang,
and Liang Wang. 2005. “The Impact
of Price Regulation on the Launch Delay
of New Drugs – Evidence from Twentyfive Major Markets in the 1990s.” Health
Economics, 14: 269–292.
Garber, Alan, and Jonathan Skinner.
2008. “Is American Health Care Uniquely
Inefficient?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(4): 27–50.
Kyle, Margaret. 2007. “Pharmaceutical Price Controls and Entry Strategies.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 88–99.
Kyle, Margaret, and Yi Qian. 2014.
“Intellectual Property Rights and Access
to Innovation: Evidence from TRIPS.”
NBER Working Paper 20779.

