                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE LOCAL ECONOMIC AND WELFARE CONSEQUENCES OF HYDRAULIC
                             FRACTURING

                                      Alexander W. Bartik
                                           Janet Currie
                                       Michael Greenstone
                                      Christopher R. Knittel

                                       Working Paper 23060
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23060


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




This paper has benefited from conversations with John Deutch, Lucas Davis, Manasi Deshpande,
Joseph Doyle, Esther Duflo, and Edson Severnini, and seminar participants at the ASSA 2014
Meetings, the Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research Spring Workshop, the
Energy Institute @Haas Summer Energy Camp, MIT, Tufts University, University of Chicago,
and the NBER Summer Institute. We thank Brian Goggin, Faraz Hayat, Colin McDonnell, Ishan
Nath, Lucy Page, Jonathan Petkun, Harshil Sahai, and Daniel Stuart for excellent research
assistance. Greenstone gratefully acknowledges financial support from MIT’s Provost Office.
Bartik gratefully acknowledges funding from the MIT Center for Energy and Environmental
Policy Research (CEEPR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23060.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Alexander W. Bartik, Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R. Knittel.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Local Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing
Alexander W. Bartik, Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R. Knittel
NBER Working Paper No. 23060
January 2017
JEL No. Q5

                                          ABSTRACT

Exploiting geological variation within shale deposits and timing in the initiation of hydraulic
fracturing, this paper finds that allowing fracing leads to sharp increases in oil and gas recovery
and improvements in a wide set of economic indicators. At the same time, estimated willingness-
to-pay (WTP) for the decrease in local amenities (e.g., crime and noise) is roughly equal to -$1000
to -$1,600 per household annually (-1.9% to -3.1% of mean household income). Overall, we
estimate that WTP for allowing fracing equals about $1,300 to $1,900 per household annually
(2.5% to 3.7%), although there is substantial heterogeneity across shale regions.


Alexander W. Bartik                              Michael Greenstone
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            University of Chicago
abartik@mit.edu                                  Department of Economics
                                                 1126 E. 59th Street
Janet Currie                                     Chicago, IL 60637
Department of Economics                          and NBER
Center for Health and Wellbeing                  mgreenst@uchicago.edu
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University                             Christopher R. Knittel
Princeton, NJ 08544                              MIT Sloan School of Management
and NBER                                         100 Main Street, E62-513
jcurrie@princeton.edu                            Cambridge, MA 02142
                                                 and NBER
                                                 knittel@mit.edu




An Online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23060
1         Introduction
The discovery of hydraulic fracturing is considered the most important change in the energy sector
since the commercialization of nuclear energy in the 1950s. Fracing,1 as it is known colloquially,
has allowed for the recovery of vast quantities of oil and natural gas from shale deposits that were
previously believed to be commercially inaccessible. The result is increases in US production of
oil and natural gas to levels unimaginable, even five years ago, substantial reductions in energy
prices that have greatly aided consumers both domestically and abroad, and fundamentally altered
global geopolitics that are likely to benefit the United States (e.g., reducing the power of OPEC
and Russia). Further, while the US has been the focus of early fracing activity, large shale deposits
of both natural gas and oil exist around the world, posing tremendous challenges to the planet’s
climate.2
        Ultimately, access to these energy resources rests on the willingness of the local communities
that sit atop these shale deposits to allow fracing within their jurisdictions. On the one hand, the
drilling brings royalty payments and economic activity. On the other hand, there are substantial
concerns about the impacts on the quality of life, including water, air, and noise pollution, traffic
congestion, and crime.3 Indeed, there has been substantial heterogeneity in communities’ reactions
with Pennsylvania, Texas, and North Dakota embracing fracing, while other localities, like New
York, Vermont, and internationally some countries such as Germany and France, have banned it.
However, in making these decisions about allowing fracing, policymakers and their communities
have not had systematic evidence on its benefits or costs, and certainly not on net benefits.
        This paper empirically characterizes the effects of fracing on local communities across a wide
variety of dimensions, including a plausible measure of the net welfare impacts. A challenge for
measuring these impacts is that the communities where fracing has taken root differ from other
parts of the country both in levels and trends of economic variables. Consequently, we develop
an identification strategy that is based on geological variation within shale plays across the US
and variation in the timing of the onset of fracing. Specifically, several factors, including thick-
ness, depth, and thermal maturity of the shale deposit, determine the accessibility and quantity
of hydrocarbons. Rystad Energy, an international oil and gas consulting company, has created
an index of these factors that is a strong predictor of the variation in the application of fracing
techniques within US shale deposits. We purchased a GIS file from Rystad that maps this index.
Thus, our identification strategy compares counties over shale deposits in the same shale play with
    1
      Hydraulic fracturing has been abbreviated in a number of ways, including “fracing,” “fracking,” “frac’ing,” and
“fraccing.” We use “fracing” throughout the paper.
    2
      For example, the global supply of natural gas has increased by more than 70 years, based on current consumption
levels, and oil reserves have increased by more than 10 years of current consumption (EIA). The newfound abundance
of fossil fuels may also have reduced incentives to invest in low carbon energy technologies.
    3
      The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has devoted an entire website to the issues surrounding fracing.
http://www2.epa.gov/hydraulicfracturing.



                                                         1
high potential for fracing to counties with lower values.4 The second source of variation is the
difference in the timing of the onset of fracing across shale plays; these differences are also due to
geological variation, among other factors. Together, these two sources of variation are the basis for
a difference-in-differences-style identification strategy.
       There are four primary findings. First, counties with high-fracing potential produce roughly
an additional $400 million of oil and natural gas annually three years after the discovery of suc-
cessful fracing techniques, relative to other counties in the same shale play. Second, these counties
experience marked increases in economic activity with gains in total income (4.4 - 6.9 percent),
employment (3.6 - 5.4 percent), and salaries (7.6 - 13.0 percent). Further, local governments see
substantial increases in revenues (15.5 percent) that are larger than the average increases in expen-
ditures (12.9 percent).
       Third, there is evidence of deterioration in the quality of life or total amenities. We find
marginally significant estimates of higher violent crime rates, despite a 20 percent increase in public
safety expenditures. Building on the work by by Moretti (2011) and Hornbeck and Moretti (2015),
who allow for moving costs and elastic housing supply in a Roback (1982) style model, we develop a
model that allows us to calculate both the change in welfare and the change in the value of amenities
from the reduced form estimates. These calculations suggest that annual willingness-to-pay (WTP)
for fracing-induced changes in local amenities are roughly equal to -$1000 to -$1,600 per household
annually (i.e., -1.9 to -3.1 percent of mean annual household income).
       Fourth, we use the model to develop a measure of the overall change in welfare among households
that lived in these communities before fracing’s initiation. The expression is a function of the decline
in amenities and observed changes in incomes (4.4 -6.9 percent), population (2.7 percent), housing
values (5.7 percent), and housing rental rates (2.7 percent).5 Overall, we estimate that WTP for
allowing fracing equals about $1,300 to $1,900 per household annually (2.5 to 3.7 percent of mean
household income), although there is substantial heterogeneity across shale regions.
       This paper makes several contributions. First, the focus on net welfare consequences provides
a broad picture of fracing’s overall impacts.6 Of course, these estimates are only as good as the
information on impacts of fracing that households have at their disposal; and as new information
emerges about potential health consequences and other impacts, this effect may change.7 Second,
   4
     A “shale play” is an area where oil and gas producing firms have targeted a particular shale formations or set of
shale formations.
   5
     Although it is very demanding of the data, we also estimate play-specific housing prices effects and find estimates
on housing prices that range between an increase of 25 percent to no statistically significant change. The largest
housing price gains are in the Bakken (primarily in North Dakota and Montana) and the Marcellus (largely in
Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Ohio) shale plays.
   6
     Due to the use of county-level information on housing prices, this paper is not able to provide a detailed assessment
of the distributional consequences of fracing on the housing market. In an important paper, Muehlenbachs et al.
(2014a) find that in a sample of roughly 1000 Marcellus region houses, proximity to a fracing site reduces prices by
20 percent for houses that rely on well water, relative to those that utilize piped water. Nor does our paper deal
with the more global issue of how fracing affects global greenhouse gas emissions and geopolitics.
   7
     The EPA released a preliminary report on a wide-ranging study on the health and environmental risks of fracing


                                                            2
the examination of 9 different shale plays provides near comprehensive measures of the impacts of
fracing across the United States.8 In contrast, much of the previous research has focused on single
plays, especially the Marcellus in Pennsylvania (Gopalakrishnan and Klaiber (2013); Muehlenbachs
et al. (2014a)).
   Third, the paper demonstrates that areas of the country with abundant opportunities for fracing
differ from the rest of the country in important ways. As a solution to this identification problem,
this paper offers a credible identification strategy based on the geological characteristics of shale
deposits. In contrast, we are unaware of any other papers in the rapidly growing literature on
fracing’s impacts that have both a research design that applies to a wide range of shale plays and
address this problem of confounding. Fourth, we have collected data on a wide set of outcomes,
ranging from measures of local economic activity to crime to housing market outcomes, which
together with the locational equilibrium model that we set out provides a fuller picture of fracing’s
impacts than has been available previously. In this respect, it expands our understanding of resource
booms (see, e.g., Wynveen (2011)), although it does not shed light on the potential for the “Dutch
disease” (see, e.g., Allcott and Keniston (2014) and Fetzer (2015) for recent work on this topic) or
our understanding of how these effects propagate (see, e.g., Feyrer et al. (2015)). In the most closely
related work, Jacobsen (2016) finds that fracing has benefited local communities economically as
measured by wages and housing rental rates.
   For several reasons, this paper’s estimates are likely to be relevant going forward for communities
making decisions about whether to allow fracing. First, there are vast shale deposits around the
globe that have not yet been accessed due to a mix of legal, institutional, and economic reasons.
As some of the non-economic barriers are removed and drilling technologies continue to advance,
many jurisdictions will be confronted with decisions about whether to allow fracing.9 Second, the
estimates are based on a period when natural gas prices were historically low, stable, and near
current levels. Thus for shale deposits that can be fraced to deliver natural gas, the paper’s results
are self-evidently relevant. Third, although the paper’s results come from a period when petroleum
prices were higher than they are currently, petroleum prices have a long history of volatility and
multiple “new normals” over the last several decades (Baumeister and Kilian (2016)).
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines our conceptual framework. Section 3 discusses
hydraulic fracturing and how it differs from conventional oil and natural gas recovery. Section
4 discusses the data used in the analysis, while section 5 describes our identification strategy.
Section 6 provides preliminary evidence, our econometric estimates, and the robustness of those
results. Section 7 presents evidence of local welfare implications of our estimates. Finally, Section
(Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development (2015)). Regulations also continue to evolve.
   8
     We restrict the sample to 9 plays to ensure enough post-fracing data to identify the effects. We come back to
this later in the paper.
   9
     See Covert et al. (2016) for a discussion of these issues and http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?
id=14431 for a map of world resources.


                                                        3
8 concludes the paper.


2     Conceptual Framework
The aim of the paper is to understand the impacts of fracing on local communities, with an eye
toward developing a summary measure of welfare. We follow a stylized model that builds upon
the insights of the canonical Roback (1982) model, which is often used as a signpost for assessing
the welfare consequences of changes in local amenities (see, e.g., Chay and Greenstone (2005);
Greenstone et al. (2010); Kline and Moretti (2015)). The model is a slightly modified version of
Moretti (2011) and Hornbeck and Moretti (2015), who incorporate the possibility of moving costs
and elastic housing supply into a Roback (1982) style model.10 The model is explained in detail in
Appendix Section A.
    This model allows for calculations that are of tremendous practical value for inferring the local
welfare consequences of fracing. In the subsequent empirical analysis, we will estimate the effect of
fracing on housing prices and rents (which are assumed to be an index for locally produced goods)11 ,
household wage and salary income, and population ∆  \         \
                                                      ln rt , ∆ ln wt , and ∆\
                                                                             ln Nt respectively. Using
these estimates, and values of the standard-deviation of idiosyncratic location preferences or moving
costs, s, and the share of household income spent on housing, β, calibrated from Albouy (2008),
Diamond (2016), and Suarez Serrato and Zidar (2016), it is possible to derive an implementable
expression for the willingness-to-pay for the change in amenities in location a.12 Specifically, differ-
entiation of Equation A.4 and re-arrangement yields an expression for household willingness-to-pay
for the amenity changes caused by fracing:

           ∆WTP for Amenities =            α∆ ln Aat =       s∆ ln Nat − (∆ ln wat − β∆ ln rat )               (2.1)

Thus, WTP for the change in amenities, expressed as a percentage of income, is equal to the
difference between the change in population, adjusted for the magnitude of moving costs, and the
change in real wages.
    This is a remarkably useful expression because it provides an estimate of willingness-to-pay for
the full set of amenity changes,13 even though a data set with the complete vector of amenities or
  10
     The only difference between the model we present here and Hornbeck and Moretti (2015) is that they are
focused on the effects of a pure productivity shock, whereas we allow the introduction of fracing to shift both local
productivity and amenities.
  11
     If fracing shifted rents in a place permanently, competitive housing markets would imply that the percentage
change in rents and housing prices should be the same. However, the shift in rents may not be permanent because
owning a home can entail lease payments that renters do not receive, and renter and owner-occupied homes may
not be perfect substitutes; for these reasons, the percentage change in rents and owner-occupied homes are likely to
differ.
  12
     In the canonical Roback (1982) model, s is effectively assumed to be equal to zero.
  13
     Aat is the full vector of amenities and α measures the willingness to pay for log-changes in those amenities.



                                                         4
information on willingness-to-pay for these amenities are unlikely to ever be available. The intuition
behind this approach comes from the fact that, in spatial equilibrium, the marginal resident must
be indifferent to relocating, which means that local housing prices will respond to changes in local
wages. The strength of this response will depend on both the elasticity of local housing supply and
moving costs.
       Additionally, it is possible to develop an expression for the change in welfare for all the people
that either reside or own property in location a before the change in amenities and local productivity
occurred.14 This is the population that has the greatest influence on whether fracing should be
allowed in a community. Specifically, let W̄a be average baseline household wage and salary income,
Ȳa be the average household rental, dividend and interest income, and R̄a be average baseline rent,
then the welfare change in dollars for an individual renter is W̄a (∆\
                                                                     ln wat + α∆\ln Aat − β ∆\
                                                                                             ln rat ),
and the welfare change for a landowner (who may or may not reside in location a) who owns one
                       ln rat + Ȳaowner × ∆ ln
housing unit is R̄a × ∆\                     \   owner 15
                                                yat       . This expression for WTP is more realistic
than the workhorse expression from the canonical Roback (1982) model that is simply equal to the
change in property values. Thus, the expression for the total change in welfare for all individuals
that either reside or own property in location a before the change in amenities is:
                                                                                        
                                              \
                                at ≈ Nat × W̄a ∆ ln wat + Ȳa × ∆ ln yat + W̄a α∆ ln Aat
   WTP for Allowing Fracing = ∆Vc                               \                \         (2.2)


       Therefore the total change in local welfare is equal to total population in place a, times the
change in income per household (including both the change in wage and interest and dividend
income per household) and the change in the WTP for amenities per household. The change in
rents has dropped out, because renters’ loss (gain) from the increase (decrease) in rents is exactly
counterbalanced by the gain (loss) for property owners from the same increase (decrease) in rents.16
       Nevertheless, this model is still stylized and there are three caveats worth highlighting. First,
the model assumes that workers are homogenous, and relaxing this assumption would lead to
additional welfare consequences. An especially vulnerable population is workers with skills that are
not well-suited for fracing-related employment (e.g., the elderly) who rent homes; this group could
experience declines in utility due to continued residence in a jurisdiction that allows fracing and
face moving costs that, in principle, could lock them in their current location. Additionally, some
homeowners may not own the mineral rights to their homes, meaning that they will not benefit from
lease payments even if there is drilling on or near their property. While these benefits obviously
  14
      This calculation ignores the change in welfare for in-migrants, as well as any profits received by oil and gas
firms in excess of lease payments to local residents. It also assumes that the average change in household income is
attained by original residents, and is not due to high earnings by immigrants. Finally, the expression omits profits
of landowners who develop new housing units or rent previously vacant housing units. However, we believe it is the
correct expression for WTP for allowing fracing in a community.
   15
      Where Ȳ owner is the average interest and dividend income for home-owners.
   16
      It is perhaps most straightforward to see this point in the case where all homes are owner occupied.


                                                         5
accrue to someone, our estimates of fracing on the change of housing prices will not capture these
benefits. Second, the model assumes that households have knowledge of and rational expectations
about fracing’s impact on all present and future changes in household income and amenities. If
households are misinformed or uninformed about current or future changes, then the true welfare
impacts of fracing will be more complicated. Of course, as new information about fracing’s impacts
(e.g., health effects) emerge, then households will update their willingness-to-pay for local amenities.
Finally, it must be emphasized that this model provides expressions solely for local welfare changes.
The model is silent on the many potential regional, national, or global effects of fracing, including
reductions in petroleum, natural gas, or electricity prices, ambiguous effects on global warming,
adoption of renewable technologies, and changes in geopolitics resulting from America’s growing
role as a fossil fuel producer.
       The below analysis develops estimates of the impacts of allowing fracing on housing prices, as
well as on household incomes. In Section 7 we combine the expressions developed in this section with
these estimates to develop estimates of the willingness-to-pay for the amenity changes associated
with the introduction of fracing and the overall change in household welfare for the people that
either resided or owned property in these locations.


3        A Primer on Hydraulic Fracturing and a New Research
         Design
The development of hydraulic fracturing of shale formations is widely considered the most important
change in the energy sector since the commercialization of nuclear energy in the 1950s. It has led to
massive increases in North American production of natural gas and petroleum that have disrupted
energy markets and geopolitics, and, depending on the rate of innovation in low carbon technologies,
has either increased or decreased the probability of disruptive climate change. The new production
has also greatly altered local economies and communities in a few short years. In North Dakota,
the flaring of methane by-product at that state’s more than 8,000 fraced wells can be seen from
outer space.17 While fracing has rocketed across many regions of the United States, technological
and political constraints have slowed its adoption around the world although most of the resources
are buried in shale formations outside the US. This section provides a brief primer on hydraulic
fracturing. It also describes how geological variation in the suitability of shale for drilling within
shale plays and variation in the timing of the spread of fracturing techniques across US shale
formations provide the basis for a research design. The appendix provides more details.
  17
       http://geology.com/articles/oil-fields-from-space/




                                                   6
3.1       A Primer on Hydraulic Fracturing
3.1.1      A Layman’s Description of Conventional and Hydraulic Fracturing Drilling

The traditional approach to gas and oil recovery involves drilling into the earth in search of a
“pool.” These “pools” exist in permeable reservoir rocks such as limestone or sandstone. The oil
and gas migrates to these pools from deeper source rocks (such as shale) where the hydrocarbons
were formed. The hydrocarbons migrate until they reach a impermeable “cap” or “seal” rock which
traps them.18 During this process, a drill bit drills through the ground and once the drill bit reaches
where the pool is believed to be located (typically 1,000 - 5,000 feet below the surface for an on-shore
well), the bit is removed, and casing-pipe is placed into the hole. Once the well is cased, the casing
is perforated toward the bottom of the casing so that the deposits, being under pressure, will flow
up through the pipe on their own. If the underground pressure is insufficient for the deposits to
naturally flow up the pipe, pumping equipment is installed at the bottom of the tubing.
       For unconventional wells, drilling often continues to lower depths than are typically reached
with conventional wells—sometimes exceeding 10,000 feet and generally significantly below the
water table. Once the drill bit nears the shale formation, the bit begins to turn sideways. This
point is known as the kick-off point. Drilling continues in a horizontal fashion often for more than
10,000 feet. This portion of the well is then cased and then perforated.19 Although the pipe is
perforated, the deposits do not flow because they are trapped in small pockets within the shale
formation and the surrounding rock is not sufficiently permeable to allow the hydrocarbons to flow
to the well-head. To break the pockets, a mixture of water, sand, and chemicals is pumped into
the well under high pressure. The pressure of the liquid fractures the pockets and the sand keeps
them from closing once the pressure is relieved. Once the shale is fractured, the hydrocarbons can
escape up through the piping to the surface.
       There are noteworthy differences in the economics of conventional and unconventional drilling.
A typical conventional well requires an investment of roughly $1 to 3 million to determine whether
the resources below the ground can be recovered. Fracing is more expensive with an investment cost
of approximately $5 to 8 million per well.20 There are, however, dramatic differences in the success
of these two approaches. Fracing has been dubbed farming for the relative certainty of producing
hydrocarbons.
       It should not be surprising that the fraced wells account for a rapidly growing share of new
wells. Although national data on the number of wells that are fraced are unavailable, we can gain
a sense for the emergence of fracing from the share of new wells that are drilled horizontally over
shale formations; this share has increased from 0.7 percent in 2000 to 25 percent in 2011 (the year
  18
      Because shale rocks have such low permeability, they can also be a “seal” rock.
  19
      Proper casing also plays the important role of preventing reserves and other chemicals produced during drilling
from leaking into the groundwater. There has been substantial debate about the frequency of improper casing.
   20
      https://blogs.siemens.com/measuringsuccess/stories/688/.


                                                         7
with the most recent data that we have purchased from Drilling Info, Inc (2012)).21 In part because
of this rapid increase in the amount of fracing, the fraction of successful exploratory wells in the
US has risen from 41 percent in 2000 to 62 percent in 2010 (EIA, 2014).22

3.1.2      Shale Terminology

Throughout the paper, we refer to shale basins and shale plays. A basin is a geological concept
that refers to a region where geological forces have caused the rock layers to form roughly a bowl
shape, where the central part is deeper than the outside portions, with the center then filled in by
layers of sediment. If one of the layers is a shale layer, the basin can sometimes be referred to as a
“shale” basin. Note that a basin can contain many different rock layers and formations, and that
in a “shale” basin, many of the rock layers will not be shale.
       A shale play is a region of a shale basin where oil and gas producing firms have targeted a
specific formation or group of formations that exhibit similar geological and drilling characteristics.
Importantly, the definition of a shale play often depends on where drilling has occurred or may
occur. For example, a widely used 2011 Energy Information Administration map23 defined shale
plays by drawing a line around the parts of shale formations with the highest density of wells.
Additionally, a shale play usually refers to one formation (for example, the Marcellus shale), while
shale basins often contain several different shale formations. For example, the Appalachian Basin
contains both the Marcellus shale and the Utica shale, which overlap for much of their extent but
at different depths.

3.1.3      Local Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing Activity

Shale deposits are located in a relatively small number of communities and, as the bans on fracing
in multiple jurisdictions indicate, these communities ultimately determine access to the resources.
As the numbers at the end of the previous section underscore, unconventional drilling has produced
substantial economic value. This paper will develop measures of the economic benefits to local com-
munities in terms of hydrocarbon production, employment, income, net migration, etc. However,
these benefits come bundled with a number of impacts that are less desirable. The claimed negative
impacts include water and air pollution, increased traffic, crime, and damage to otherwise largely
unperturbed physical environments (see e.g. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research
and Development (2015), Phillips (2014), Ground Water Protection Council and ALL Consulting
(2009), National Energy Technology Labratory (2013), Rubinstein and Mahani (2015)).
  21
     The fraction of wells that are drilled over shale formations has increased from 41 percent in 2000 to 48 percent
in 2011, while the share of horizontal wells has increased from 1.7 percent in 2000 to 33 percent in 2011.
  22
     This improvement in the success rate for exploratory wells cannot be entirely attributed to fracing, as advances
in 3D-imaging have also reduced dry holes for conventional wells.
  23
     http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/usshalegas/ We, as well as much of the growing economics literature
on fracing, use this map to define the boundaries of shale plays.


                                                         8
      The below analysis will measure as many of these local impacts as is possible with available data
sources. Ultimately, they cannot be all measured and even if they could their net impact on social
welfare is unknowable. As the conceptual framework outlines, we develop estimates of the WTP
for the total change in amenities and the net welfare impacts of allowing fracing in the community.


3.2       A New Research Design
This paper’s empirical analysis aims to determine the consequences for a local community of allowing
fracing. The empirical challenge is to identify a valid counterfactual for jurisdictions that allowed
fracing. That is, it is necessary to identify jurisdictions that are identical, except for the presence
of fracing; otherwise the empirical analysis may confound fracing with the other differences across
jurisdictions. The difficulty is that places with fracing activity may differ from those that do not
for a variety of reasons that also affect key outcomes. Places that have a more extensive history
of oil and gas development, a lower value of land, or different local economic shocks may be more
likely to experience fracing.
      The growing fracing literature has relied on a variety of identification strategies. Perhaps, the
most widely used one is to compare areas over shale formations to areas without shale formations
underneath them (see e.g., Cascio and Narayan (2015); Fetzer (2015); Maniloff and Mastromonaco
(2014); Weber (2012); Weinstein (2014)). As we demonstrate below, these places differ on many
dimensions in both levels and trends undermining the validity of this approach. Others have taken
advantage of a border discontinuity design, based on comparing border areas in Pennsylvania where
fracing has been embraced versus New York where it has been banned (Boslett et al. (2015)). This
design may be appealing for reasons of internal validity, but its results are specific to just one
of the more than ten shale plays in the country, leaving important questions of external validity
unanswered.24
      As an alternative to these approaches, this paper’s identification strategy is based on differences
in geology within shale plays and the rate at which the basic principles of hydraulic fracturing were
successfully applied across US shale formations. The remainder of this subsection describes these
two sources of variation that underlie our difference-in-differences-style research design.

3.2.1      Cross-Sectional Variation in Prospectivity within Shale Plays

Shale plays are not homogenous and there is significant variation in the potential productivity of
different locations within a shale play. Geological features of the shale formation affect the total
quantity and type of hydrocarbons contained within a shale formation, the amenability of the
shale to fracing techniques, and the costs of drilling and completing the well. Among others, these
features include the depth and thickness of the shale formation, as well as the thermal maturity,
 24
      As our results below highlight, there is substantial heterogeneity across shale plays in the effects of fracing.


                                                             9
porosity, permeability, clay content, and total organic content of the local shale rock (Zagorski et al.
(2012), Budzik (2013)). The thickness, porosity, and total organic content of the shale determine
the quantity of hydrocarbons that could have formed in the shale formation. Thermal maturity,
which measures how much heat the shale has been exposed to over time, determines whether
hydrocarbons have formed and, if so, what types. Finally, the permeability, clay content, presence
of natural fractures and depth influence how well the formation will respond to fracing, as well as
how expensive drilling and completion will be.25,26
       Rystad Energy is an oil and gas consulting firm that provides research, consulting services, and
data to clients worldwide. We purchased Rystad’s NASMaps product that includes GIS shapefiles of
Rystad’s Prospectivity estimates for each North American shale play (Rystad Energy (2014)). Fig-
ure 2 maps the Rystad Prospectivity estimates for major US shale plays. The “prospectivity”values
are estimates of the potential productivity of different portions of shale plays based on a non-linear
function of the different geological inputs, including formation depth, thickness, thermal maturity,
porosity, and other information, along with Rystad’s knowledge and expertise on the impact of
geology on productivity in different shale plays. In practice, the geological variables included and
the functional forms used to transform them into prospectivity scores differ for each shale, so scores
cannot be compared across shale formations.
       We aggregated the Rystad prospectivity measure to the county level by computing the maximum
and mean Rystad score within each county. We then divide counties, within a shale play, into Rystad
score quartiles. Our preferred measure of fracing exposure is based on the maximum prospectivity
score within each county. This decision is motivated by the observation that the quality of a county’s
best resources may more strongly impact hydrocarbon production than the average quality. We
also explore the sensitivity of the results to alternative measures of fracing exposure. Figure 3
shows a map of the county assignments. The appendix illustrates in greater detail how the Rystad
prospectivity measure was used to assign counties into top quartile and the bottom three quartiles.

3.2.2      Temporal and Cross-sectional Variation in the Discovery of Successful Fracing
           Techniques

While geological features of the shale deposits provide cross-sectional variation, the paper’s research
design also exploits temporal variation in the initiation of fracing across shale plays. This time
variation comes both from heterogeneity in the shale formations’ geology and potential for oil and
  25
     Depth is also correlated with thermal maturity, because deeper formations have usually experienced higher levels
of pressure and heat.
  26
     See Budzik (2013) for a general discussion of the role played by different geological characteristics in determining
the effectiveness of fracing. Zagorski et al. (2012) describes the geological features of the Marcellus and their role
in drilling productivity, Covert (2014) includes a discussion of the importance of different geological factors in the
Bakken. See McCarthy et al. (2011). for an introduction to the science of hydrocarbon formation and a helpful
discussion of thermal maturity.



                                                           10
gas recovery that led to differences in the time elapsed before drilling and exploration firms devised
successful fracing techniques in each play, as well as local and national economic factors influencing
oil and gas development. We determined the first date that the fracing potential of each of the 14
shale plays in the US became public knowledge. When possible, these dates correspond to investor
calls and production announcements when firms first began drilling operations involving fracing in
an area or released information on their wells’ productivity. The appendix provides more details on
the development of the dates and the implications for identification.
   Table 1 summarizes the temporal variation in the initiation of fracing across shale plays, as
well as the distribution of top-quartile counties within each play. The Barnett was the first play
where modern hydraulic fracturing in shale plays combined with horizontal wells found success.
This success started becoming public in late 2000 and early 2001. Fracing was initiated in 10 of the
14 plays by the end of 2009. In total, there are 95 top-quartile counties and 310 counties outside of
the top quartile in these 14 plays.


3.3    Alternative Identification Strategies
While our identification strategy provides a plausible control group for top-quartile counties, there
are two potential shortcomings of this design. The first is that our strategy does not yield estimates
of the impact of fracing in counties other than the top quartile. Second, and related, if fracing has
local economic effects on non-top quartile counties, our estimates of the impacts on top-quartile
counties will be biased. This might occur for two reasons. First, counties in physical proximity to
top quartile counties may benefit from an increase in drilling activity because of either economies
of geographic scope associated with drilling, or because these counties themselves have deposits
of newly economically accessible hydrocarbons. Second, many of the economic outcomes that we
measure can increase as a result of an increase in nearby drilling activity. For example, workers
may commute to nearby counties, or workers living in top-quartile counties may travel and spend
money in nearby counties.
   In principle, these two shortcomings could be overcome by matching all counties in shale plays
to counties that are outside of shale plays. Following the procedure in Imbens and Rubin (2015),
we used propensity score matching to match counties within shale plays to counties outside shale
plays. The appendix describes this matching strategy in more detail. However, as we show in
Table 2, this matching strategy was unable to provide plausible control counties, especially for the
housing-price measures. This creates a tension between developing a comprehensive measure of
fracing’s impacts and what can be estimated credibly. Because matching does not appear to be a
solution to the confounding problem here, this paper focuses on estimate the impact of fracing on
top-quartile counties, but we note that this is likely an underestimate of the full impacts of fracing
across the United States.


                                                 11
4        Data Sources and Summary Statistics
The analysis is conducted with the most comprehensive and detailed data set ever assembled on
fracing and its consequences. Clearly, it would be impossible to estimate the effects of fracing on
every potential outcome; however, we collected data on a large set of effects and will use these
results to estimate the net welfare effects of fracing. This section briefly describes the data sources,
with more details provided in the Data Appendix. It then provides some evidence on the validity
of the research design.


4.1       Data Sources
4.1.1      Fracing Data

Shapefiles of the locations of shale plays and basins, as well as historic oil and gas prices, come
from the Energy Information Agency (EIA).27 Oil and gas production data for 1992 through 2011
come from data purchased from Drilling Info, Inc (2012). The research design depends on the
prospectivity estimates from Rystad Energy’s NASMaps product purchased from Rystad Energy
(Rystad Energy (2014)).

4.1.2      Economic Outcomes

We measure the effect of fracing on a variety of county-level economic outcomes. The Bureau of
Economic Analysis’ Regional Economic and Information Systems (REIS) data are the source for
data on total employment and total annual earnings by type (US Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) (2014)). These data are complemented by the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages’
(QCEW) data on wages by industry (Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor (2014)).
       Housing price data for 2009 through 2013 come from the American Community Survey (ACS),
while housing price data for previous decades (2000 and 1990), as well as data on the total number
of housing units, come from the decennial Census.28 In some of our specifications, we also draw on
economic data from the decennial Census and 2009 - 2013 pooled ACS, including employment, per
capita income, population, and population broken down by age and sex.29 The 2009 - 2013 ACS data
need to be pooled to precisely estimate average county outcomes, so, for a given county, these data
  27
      For oil prices we use the Cushing, OK, spot price for West Texas Intermediate (Energy Information Agency
(2011)) and for natural gas we use the city-gate price. Shapefiles for the boundaries of shale plays and basins come
from the EIAs Maps: Exploration, Resources, Reserves, and Production site (Energy Information Agency (2011)).
   28
      Alternatives to Census data on housing outcomes do exist, such as Zillow or RealtyTrac data. However, for many
of the counties affected by fracing, these data are either missing or interpolated. In addition, these data would not
have information on rental markets.
   29
      All Census and ACS data were retrieved from the National Historical Geographical Information System (Min-
nesota Population Center (2011)).




                                                         12
are treated as a single year’s observation.30 Housing permit data come from the Census Bureau’s
New Residential Construction data-series (US Census Bureau (2014a)). Monetary variables are
inflation adjusted using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) produced by the BLS (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, U.S Department of Labor (2015)).
       Migration data come from the Internal Revenue Service’s county-county migration dataset,
released as part of the Statistics on Income (Internal Revenue Service (2015)).

4.1.3      Crime

Crime data come from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2015) Uniform Crime Reporting program
(UCR). Individual police agencies (e.g. City of Cambridge Police, MIT Police, etc.) report “index
crimes” to the FBI, including murder, rape, aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, and
motor-vehicle theft. Reporting is non-mandatory,31 and consequently not all agencies report all
index crimes in all years. To prevent within-county sample composition changes over time from
influencing our results, we define a consistently reporting series using agencies that report32 index
crimes in most years33 from 1992 through 2013. To ensure that the consistently reporting agencies
are representative of the county as a whole, we only include counties in our sample if the consistent
sample agencies account for at least 20 percent of total crimes in a given county between 2011
and 2013.34 Following the FBI, we sometimes group crimes into the categories of violent crimes
and property crimes. Violent crimes include murder, rape, aggravated assault, and robbery, while
property crimes include burglary, larceny, and motor-vehicle theft.

4.1.4      Public Finance

Data on local government spending and revenues come from the Census of Governments conducted
every 5 years (years ending in 2 and 7) by the US Census Bureau (US Census Bureau (2014b)).
We aggregate direct expenditures and revenues to the county level by summing the values for all
local governments within the county. These outcomes are inflation adjusted using the same CPI as
  30
     The Census Bureau suppresses data for many counties in the 1-year and 3-year ACS releases. Data from very
few counties are suppressed in the 5-year ACS estimates.
  31
     Some federal grants are conditioned on reporting UCR data, so there is an incentive to report.
  32
     Some agencies report crime for only a few months in some years, while others report 0 crime in some years
despite covering a large population and reporting high levels of crime in other years, while still others report some
crime types but not others. We discuss how we handle these and other misreporting or insufficient reporting in the
appendix.
  33
     To avoid throwing out data from agencies that report crime in all years except for one or two, we interpolate
each crime type for an agency in year t if the agency reports the given crime type in year t + 1 and t − 1 and the
crime type is missing for the agency for no more than three years from 1990 to 2013. The consistent sample is then
agencies for which we have either a reported or an interpolated crime value for each crime type in every year from
1992 to 2013.
  34
     Unfortunately, a few counties do not have any agencies that report crimes in most years, and consequently our
sample size is smaller for crime than our other outcome variables, containing 56 Rystad top-quartile counties and
340 total counties, compared to 65 Rystad top-quartile counties and 405 total counties in the full sample.


                                                         13
above. We supplement these data using school district-level enrollment data from the Common Core
(National Center for Education Statistics (2015)), which allow us to create measures of spending per
pupil. Specifically, for all counties in which every school district reports enrollment data in 1997,
2002, and 201235 we total county-level primary and secondary enrollment and divide elementary
and secondary direct expenditures from the Census of Governments by this enrollment number to
compute spending per pupil.


4.2     Summary Statistics
Column (1) of Table 2 reports on the county-level means of key variables. Panel A reports on the
values of these variables in 2000, which predates the widespread development of fracing shale plays
with horizontal wells in all areas of the US, while Panel B reports on the change between 2000 and
1990. The entries in the first column are intended to provide a sense of the economic magnitude
of the differences in means between pairs of counties that are reported in the remaining columns.
These comparisons provide an opportunity to gauge the credibility of the paper’s quasi-experimental
research design, as well as alternative potential designs. Because the crime data have many more
missing observations than the data for the other variables, we perform this exercise separately for
the crime and non-crime variables. We first discuss the non-crime variables and then the crime
variables.
    Column (2) compares counties over shale basins with counties across the remainder of the United
States and finds that there are important differences between these two sets of counties. Counties
within a shale basin have worse economic outcomes; for example, per capita income in 2000 is
almost 30 percent (0.279 natural log points) lower in these counties. Indeed, 9 of the 10 reported
variables are statistically (and economically) different between the two sets of counties. This is
summarized by the p-value of 0.00 associated with the F-test for the hypothesis that the differences
in the 10 variables are jointly equal to zero. Panel B reveals that shale basin counties were growing
more slowly than the rest of the country from 1990 to 2000; just as in Panel A, 9 of the 10 variables
would be judged to be statistically different across the two sets of counties by conventional criteria.
Overall, the results in column (2) cast doubt on the validity of a difference-in-difference specification
that is based on comparing shale basin counties with the rest of the United States which has become
a prevalent identification strategy in the literature.
    Column (3) explores the validity of an alternative identification strategy that compares counties
in shale plays versus the remaining counties in the same shale basin but not necessarily in the same
shale play.36 (Recall that basins are larger than plays in general.) The differences in income levels
  35
     We don’t use 2007 data because we estimate long-difference models of the change in public finance outcomes
between 2002 and 2012. We include 1997 data because, in Appendix Table 12, we also report the robustness of our
results to estimating long-difference models of the change between 1997 and 2012.
  36
     The entries report the results from regressions of the variable in the row against an indicator for whether the



                                                        14
and income changes are even larger than in column (2), and across the 10 variables there are again
statistically and economically large differences between these other two sets of counties. The entries
suggest that this comparison is also unlikely to be the basis for a credible quasi-experiment.
    In contrast, the entries in column (4) support the validity of this paper’s identification strategy
that relies on comparing changes in counties within a play that have a Rystad prospectivity measure
in the top quartile to the other counties within the same play.37 A comparison of pre-treatment
levels and trends finds little evidence of differences in these two categories of counties. For example,
the large differences in levels and trends of housing values and per capita income in columns (2) and
(3) are not evident, either statistically or economically, in these two sets of counties. More broadly,
the null of equality of the reported variables cannot be rejected in either levels or trends.38
    The last two columns compare top-quartile counties and non-top quartile counties to their
p-score matching counterparts. Column (5) shows that the p-score technique performs well for top-
quartile counties in terms of statistical significance. However, a number of the differences are large
in magnitude. Column (6) matches quartiles 1 through 3. Here, the matching perform significantly
worse; all but hydrocarbon production are statistically different across the two groups.
    Turning to the crime variables and pre-trends in Panels A2 and B2, we can see in column (2)
that there are large differences in levels of crime, but only small differences in trends, in counties
within shale basins compared to the rest of the US. In particular, counties within shale basins have
lower levels of violent and property crime. Column (3) shows that comparing counties within shale
plays to other counties within the same shale basin reduces the magnitude of the difference between
crime levels in Panel A2 markedly, but actually increases the magnitude of the differences in crime
trends. Column (4) shows that when comparing Rystad top-quartile counties to other counties
within the same shale play, we cannot reject the joint null that property and violent crime do not
differ between top-quartile and other shale play counties in either levels or trends. However, it
must be noted that the estimated difference in trends for property crime is statistically significant.
Furthermore, for both trend variables, our point estimates are large and positive, and the standard
errors are extremely large, meaning that we cannot rule out quite large pre-trends in crime in
county is in a shale play, an indicator for whether a county is in a shale play interacted for an indicator for whether
the shale play is in the balanced sample of shale plays, and basin fixed effects on the subset of counties in shale
basins. The coefficient and standard error associated with the shale play indicator are reported in the table and are
based on the balanced sample of counties.
  37
     The entries report the results from regressions of the variable in the row against an indicator for whether the
county has landmass with a top-quartile Rystad prospectivity score, this Rystad top quartile indicator interacted
with an indictor for whether the shale play that lays under the county is in the balanced sample of shale plays,
and play fixed effects on the subset of counties in plays. The coefficient and standard error associated with the
top-quartile indicator are reported in the table and are based on the balanced sample of counties.
  38
     Interestingly, one of the few variables that remains different in levels across all columns is total hydrocarbon
production. This is not too surprising because shale formations were often source or seal rocks for conventional
hydrocarbon production. Consequently, some locations with high potential for fracing also had high potential for
earlier, conventional production. Reassuringly, these differences are dramatically reduced when we look at trends in
hydrocarbon production, which are not economically or statistically significantly different between top quartile and
other counties within shale plays.


                                                          15
top-quartile counties. Consequently, our crime results must be interpreted cautiously.
      Although the column (4) results fail to undermine the validity of contrasting these two sets
of counties, all reported specifications will control for all permanent differences between them.
Further, we will also report on some specifications that adjust for county-specific time trends. The
next section discusses the estimation details.
      Finally, we turn to the matching comparisons. Each of the shale play county groups exhibit
statistically significantly lower crime rates compared to their p-score matching counterparts. In
terms of pre-trends, the comparison of top-quartile counties performs somewhat well, although the
F-statistic is significant at conventional levels. As with levels, the non-top quartile counties are
significantly different from their p-score matching control group. These findings suggest that the
pscore-matching procedure is not successful in generating an adequate match for counties exposed
to fracing.


5       Empirical Strategy
This section describes the paper’s two approaches to implementing the research design based on
variation in geology within shale plays and timing in when fracing techniques were adapted to
individual plays. Depending on whether the economic variable of interest is measured annually or
decennially, we estimate difference-in-differences and long-difference specifications.


5.1       Estimation: Time-Series Difference-in-Differences
When annual data are available, we estimate the following equation for outcome variable ycpt , where
the subscripts refer to county (c), shale play (p), and year (t):

                      ycpt =      µpt + γc                                                               (5.1)
                                                                               
                                  +δ 1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c + cpt .


The specification includes year-by-play, µpt , and county fixed effects, γc . The two key covariates
are: 1) 1[Post Fracing]pt , which is an indicator that equals 1 in the year that fracing is initiated
in shale play p and remains 1 for all subsequent years;39 2) 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c is an indicator
for whether the maximum prospectivity value within county c is in the top quartile for counties in
shale play p. The model is fit on the sample of counties that intersect at least one of the 14 US
shale plays listed in Table 1.
      The parameter of interest, δ, is a difference-in-differences estimator of the effect of fracing. It
measures the change in the difference in ycpt between high and low Rystad prospectivity counties
 39
      This variable equals one for all counties that intersect a shale play after its first-frac date.


                                                             16
within shale plays, after fracing was initiated, relative to before its initiation. Two limitations to
this approach are that δ could confound any treatment effect with differential pre-trends in the
Rystad top-quartile counties40 and that it assumes that fracing only affects the level of economic
activity, rather than the growth rate. With respect to the latter issue, the possibility of adjustment
costs, as well as capital and labor frictions, means that the effect of fracing on economic and other
outcomes may evolve over time in ways that a pure mean shift model fails to capture.
       Additionally, we fit event study-style versions of equation (5.1), where the indicator variable,
1[Post Fracing]pt , is replaced by a vector of event year indicators, τpt . Event years are defined
as the calendar year (e.g., 2006) minus the first-frac year in the relevant shale play.                         In the
subsequent analysis, we plot the coefficients associated with the interaction of this vector and
1[Rystad Top Quartile]c ; these coefficients measure the difference in outcomes between top-quartile
and other counties within a play, by event years. These figures provide an opportunity to visually
assess whether differential pre-trends pose a challenge to causal inference and examine the evolution
of the treatment effect over time.
       We also estimate a richer specification that directly confronts these two potential shortcomings
of equation (5.1). Specifically, we estimate:

                  ycpt =      µpt + γc                                                                            (5.2)
                              +β1 (τpt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                              +δ0 (1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                              +δ1 (τpt · 1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c ) + cpt .

This model allows for differential pre-trends in event time for Rystad top-quartile counties, which
are captured by the parameter β1 . Moreover, it allows for a trend break in outcomes, δ1 , as well
as a mean shift, δ0 . Thus, the estimated effect of fracing τ years after the start of fracing is then
δ0 + δ1 × τ . Finally, we will also report on models where we include trends in the calendar year t
that are allowed to vary at the county level.41
       Details about the variance-covariance matrix are also noteworthy. First, several of the outcome
variables, for example mean housing prices, are county-level estimates. Observations on counties
with values estimated on a smaller sample will mechanically have error terms with higher variance.
To account for this heteroskedasticity, we weight the equations for these outcomes with the square
root of the sample size used to compute the value (e.g., the total number of owner occupied housing
  40
     Although we are not able to reject the joint null hypothesis there are no overall differences in pre-trends between
Rystad top-quartile and other counties for all of our outcome variables, a few important outcomes, such as income
and employment, exhibit economically large pre-trends. Allowing for differential pre-trends reduces concerns that
these pre-trends in income and employment are biasing our results.
  41
     The variable τpt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c is collinear with the county-specific time trends, so that variable is
dropped in these specifications.



                                                          17
units for the county-level mean housing price).42 Second, the reported standard errors are clustered
at the county level to allow for arbitrary serial correlation in residuals from the same county. Third,
there may be spatial correlation between the error terms in nearby counties. In the robustness
Tables 4 and A8 we report Conley standard errors in brackets under the first row, which allow for
spatial correlation in the error terms between nearby counties. We discuss these results in more
detail in Section 6.4.
       Finally, it is important to underscore that the variation in the year of development across shale
plays has implications for estimation. In particular, there are differences in the number of pre-
and post-fracing years across shale plays, including some that have none or very few post-fracing
years. To avoid introducing compositional bias in the estimation of the treatment effects, we focus
estimation on a balanced sample throughout the analysis; this sample is restricted to county-year
observations with corresponding event years that range from -11 through 3, 4, or 5 (depending on
the data source), from the 9 shale plays with first-frac dates that occur in 2008 or before. The
subsequent analysis reports both treatment effects that are estimated using all available data and
treatment effects where the sample is restricted to the balanced sample. In the former sample,
the years outside the balanced sample contribute to the identification of the county fixed effects.43
Among these 9 shale plays, there are a total of 65 top-quartile counties and 310 counties outside
the top quartile.44 We report estimates of fracing’s impact on outcomes evaluated 3, 4, or 5 years
(depending on the data source) after fracing’s initiation from this balanced sample.
  42
     The variables for which we implement this weighted least squares approach are: mean housing prices, median
housing prices, mean rents, median rents, mean mobile home rental price, mean mobile home value, salary income
per worker, income-per-capita, median household income, employment-to-population ratio, unemployment rate, sex
by age population shares, manufacturing employment share, and mining employment share.
  43
     The unbalanced sample is comprised of observations from shale plays with first-frac dates after 2008 and obser-
vations from shale plays with first-frac dates before 2009, for the years corresponding to less than -11 or -10 years or
greater than 3, 4, or 5 years (depending on the data source) in event time. In practice, the models are estimated on
the full sample so, for example, the specification corresponding to equation (5.2) takes the following form to ensure
that the treatment effects are identified from the balanced sample only:

               ycpt =    µpt + γc + β1 τ · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c                                                 (5.3)
                         +β2 (1[Unbalanced Sample]ct · τ · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                         +δ0 (1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                         +δ1 (τ · 1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                         +δ2 (1[Unbalanced Sample]ct · 1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                         +δ3 (1[Unbalanced Sample]ct · τ · 1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c )
                         +cpt .

The reported estimate of the treatment effects is then based on δ0 and δ1 .
  44
     For outcomes with annual data, we restrict the sample to counties with non-missing data in all years since 1990
(1992 for the drilling variables). For some variables, this reduces the sample size slightly.




                                                          18
5.2       Estimation: Long-Differences
For a number of outcomes, such as housing values, population, and demographic variables, well-
measured county-year level data are not available nationally. For these outcomes, we turn to the
Decennial Census and the American Community Survey (ACS) to estimate long-difference models
using the pooled 2009 - 2013 ACS as the post-period and 2000 decennial census as the pre-period.45
The long difference specification may be especially appealing in the case of housing prices: as
discussed in Section 3.2.2, asset prices very quickly reflect information about the future, so with
annual housing data assigning a first fracing data after information about fracing potential was
known would lead to an understatement of the effect on housing prices. Consequently, a long-
difference specification, where the first year of the period is before fracing information is available
anywhere in the country and the last year is after our estimated first fracing date for the shale play
in our sample where fracing arrived last, is likely to solve this problem. Our estimating equation is
derived by first differencing equation (5.2), which gives:

           ycp,2013/09 − ycp,2000 = γp + δ(1[Post Fracing]pt · 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c ) + cpt .            (5.4)

The parameter δ is a difference-in-differences mean shift estimate of the effect of fracing and maps
directly to δ in equation (5.2).
       Three details about the long-difference approach are worth noting. First, the below event-study
graphs suggest that fracing increases the growth rate of many economic variables, rather than simply
affecting their levels. Thus, for many economic variables, such as income or total housing units, we
might expect the difference-in-differences estimator to understate the impact of fracing several years
after its initiation. This concern is ameliorated in the case of asset prices, such as house prices, that
may rapidly incorporate the expected future impact of fracing. Second, the long-difference approach
is unable to adjust the estimates for differences in pre-existing trends in outcomes between the top-
quartile and other counties within a play. Third, we expect that the initiation of fracing will affect
the quality of the housing stock, in addition to the price of land, so specifications for prices and
rents adjust for housing characteristics of both rental and owner-occupied housing units. Appendix
Section E.3 describes which housing characteristics we use in more detail.
  45
    For long-difference results using the Census of Governments or the Census of Agriculture, the post-year is 2012
and the pre-year is 2002.




                                                        19
6     Results

6.1       Oil and Natural Gas Production Effects
The analysis begins with Figure 4, which is derived from the event-study regression for the total
value of hydrocarbon production, measured in millions of dollars. There is little evidence of a trend
in hydrocarbon production in advance of the successful application of fracing techniques in the top-
quartile counties, relative to the other counties. Additionally, the figure makes clear that following
the initiation of fracing, the average top-quartile Rystad county experiences a significant gain in
the value of hydrocarbon production, increasing by more than $400 million from year τ = −1 to
year τ = 3.
    Table 3 more parsimoniously summarizes the findings from Figure 4. It reports the results
from three alternative specifications, each building upon the previous specification. The column (1)
specification includes county and year-by-play fixed effects and reports the mean increase in oil and
gas production in the post-fracing years. Column (2) allows for differential pre-fracing event time
trends in top-quartile counties and then includes a term to test whether these potentially differential
top-quartile trends change after fracing is initiated. Column (3) makes two changes, relative to
Column (2); it restricts the data file to the balanced sample described above and replaces the top-
quartile, pre-fracing event time trend variable with county-specific calendar time trend variables.
The bottom of the table reports the estimated treatment effect from each of these models three
years after fracing begins.
    It is apparent that the initiation of fracing led to substantial increases in hydrocarbon production
in top-quartile Rystad counties. The column (1) estimate that does not allow for a trend break
suggests that fracing increases the value of production by about $242 million per year in top-quartile
counties. Columns (2) and (3) confirm the visual impression that the change in hydrocarbon
production is better characterized by a specification that allows for a trend break, rather than
only a mean shift; these specifications suggest that hydrocarbon production was about $410 million
higher in each county three years after the initiation of fracing in top-quartile counties. To put
this estimated effect into context, the median population in top-quartile counties prior to fracing
activity is about 22,000, indicating an increase of hydrocarbon production of roughly $19,000 per
capita.


6.2       Labor Market and Amenity Effects
Figures 5 and G.4 are event study plots of county-level natural log of total employment and total
income for Rystad top-quartile counties, respectively, after adjustment for county and play-by-
year fixed effects. Both total employment and total income increase substantially in top-quartile
counties following fracing’s initiation. Additionally, there is evidence of positive pre-trends for both


                                                  20
outcomes, especially for income. These graphs suggest that the more reliable specifications for these
outcomes will allow for differential pre-trends and a trend break post-initiation of fracing.
       Table 4 reports the results of estimating the same three specifications used in Table 3 for a
series of measures of local economic activity and population flows. For reasons of brevity, the table
only reports the estimated treatment effect 4 years after the initiation of fracing, rather than the
fuller set of individual regression parameters reported in Table 3. Panels A and B are derived from
the REIS data file and report on total employment, total income, and income subcategories, while
Panel C uses the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) county-county migration flows data.46
       Panels A and B indicate that Rystad top-quartile counties experience sharp improvements in
economic activity after the initiation of fracing, relative to other counties in the same play. In the
more reliable specifications presented in columns (2) and (3) specifications, the estimates indicate
increases in employment of about 4.9 - 5.4 percent. The income results reveal gains of 4.4 - 6.9
percent that are driven by increases in wages/salaries and rents/dividends (this includes royalty
payments from natural resource extraction). The migration results in Panel C are not stable across
specification but qualitatively point to modest increases in net migration.
       Table 5 reports on tests of the robustness of these results by fitting the long difference-in-
differences specification with data from the 2009-2013 American Community Survey and 2000 Cen-
sus of Population and Housing. This specification is most comparable to the column (1) specification
in Table 4, because it is not possible to adjust for differential pre-trends with just two years of data
per county. However, the qualitative conclusions about economic activity are unchanged from the
trend-break specification described above, as the estimates in Panels A and B suggest a 4.8 percent
increase in employment, 2.6 percentage point gain in the employment to population ratio, 0.6 per-
centage point decline in the unemployment rate, and 5.8 percent rise in mean household income.47
Finally, Panel C indicates that there was 2.7 percent increase in population although this is only
statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
       We next turn to the QCEW data to obtain a more nuanced picture of the changes in the local
labor market. Figure 6 plots the implied treatment effect four years after fracing begins in Rystad
top-quartile counties, along with 95-percent confidence intervals. Across all industries, the estimates
indicate that employment increases by an average of roughly 10 percent and this would be judged to
be statistically significant by conventional criteria. This is larger than the 4 - 5 percent increase in
employment in Tables 4 and 5, but the QCEW assigns employment to a county based on the place
of work, not the place of residence as is the case for the data files used in Tables 4 and 5.48 Natural
resources and mining is the industry with the largest increase in employment, more than 40 percent.
  46
     The IRS data track county-to-county migration flows using the addresses of income tax filers.
  47
     The estimate for median household income is an increase of 6.0 percent with a standard error of 1.2 percent.
  48
     Furthermore, we use QCEW data through 2013, whereas we only use REIS data through 2012, which one might
also expect to decrease the estimated employment effect using REIS data if the effect of fracing on employment is
increasing over time.


                                                       21
There are also statistically significant increases in employment in construction and transportation.
No industry has a decline that would be judged to be statistically significant.49
       Hydraulic fracturing is also likely to lead to changes in the composition of the workforce and
population, because many of the jobs associated with fracing are held by men in their 20s and
30s. The increase in demand for these workers may lead to in-migration of young males, but
could also lead to out-migration of other age groups and women. Appendix Table 3 explores
how the population’s demographics change. While many of the estimates are imprecise, we find
some evidence of an increase in the share of prime-age males and a decrease in the non-working
aged population (both young and old). The Panel C results indicate that there is an increase in
the share of people with college degrees, perhaps underscoring the sophistication of these drilling
operations.
       There is a close connection between the labor market and criminal activity and there have
been several media reports suggesting that fracing is associated with increases in crime rates.50
Furthermore, as we see in Appendix Table 3, fracing is associated with increases in the population
share of prime age males, which some evidence suggests may result in higher crime rates (for
example, see Edlund et al. (2013)). We investigate this possibility with the FBI Uniform Crime
Reporting program data, which is the most comprehensive, standardized data available on crime
rates. Figure G.5 shows the event-study plot for log violent crime. The estimates are imprecise,
but are suggestive of an increase in violent crime. Panels A, B, and C of Table 6 report the results
of the same three specifications used in Tables 3 and 4 for log total-crime, log violent crime, and
log property crime respectively. Consistent with Figure G.5, the estimates for violent crime are
positive across all three geological-based specifications, but imprecise.
       Finally, we note that we attempted to measure whether air quality in top-quartile counties was
affected by fracing-related activity. The EPA air pollution monitoring network is sparse in the
countries covered by shale plays and it was not possible to develop reliable estimates. Even when
using the air quality measure with the broadest coverage,51 only 13 of 65 top quartile counties and
66 of 370 shale play counties have non-missing data in all years between 2000 to 2011.
  49
     Interestingly, despite the large estimated increase in wage and salary income in Table 4, which we would ex-
pect would make manufacturing firms less competitive in fracing counties, the estimated change in manufacturing
employment is very small. There are a few possible explanations for this finding. One is that, given capital adjust-
ments costs and other frictions, any effect on manufacturing may appear only a number of years after fracing starts.
Alternatively, lower natural gas prices may help keep local manufacturers competitive despite the rise in wages.
Fetzer (2015) proposes this channel and finds evidence consistent with lower natural gas prices being an important
mechanism in keeping manufacturing in fracing counties.
  50
     http://geology.com/articles/oil-fields-from-space/.
  51
     Average Total Suspended Particulate Matter (TSP), imputed using PM10 or PM2.5 when TSP is not available.




                                                        22
6.3       Local Public Finance
The influx of hydraulic fracturing may also lead to changes in the composition and levels of lo-
cal government’s public finances, specifically revenues and expenditures, in ways that affect public
well-being. Table 7 reports the estimated treatment effects for local government expenditures and
revenues, based on the fitting of equation 5.2. The estimates suggest that fracing is largely budget
neutral; county-wide local government expenditures increase by 12.9 percent, while revenues increase
by 15.5 percent. The specific sources of the increases in expenditures and revenues follow intuitive
patterns. We estimate that public safety expenditures increase by about 20 percent, infrastructure
and utility expenditures went up by roughly 24 percent, and welfare and hospital expenditures in-
creased by about 24 percent, too (although this increase would not be judged statistically significant
by conventional criteria). Interestingly, we only find a small, and noisily estimated, 2.5 percent in-
crease in education expenditures. Looking at Panel D, which reports the change in log elementary
and secondary education per pupil, we see that spending per pupil is virtually unchanged. The
increase in total revenues is largely a result of increases in property tax revenues of 13 percent and
other revenues of 26 percent. Panel C reveals that the overall financial position (i.e., debt minus
cash and securities as a percentage of annual revenue) of local governments in top-quartile counties
is essentially unchanged.52
       Overall, the Table 7 results indicate that fracing leads to important changes in the character of
local governments. Most obviously, these governments grow in size as the local economies grow. On
the spending side, many of the new public resources are devoted to infrastructure investments with
much of this spending likely aimed at accommodating and/or supporting the new economic activity.
The increase in expenditures on public safety is telling and underscores that a full accounting of
the impact on crime must include this additional effort to prevent crime. Put another way, the full
effect of fracing on crime includes both the potential increase in criminal activity described above
and the increase in resources devoted to preventing crime.53 A topic of considerable interest is
whether public education spending is affected and the available evidence suggests that the rise in
local revenues does not lead to higher per pupil school spending. Finally, it is noteworthy that the
net financial position of governments in top-quartile counties appears unchanged.54
  52
     Appendix Table 12 reports long difference results using 1997 as the base-year instead of 2002 (our first-frac date
for the Barnett is in late 2001, so in theory the 2002 local public finance outcomes could already have incorporated
some of the effect of fracing). The results for local government spending and revenues are qualitatively unchanged
when using 1997 as the pre-year instead of 2002. Appendix Table 11 reports on the impacts of fracing on local
government employment and payroll.
  53
     This is analogous to Deschenes et al. (2012) which demonstrates that the full welfare effects of a reduction in air
pollution include changes in health outcomes and expenditures on medicines that protect individuals’ health from
exposure to air pollution.
  54
     This is consistent with recent case-study evidence from Newell and Raimi (2015), although they find important
heterogeneity across municipalities.




                                                          23
6.4       Robustness
We gauge the robustness of the results to alternative definitions of fracing exposure and approaches
to controlling for local economic shocks. Panels A and B of Table 4 and Panel B of Appendix Table
8 report on these exercises for hydrocarbon production, employment, and income, respectively.
Column (1) reports the results from fitting specifications that were used in column (2) of Tables
3 and 4. Column (2) adds state-by-year fixed effects to the column (1) specification. Column (3)
returns to the specification in column (1), but here the balanced sample is defined to include shale
plays that have at least two years of post data for all outcome variables (rather than three years)
although the treatment effect is still reported at τ = 3. In practice, this allows the Eagle Ford shale
play to contribute to the reported treatment effects. All three columns use the same sample used
throughout the paper.
       The entries in the rows of each Panel report on alternative definitions of counties that are highly
amenable to fracing. The first row repeats the definition that we have utilized throughout the
paper. That is, a county must have some land area with a Rystad prospectivity score that is in the
top quartile for its shale play. For the entries in this row, we report standard errors clustered at the
county-level (in parentheses) as is done throughout the rest of the paper and standard errors that
allow for spatial correlation (in square brackets) in the error terms (Conley (1999)).55 The next two
rows alter the definition so that it is based on land area with a Rystad score in the top tercile and
quartile, respectively. Rows 4-6 base the definition on the mean value of the Rystad prospectivity
score across all of a county’s land area, using the top quartile, tercile, and octile, respectively.
       The Panel A results suggest that the conclusions about the effect of fracing on hydrocarbon
production are qualitatively unchanged by these alternative approaches. It is reassuring that the
estimated effect is increasing in the stringency of the indicator definition for fracing amenability in
the cases of both the maximum- and mean-based definitions. Further, the estimates are larger for
the maximum-based definition. The standard errors tend to be larger with the Conley assumptions
about the variance-covariance matrix, but these assumptions do not appreciably affect the statistical
significance of the results. Additionally, the estimates are essentially unchanged by replacing the
play-year fixed effects with the state by year ones. Finally, it is noteworthy that the estimated
effects in column (3) are modestly larger, reflecting the Eagle Ford’s boom in petroleum production
since 2009.
       The results in Panel B broadly support the conclusions from the preferred results in Table 4.
They are qualitatively unchanged by the use of state by year fixed effects or allowing the Eagle
Ford to influence the estimated treatment effect. When the maximum Rystad prospectivity score is
  55
     To implement Conley standard errors, we use code from Hsiang (2010). We compute the centroids of counties
using GIS software and allow for spatial correlation between counties whose centroids fall within 200 km of a given
county. Nearby counties are uniformly weighted until the cutoff distance is reached. These standard errors also allow
for serial correlation in the error terms of a given county.



                                                         24
used, fracing is estimated to increase total income by 6 - 9 percent and the effect would be judged
statistically significant by conventional criteria in 7 of the 9 specifications. When the mean Rystad
prospectivity score is used, the estimated effects tend to be smaller and statistically insignificant,
although the 95 percent confidence intervals overlap the analogous intervals associated with the
maximum based variables.56 Panel B of Appendix Table 8 reveals that the employment-based
results have the same pattern in that the estimated effects tend to be larger with the maximum-
based definitions of a county’s suitability for fracing. The broader lesson here seems to be that even
within shale plays, the economic benefits of fracing are concentrated in the subset of counties that
are most suitable for drilling, although the imprecision of the estimates makes definitive conclusions
unwarranted.57
       An issue that is related to the question of the robustness of the estimated treatment effects is the
degree of spillovers between top-quartile counties and other counties in the same play. The full local
effects of fracing include these spillovers, which may involve individuals living in a non-top-quartile
county but working in one and the resulting knock-on effects in their home county. If there are
fixed local costs of drilling, neighboring counties might also experience increases in hydrocarbon
production; for example, it is costly to move rigs and other infrastructure long distances.
       While these effects are likely real and cause the paper’s estimates to understate the full local eco-
nomic benefits, our identification strategy is not well suited to measure them. The ideal experiment
would provide random variation in the suitability of fracing in adjoining, either geographically or
economically, counties. Since our empirical approach rests on comparing different sets of counties,
both of which sit atop the same shale formation, this violates the ideal.


6.5       Heterogeneity Across Shale Plays
Our empirical design also allows us to estimate play-specific effects from fracing. We report on the
9 shale plays included in the pooled results. Additionally, we also include the Eagle Ford shale play
although fracing began there in 2009 which is beyond the cutoff for our pooled results; however,
the Eagle Ford, located in the southern part of Texas, has attracted a lot of attention.
       The 10 event study plots for hydrocarbon production (Figure G.7) suggest that in 9 of the shale
plays, hydrocarbon production in top-quartile counties prior to fracing was largely flat and then
took off after the commencement of fracing. The lone exception is the Woodford Anadarko play,
which for largely idiosyncratic reasons experienced an increase in production in advance of fracing
and decline afterwards.58
  56
     Panel A of Appendix Table 8 reports estimates from the same specifications for total wage and salary income
and also suggests that the results for this outcome are robust.
  57
     The number of top-quartile counties with the maximum- and mean-based definitions are 65 and 75, respectively.
The analogous numbers of counties for the octile variables are 32 and 39, and 88 and 102 for the tercile ones.
  58
     Two factors explain the patterns in the Woodford Anadarko. First, there is only one top-quartile county in the
Anadarko play. Therefore, we are essentially measuring how this county compares to the rest of the play. Conse-


                                                        25
    Table 9 reports the econometric results across the ten shale plays. Here, we focus on three
outcomes: hydrocarbon production, wage and salary income, and housing prices.59 Column (1)
reproduces the overall estimate for the relevant outcome from previous tables. The play-specific
estimates are in columns (2) through (10) and the Eagle Ford estimates are in column (12). Column
(11) reports the F-statistic and associated p-value from a test that the 9 shale estimates in columns
(2) through (10) are equal. The Eagle Ford is not included in the F-test or in the overall estimates
for Column (1). Although it is demanding to estimate shale-specific treatment effects, this exercise
is still able to produce results with substantial empirical content.
    As suggested by the event study graphs, we estimate large increases in hydrocarbon production
in 9 of the 10 plays; the estimates are statistically significant in 6 of the 9. Similarly, we estimate
sizable increases in income per household in 7 of 10 plays; the estimates would be judged statistically
significant by conventional criteria for 4 of the 7. In contrast, the gains in housing prices appear to be
concentrated in two of the 10 plays. Specifically, the house price gains in the Bakken and Marcellus
shale plays—the two shale plays that have generally received the most media attention—are 23
percent and 9 percent, respectively.
    It is noteworthy that we can reject the null of equal effects for all three outcome variables. With
only 10 observations, it is difficult to make precise statements about the sources of the observed
heterogeneity. However, we note that the estimated effects on income are (weakly) positively cor-
related with the hydrocarbon effect (0.11), positively correlated with the share of oil production
(0.49), and negatively correlated with pre-fracing population (-0.30).60 That is, places with large
changes in hydrocarbon and small baseline populations experience larger labor demand shifts and
have fewer workers in other sectors who can switch into oil and gas production, increasing the
impacts on incomes. It is not surprising that the results are imprecise for higher population plays,
because there is less statistical power to detect reasonable effect sizes for aggregate outcomes in
these areas; further, it seems reasonable to expect smaller effect sizes in heavily populated areas
with larger economies..
quently, even if top-quartile counties are expected to have much more fracing than others, with only one draw there
is a non-trivial probability that the top-quartile county will not have higher hydrocarbon production. Second, the
Anadarko play had considerable conventional drilling activity prior to hydraulic fracturing. Therefore, our estimation
conflates the decline in conventional production and the increase in fracing, possibly beginning as a response to the
reduction in conventional production. See, for example, http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/volume-93/issue-
10/in-this-issue/exploration/partial-us-oil-gas-resource-volumes-termed-39astonishing39.html.
   59
      Given the substantial heterogeneity suggested by these results, it is also interesting to explore whether this
heterogeneity extends to other outcomes. Appendix Table 5 reports play-specific results for a broad set of additional
hydrocarbon, labor market, quality of life, and housing variables. The results also show substantial heterogeneity on
these dimensions, and like our other results, suggest that the effects of fracing on the Bakken have been much larger
than the effects on other plays.
   60
      The estimated housing price effects also show this pattern, although the correlations are weaker—0.06 for hy-
drocarbon production and -0.18 for population.




                                                         26
7        Interpretation and Local Welfare Consequences of Frac-
         ing
What are the net local welfare consequences of fracing? To this point, the paper has reported on
a wide range of outcomes with some indicating that, on average, Rystad top-quartile counties have
benefited from the initiation of fracing, while others reveal less positive impacts. Guided by the
conceptual framework outlined in Section 2, this section develops measures of willingness to pay for
the change in local amenities and for the net local welfare consequences of the initiation of fracing
based on estimated changes in housing prices and rents, income, and population. The section begins
with an examination of the impacts of fracing’s initiation on housing markets, which is a key input
into both willingness to pay expressions.


7.1       Housing Price and Quantity Estimates
Panel A of Table 8 reports on the impact of fracing’s initiation in Rystad top-quartile counties from
the estimation of the long difference-in-differences specification detailed in equation (5.4). The
estimates indicate that median and mean housing values for owner-occupied homes increased by 5.7
percent due to fracing. Further, the median price of mobile homes increased by almost 8 percent.
Panel B indicates that rental prices for renter-occupied units increased by 2 to 3 percent.61
       Returning to Appendix Table 4, Panel C explores the robustness of the estimated effect on log
median housing values. The estimates are generally unchanged by the use of alternative Rystad
measures (e.g., quartile versus octile and maximum versus mean). The models that add state-by-
year fixed effects in column (2) tend to produce smaller point estimates, although the 95 percent
confidence intervals of these estimates overlap with those in column (1).62 In total, 17 of the 18
estimates fall in a range of roughly 2 percent to 6 percent and 15 of those 17 estimates would be
judged to be statistically significant by conventional criteria. Allowing for spatial correlation, which
is done in brackets below row 1, roughly doubles the standard errors, but the estimates in columns
(1) and (3) still remain significant at a 95 percent level. Overall, we conclude that the initiation
of fracing led to meaningful increases in housing prices in counties especially amenable to fracing,
relative to other counties in the same shale play.
  61
     Appendix Table 9 demonstrates that the housing price results are robust to including vacant homes and rentals
in the calculation of mean home values and mean rents.
  62
     Given that adding state fixed effects tends to reduce the estimated effect of fracing on housing prices, we explore
how adding state fixed effects influences the play-specific results in Appendix Table 7. This table shows that adding
state fixed effects does not dramatically influence many of the point estimates. The most notable change is that the
estimate of the impact of fracing on housing prices for the Marcellus is reduced from roughly 9 percent to about 6
percent. It is perhaps not too surprising that the Marcellus estimates are influenced more than the estimates for
other plays because the Marcellus overlaps 5 states in our sample. The only other play-specific estimate that changes
markedly is the Haynesville estimate, which changes from a 7 percent estimated reduction in house prices to a 12
percent reduction. The Haynesville is roughly half in Texas and half in Louisiana, so it is also not surprising that
adding state fixed effects influences the Haynesville results.

                                                          27
       It is noteworthy that there is an extensive literature documenting the capitalization of various
amenities into local housing prices and that 5.7 percent is a large effect for a county-level one.63 For
example, Chay and Greenstone (2005) find that the dramatic air quality improvements induced by
the implementation of the Clean Air Act increased housing prices by just 2.5 percent in counties
that faced strict regulation. Further, Currie et al. (2010) find that school facility investments lead
to 4.2-8.6 percent increases in house prices but over the smaller geographic unit of school districts.
While Currie et al. (2015) find that the opening of an industrial plant leads to 11 percent declines
in housing prices, this effect is limited to houses within 0.5 miles of the plant.
       Returning to Table 8, Panel C examines the impact on housing supply and land use. Contrary
to the conventional wisdom, the data do not reveal a substantial increase in the number of housing
units or even mobile homes. The point estimate for acres of agricultural land is large and negative,
suggesting that some of this land is converted to residential usages; however, its associated t-statistic
is less than 1.64 It is noteworthy, however, that the vacancy rate for housing units declined by 1.0
percentage point.
       A shortcoming of the housing supply data is that the end of period data is an average calculated
from 2009-2013, and this includes several years where fracing was only in its early stages for multiple
shale plays. As a complement and means to peek further into the future, Appendix Figure G.6 is
an event study graph that examines the impact of the initiation of fracing in Rystad top-quartile
counties on the number of housing unit construction permits issued. The figure suggests that
there has been an increase in permits with the introduction of fracing but this increase does not
become apparent until three years after fracing was initiated. The fitting of the column (2) version
of equation (5.2) indicates that five years after fracing’s initiation in these counties, the annual
number of housing unit permits are about 30 percent higher; this is only statistically significant at
the 10 percent level, which is not surprising in light of the noisiness in the event study figure (Panel
C of Appendix Table 2).


7.2        Local Welfare Estimates
While there is little question that fracing increases local productivity, a central question in the
debate about fracing is the magnitude of its negative aspects or its net impact on local amenities,
and how large these negative aspects are relative to the increases in local income. With some
assumptions, it is possible to develop a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the total local welfare
  63
      It seems reasonable to presume that the 5.7 percent average effect obscures important within-county variation
in housing price changes, and indeed this is an important finding in Muehlenbachs et al. (2014b).
   64
      As for local public finance, the Census of Agriculture is reported in every year ending in 7 or 2. Consequently, it
is unclear whether 2002 or 1997 is the best base year for the Barnett play because our first-frac date for the Barnett
is in late 2001. In Appendix Table 13 we report specifications where we replace 2002 with 1997 as the base year.
The point estimate for the effect of fracing on agricultural land quantities becomes 0.067 and is, again, imprecisely
estimated. The sensitivity of the agricultural land results suggest that they must be interpreted with caution.



                                                           28
change caused by fracing, as well as the willingness-to-pay for the change in amenities. We use
the local labor market model in developed in Section 2 above, that relaxes the assumptions of the
canonical Roback (1982) to derive both estimates of the WTP for an amenity change and the total
change in welfare. As we noted above, the intuition behind this approach comes from the fact
that, in spatial equilibrium, the marginal resident must be indifferent to relocating, which means
that local housing prices will respond to changes in local wages. The strength of this response will
depend on both the elasticity of local housing supply and moving costs. Using estimates from the
literature on the relationship between pure productivity shocks and house prices, we can then back
out the change in local amenities and use these estimates to infer the total change in local welfare.
       Specifically from Equation 2.1, WTP for the change in amenities can be expressed as:

                              \
                             α∆ ln Aat =          ln Nat − (∆
                                                s∆\         \ ln wat − β ∆
                                                                         \ ln rat ),                               (7.1)

where ∆ ln N is the change in local population and s is the standard deviation of idiosyncratic
location preferences or moving costs and the term in parentheses is the change in real income,
which is measured as the difference between the change in wage and salary income per household,
∆ ln w , and the product of the share of locally produced goods in the consumption basket, β, and
the change in housing prices or rents (a proxy for a price index for local goods), ∆ ln r.65 Thus,
WTP for the change in amenities, expressed as a percentage of income, is equal to the difference
between the change in population, adjusted for the magnitude of moving costs, and the change in
real wages. With the estimated WTP for the change in amenities, it is straightforward to develop
an estimate for the WTP for allowing fracing (i.e., the net welfare change for original residents) by
using 2.2, which also incorporates income from lease payments received by households.
       Before proceeding, we further explore the expression for willingness to pay for amenities to
provide further intuition. For example, consider the case where WTP for amenities is zero. Here,
the change in real income is equal to the adjusted change in population. Alternatively, when the
                                                                                                     \
                                                                                                     ∆ ln wat −β ∆
                                                                                                                 \ ln rat
population change is larger than the change in real income normalized by s, i.e.,                             s
                                                                                                                          ,
then amenities must have risen (fallen); that is, at the margin, people are exchanging reductions in
real incomes for higher amenity levels. Finally, higher values of s mean that location decisions are
less responsive to changes in real wages.
       Table 10 reports empirical estimates of the annual WTP for the change in amenities and annual
WTP for allowing fracing using these equations, the above estimates, and a range of assumptions.
The entries in Panel A report the mean annual WTP measures for original households in top-quartile
  65
    The model discussed above is based on rents. If the housing market is perfectly competitive and the change
                                                                          1
in rents is constant after the introduction of fracing, then ∆ ln pj = 1−β   ∆ ln r and the percentage change in rents
and house prices will be identical. In practice, we do not find an identical increase in house prices and rents. This
result could be due to several factors, including the fact that homeowners receive oil and gas lease royalty payments
while renters do not. Alternatively, the larger increase in house prices could reflect expectations about future growth
associated with fracing.


                                                          29
counties. The entries in Panel B report the present value of WTP for permanently allowing fracing
for original residents in these counties when the estimated annual changes in amenities, income,
housing costs, etc are assumed to be constant and to last forever and a 5 percent discount rate is
assumed. Columns (1) - (2) use the change in rental prices as the measure of the change in housing
costs and columns (3) - (4) use the change in housing prices.
       In both panels, the first row reports on estimates that assume that β = 0.65, the share of
household wage and salary income spent on locally produced goods, following Albouy (2008) and
s = 0.40, the standard deviation of idiosyncratic location preferences or moving costs, which is in
the mid point of the range from 0.27 to 0.57 estimated by Diamond (2016).66 The subsequent rows
in each panel are based on alternative assumptions for β and s, although we believe the first row’s
assumptions are the most defensible. Throughout, we assume a 7.5 percent change in mean wage
and salary income, a 9.3 percent change in interest and dividend income, and a 2.7 percent change
in population (based on the Table 5 results)
       The estimates suggest that the initiation of fracing decreases local amenities. Using the preferred
assumptions, the estimated annual WTP is -$964 per household when the change in housing prices is
used as a proxy for local prices and -$1,582 with the change in rental rates. Alternative assumptions
about β and s do not greatly alter these estimates, supporting the conclusion that local amenities
decline appreciably after fracing’s initiation. If we assume that the decline in amenities is permanent,
then the present value of the decline in local amenities is -$32 billion with housing prices and
-$53 billion with rental rates.67 Finally, we note that, in principle, these estimates captures all
of the changes in positive and negative amenities, including any changes in truck traffic, criminal
activity, noise and air pollution from drilling activity, and household beliefs regarding expected
health impacts.
       The full WTP for allowing fracing accounts for both the decline in amenities and the greater
economic opportunities (i.e., it is the difference between the gross benefits and the gross costs). The
estimates in columns (2) and (4) suggest that the net effect is positive meaning that on average
the benefits exceed the costs. Specifically, we estimate that WTP for allowing fracing equals about
$1,300 to $1,900 per household annually (i.e., 2.5 to 3.7 percent of annual income). If the changes in
amenities and economic opportunities are permanent, Panel B suggests that the increase in welfare
is in the neighborhood of $44 billion to $64 billion in the top quartile Rystad counties. As a basis
of comparison, the estimated welfare gain is $10.4 billion when the canonical Roback model with
its assumptions of inelastic housing supply and zero moving costs is combined with the paper’s
  66
     The 65% share of income spent on housing is significantly higher than the 30-40% usually found in the Consumer-
Expenditure Survey. This difference is driven by two primary factors. First, as mentioned above, the 65% number
incorporates the correlation between local rents and the prices of other locally traded goods, such as retail services,
etc... Second, this 65% is in terms of household wage and salary income rather than total income.
  67
     This calculation uses the 2000 Census population for each county.




                                                          30
estimates.68 It is evident that with both models, and this paper’s empirical estimates that the value
of the greater economic opportunities outweighs the decline in local amenities.
       Are these estimates plausible? Recall that our estimate of the impact of the introduction of
fracing on local hydrocarbon production is roughly $400 million per year, which, if it represented a
permanent change, would have a present discounted value of $8 billion dollars per county. There are
65 top-quartile counties, so the estimated national welfare gain of $44 to $64 billion is approximately
10% of the national increase in hydrocarbon production of $520 billion. Thus, at least with this
basis of comparison, these estimates seem reasonable.
       It is worth underscoring that Table 10 has reported average estimates of WTP and it is unlikely
that all residents are made better off by allowing fracing. For example, individuals who are not in
the labor force will not benefit from the increase in local productivity. Renters who are not in the
labor force are likely to fare especially poorly because they will face higher rents and no change
in income. Additionally, homeowners who do not own the mineral rights to their property will
not benefit from the drilling royalties, but may experience the negative impacts of drilling activity.
The extent of the heterogeneity in the impacts of local productivity shocks and of changes in local
amenities is a promising area for future research that requires more detailed micro data.
       It is possible, however, to explore the heterogeneity in the WTP measures across shale plays. In
Table 9, Panel E, we report the estimated change in WTP for amenities and local welfare separately
by shale play. The estimates are qualitatively consistent across shale plays, with 8 of 10 shale plays
experiencing declines in amenities or quality of life and 7 of 10 benefiting from welfare improvements.
The largest estimated welfare gains are in the Bakken, which has received a lot of attention in the
popular media, the Fayetteville and Marcellus plays.
       It is natural to wonder about the sources of heterogeneity in the welfare impacts across the
plays. Panel A reports the average population in top quartile counties and the share of hydrocarbon
production value that comes from oil as we had ex ante assumed that these two variable would be
important predictors of WTP to allow fracing. Among the three largest gainers one is dominated
by petroleum (Bakken) and the other two (Fayettevile and Marellus) are dominated by natural
gas production, underscoring that there this explanatory variable is imperfect. Besides observable
predictors, it seems plausible that there is heterogeneity across shale plays in moving costs, s and
the share of income spent on housing, β, due to differences in proximity to other labor markets,
demographic composition, or tastes; such heterogeneity would lead to different estimates of the
heterogeneity in the welfare impacts of fracing across shale plays than indicated in Table 9. Overall,
  68
     Using the Roback model, the increase in housing prices of 5.7 percent implies an increase in each county’s welfare
of approximately $160 million on average; this is a total welfare gain of roughly $10.4 billion across the 65 Rystad
top-quartile counties. The reason for this much smaller estimated welfare effect in the canonical Roback model is
that when there are zero-moving costs and inelastic housing supply, large changes in income would cause very large
rises in rents if amenities were unchanged. The fact that there is only a small rise in rents, despite the rise in wage
and salary income, implies that there must have been a large decline in local amenities.



                                                          31
it is apparent that the question of where fracing offers the largest net benefits cannot be answered
decisively with just ten data points.69
       Two final points are noteworthy. First, these revealed preference estimates of WTP to allow
fracing (and for amenity changes) are ultimately determined by households’ knowledge. If new
information causes households to update their estimates of fracing’s environmental and quality of
life impacts, then this paper’s WTP estimates will necessarily change. Second, this paper’s estimates
of WTP to allow fracing only reflect local changes in welfare. The global welfare effects of fracing
include potentially very important consequences for petroleum, natural gas and electricity prices,
local air pollution, global warming, and geopolitics. All of these impacts are outside the scope of
this paper; however, none of them become relevant if local communities do not allow fracing within
their jurisdictions.


8        Conclusions
Using a new identification strategy based on geological variation in shale deposits within shale
plays, we estimate the effects of fracing on local communities. There are four primary findings.
First, counties with high fracing potential produce roughly an additional $400 million of oil and
natural gas annually three years after the discovery of successful fracing techniques, relative to other
counties in the same shale play. Second, these counties experience marked increases in economic
activity with gains in total income (4.4 - 6.9 percent), employment (3.6 - 5.4 percent), and salaries
(7.6 - 13.0 percent). Further, local governments see substantial increases in revenues (15.5 percent)
that are larger than the average increases in expenditures (12.9 percent) though the increased
expenditures seem largely aimed at supporting the new economic activity, with little effect, for
example, on per pupil expenditures in public schools. Third, there is evidence of deterioration in
the quality of life or total amenities, perhaps most notably marginally significant estimates of higher
violent crime rates, despite a 20 percent increase in public safety expenditures. We estimate that
annual willingness-to-pay (WTP) for fracing-induced changes in local amenities are roughly equal
to -$1,000 to -$1,600 per household annually (i.e., -1.9 to -3.1 percent of annual mean household
income). Fourth, we estimate that mean WTP for allowing fracing equals about $1,300 to $1,900
per household annually (2.5 to 3.7 percent of median household income) among original residents
of counties with high fracing potential.
       The discovery of hydraulic fracturing is widely considered the most important change in the
energy sector since the commercialization of nuclear energy in the 1950s. To date, almost all of the
fracing activity has been confined to North America, yet even so it has upended many features of
the global economy, global environment, and international relations. There are substantial shale
  69
    In Appendix Table 6 we report play-specific estimates instead using the change in rents to measure house prices.
This table also reports aggregate affects of fracing on welfare by play.


                                                        32
deposits both in North America and other parts of the world that have not been exploited to date
so there is potential for further change. This paper demonstrates that to date local communi-
ties that have allowed fracing have benefited on average, although there is evidence of important
heterogeneity in the local net benefits.


References
Albouy, D. (2008): “Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across
  Metropolitan Areas,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 14472.

Allcott, H. and D. Keniston (2014): “Dutch Disease or Agglomeration? The Local Economic
  Effects of Natural Resource Booms in Modern America,” Tech. rep., NYU Working Paper.

Baumeister, C. and L. Kilian (2016): “Forty Years of Oil Price Fluctuations: Why the Price
  of Oil May Still Surprise Us,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, 139–60.

Boslett, A., T. Guilfoos, and C. Lang (2015): “Valuation of Expectations: A Hedonic Study
  of Shale Gas Development and New York’s Moratorium,” Working paper, University of Rhode
  Island.

Budzik, P. (2013): “The Application of Hydraulic Fracturing to US and World Shale Gas and
  Tight Oil Deposits,” Tech. rep., American Society of Mechanical Engineers Webinar.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, US Department of Labor (2014): “Quarterly Census of
  Employment and Wages: County High-Level QCEW NAICS-Based Data Files from 1990-2013,”
  Tech. rep.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S Department of Labor (2015): CPI Detailed Report,
  Table 24: Historical Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U): US city average,
  all items.

Cascio, E. U. and A. Narayan (2015): “Who Needs a Fracking Education? The Educational
  Response to Low-Skill Biased Technological Change,” Working paper, Dartmouth College.

Chay, K. Y. and M. Greenstone (2005): “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
  Housing Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 113, pp. 376–424.

Conley, T. (1999): “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of Economet-
  rics, 92, 1–45.

Covert, T., M. Greenstone, and C. R. Knittel (2016): “Will We Ever Stop Using Fossil
  Fuels?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30, 117–38.

                                               33
Covert, T. R. (2014): “Experiential and Social Learning in Firms : The Case of Hydraulic
  Fracturing in the Bakken Shale JOB MARKET PAPER,” 1–43.

Currie, J., L. Davis, M. Greenstone, and R. Walker (2010): “The Value of School Facility
  Investments: Evidence from a Dynamic Regression Discontinuity Design,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 125, 215–261.

——— (2015): “Environmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant
  Openings and Closings,” American Economic Review, 105, 678–709.

Deschenes, O., M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro (2012): “Defensive Investments and
  the Demand for Air Quality: Evidence from the NOx Budget Program and Ozone Reductions,”
  Working Paper 18267, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Diamond, R. (2016): “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’ Diverging
  Location Choices by Skill : 1980-2000,” American Economic Review, 106, 1980–2000.

Drilling Info, Inc (2012): DI Desktop: US Oil and Gas Well Production Data, Used with
  permission.

Edlund, L., H. Li, J. Yi, and J. Zhang (2013): “Sex Ratios and Crime: Evidence from China,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 1520–1534.

Energy Information Agency (2011): Maps: Exploration, Resources, Reserves, and Production.

Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development (2015):
  “Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas on Drinking Water
  Resources Executive Summary,” Tech. Rep. June.

Federal Bureau of Investigation (2015): Uniform Crime Records (UCR).

Fetzer, T. (2015): “Fracking Growth,” Working paper, London School of Economics.

Feyrer, J., E. T. Mansur, and B. Sacerdote (2015): “Geographic Dispersion of Economic
  Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution,” Working Paper 21624, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Gopalakrishnan, S. and H. A. Klaiber (2013): “Is the Shale Energy Boom a Bust for Nearby
  Residents? Evidence from Housing Values in Pennsylvania,” American Journal of Agricultural
  Economics.

Greenstone, M., R. Hornbeck, and E. Moretti (2010): “Identifying Agglomeration
  Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 118, pp. 536–598.

                                              34
Ground Water Protection Council and ALL Consulting (2009): “Modern Shale Gas
  Development in the United States: A Primer,” 116.

Hornbeck, R. and E. Moretti (2015): “Who Benefits From Productivity Growth? The Local
  and Aggregate Impacts of Local TFP Shocks on Wages, Rents, and Inequality,” Tech. rep.

Hsiang, S. (2010): “Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic production
  in the Caribbean and Central America,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107,
  15367–15372.

Imbens, G. and D. Rubin (2015): Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sci-
  ences: An Introduction, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, first ed.

Internal Revenue Service (2015): Statistics on Income Tax Stats - US Population Migration
  Data, Washington, DC: IRS.

Jacobsen, G. D. (2016): “Who Wins in an Energy Boom? Evidence from Wage Rates and
  Housing,” Tech. rep.

Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2015): “People, Places and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare
  Economics of Local Economic Development Programs,” Annual Review of Economics.

Maniloff, P. and R. Mastromonaco (2014): “The Local Economic Impacts of Hydraulic
  Fracturing and Determinants of Dutch Disease,” Tech. rep.

McCarthy, K., K. Rojas, M. Niemann, D. Palmowski, K. Peters, and A. Stankiewicz
  (2011): “Basic Petroleum Geochemistry for Source Rock Evaluation,” Oilfield Review, 23, 32–43.

Minnesota Population Center (2011): National Historical Geographic Information System:
  Version 2.0, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.

Moretti, E. (2011): “Local Labor Markets,” Elsevier, vol. 4B, chap. 14, 1237–1313, 1 ed.

Muehlenbachs, L., E. Spiller, and C. Timmins (2014a): “The Housing Market Impacts of
  Shale Gas Development,” Working Paper 19796, National Bureau of Economic Research.

——— (2014b): “The Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development,” Working Paper 19796,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

National Center for Education Statistics (2015): “Common Core Data: Local Education
  Agency (School District) Universe Survey Data,” Tech. rep.

National Energy Technology Labratory (2013): “Modern Shale Gas Development in the
  United States : An Update,” 1–79.

                                              35
Newell, R. G. and D. Raimi (2015): “Shale Public Finance: Local Government Revenues and
  Costs Associated with Oil and Gas Development,” Working Paper 21542, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Phillips, S. (2014): Pennsylvania Frack Ponds Now Number More than 500.

Roback, J. (1982): “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90,
  pp. 1257–1278.

Rubinstein, J. L. and A. B. Mahani (2015): “Myths and Facts on Wastewater Injection,
  Hydraulic Fracturing, Enhanced Oil Recovery, and Induced Seismicity,” Seismological Research
  Letters, 86, 1060–1067.

Rystad Energy (2014): North American Shale Plays Maps: Q3, 2014, Used with permission:
  http://www.rystadenergy.com/.

Suarez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016): “Who Benefits From State Corporate Tax Cuts
  ? a Local Labor Markets Approach with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review,
  Forthcoming.

US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (2014): Regional Economic Information System:
  Local Area Personal Income and Employment, Washington, DC: BEA.

US Census Bureau (2014a): Building Permits Survey.

——— (2014b): Census of Governments: Finances.

Weber, J. G. (2012): “The effects of a natural gas boom on employment and income in Colorado,
  Texas, and Wyoming,” Energy Economics, 34, 1580–1588.

Weinstein, A. (2014): “Local Labor Market Restructuring in Shale Booms,” Journal of Regional
  Analysis and Policy, 44, 71–92.

Wynveen, B. J. (2011): “A Thematic Analysis of Local Respondents Perceptions of Barnett
  Shale Energy Development,” Journal of Rural Social Sciences, 26, 8–31.

Zagorski, W. A., G. Wrightstone, and D. Bowman (2012): “The Appalachian Basin
  Marcellus Gas Play: Its History of Development, Geologic Controls on Production, and Future
  Potential as a World-class Reservoir,” in Shale reservoirs - Giant resources for the 21st century,
  ed. by J. A. Breyer, no. 97 in AAPG Memoir, 172 – 200.




                                                36
9        Figures

                    Figure 1: Hydrocarbon production from horizontal wells over shale play




                                              3000 2000
                                       Terrawatt Hours
                                     1000     0




                                                          1990        1995              2000              2005           2010
                                                                                         Year

                                                                 Horizontal wells over shale formations          All other wells



 Notes: This figure plots the total energy content of hydrocarbons produced from horizontal wells over shale plays over time. In 1991, there is almost no
production from these wells. However, as a results of the technological innovations in using fracing and horizontal drilling into shale formations, these types
of wells have grown dramatically as a share of US hydrocarbon production, rising to more than a quarter of all US hydrocarbon production by 2011. The
data come from Drilling Info, Inc (2012).




                                                                                        37
                                   Figure 2: Shale basins, plays, and prospectivity scores




 Notes: This figure overlays shale basins, shale plays, and Rystad prspectivity scores over a map of US counties. Shale basins are shown in green, shale plays


                                                                   Basin                             Play
are shown in blue, and Rystad Prospectivity scores are shown in shades of red, with darker red indicating a higher prospectivity score. Shapefiles for US shale
basins and plays comes from the Energy Information Agency (2011), while prospectivity scores were purchased from Rystad Energy (2014).




                                      Figure 3: County prospectivity score classifications




 Notes: This figure shows prospectivity score classifications for counties in the contiguous US. Counties in red are in the top quartile of the Rystad prospectivity
measure, counties in blue are not in the top quartile of Rystad prospectivity but are within a shale play, and counties in green are not in a shale play, but are
in a shale basin.

                                         None                    Basin                    Play                  Top Quartile




                                                                                38
                       Figure 4: Event study analysis of county-level value of hydrocarbons




                                                                               600
                                        Total Production (Millions of Dollars)
                                           0          200     -200 400




                                                                                     -10         -5                0       5
                                                                                                            Year




 Notes: This figure plots results from an event-study analysis of the difference in the county-level value of hydrocarbon production between high-fracing
potential counties and other counties in shale plays before and after fracing began. The reported coefficients come from fitting a modified version of Equation
5.1 where we interact 1[Rystad Top Quartile]c with a vector of event year indicators, τpt . Event years are defined as the calendar year minus the first-frac
year in the relevant shale play. These coefficients measure the difference in outcomes between top-quartile and other counties within a play, by event years.
The model also includes play-year and county fixed effects. All Rystad Top Quartile-event year interactions are interacted with an indicator for being in
the unbalanced sample. The reported coefficients correspond to the balanced sample. Consequently, the results in the figure correspond to shale-plays that
began fracing in or before 2008 and event-years common to all these shale plays (i.e. event-years observed for all shale plays that began fracing in or before
2008). Data on hydrocarbon production from 1992 to 2011 come from Drilling Info, Inc (2012). The shaded blue region shows 95 percent confidence intervals
calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.



                                     Figure 5: Event study analysis of total employment
                                                              .1
                                        Log(Total Employment)
                                           0             .05  -.05




                                                                                           -10        -5               0   5
                                                                                                            Year




 Notes: This figure plots results from an event-study analysis of the difference in log(total employment) between high-fracing potential counties and other
counties in shale plays before and after fracing began. The reported coefficients come from fitting a modified version of Equation 5.1 where we interact
1[Rystad Top Quartile]c with a vector of event year indicators, τpt . Event years are defined as the calendar year minus the first-frac year in the relevant shale
play. These coefficients measure the difference in outcomes between top-quartile and other counties within a play, by event years. The model also includes
play-year and county fixed effects. All Rystad Top Quartile-event year interactions are interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample. The
reported coefficients correspond to the balanced sample. Consequently, the results in the figure correspond to shale-plays that began fracing in or before 2008
and event-years common to all these shale plays (i.e. event-years observed for all shale plays that began fracing in or before 2008). Data on county-level total
employment from 1990 to 2012 come from the Local Area Personal Income (LAPI) data from the Regional Economic and Information Systems (REIS) data
produced by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (2014). Specifically, we use the the variable CA25-10. The shaded blue region shows 95 percent
confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.




                                                                                                           39
                                                                                             Figure 6: Employment effects by industry

                                                                                                                                                    Log(Employment)
                                                                      .6
                                Estimated Treatment Effect at t = 4
                                                                      .4
                                                                      .2
                                                                      0
                                                                      -.2




                                                                                                                                  es




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 es


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es
                                                                                                                                                                                           es




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     es
                                                                                                      g




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       es
                                                                                                                                                                           ity
                                                                                                                                                            es
                                                                                                                                            es




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g
                                                                                        es




                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                                                                         n
                                                                                                   in




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rin
                                                                                                                   io




                                                                                                                                                                                                       io
                                                                                                                                                                          l
                                                                                                                                ic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ic


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tri
                                                                                                                                                                                       tri




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ic
                                                                                                                                                           iti
                                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                                    tri




                                                                                                                                                                       ta
                                                                                                 in


                                                                                                                ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                     at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tu
                                                                                                                             rv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rv
                                                                                                                                                       iv
                                                                                                                                          rv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           us
                                                                                                                                                                                      us




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                us
                                                                                   us




                                                                                                                                                                      pi
                                                                                               M


                                                                                                              ru




                                                                                                                                                                                                  rm
                                                                                                                                                      ct




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ac
                                                                                                                           Se




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Se
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Se
                                                                                                                                       Se




                                                                                                                                                                  os




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                                                                                                 nd




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nd
                                                                               nd




                                                                                                          st
                                                                                             d




                                                                                                                                                  lA




                                                                                                                                                                                                fo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            uf
                                                                                          an


                                                                                                         on




                                                                                                                                                                 H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lI
                                                                                                                                                                                 lI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           lI
                                                                            lI




                                                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                            lth
                                                                                                                                     er




                                                                                                                                                                                             In




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                                                                                 ia
                                                                                                                     tio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Al
                                                                                                                                                                            Al




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Al
                                                                          Al




                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                      C




                                                                                                                                  th




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                        es




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ea
                                                                                                                                               nc


                                                                                                                                                            an




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                   rta



                                                                                                                                 O




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t,
                                                                                                                                                                           t,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 si
                                                                                    rc




                                                                                                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                                                            na




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               en
                                                                                                                                                                       en




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 en
                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                po




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bu
                                                                                   ou




                                                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                                                                      ur
                                                                                                                                          Fi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nm
                                                                                                                                                                      nm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nm
                                                                                                                                                                                                  an
                                                                                                           ns
                                                                               es




                                                                                                                                                      is




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nd
                                                                                                                                                 Le
                                                                                                            a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          er
                                                                                                                                                                  er




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            er
                                                                               R




                                                                                                                                                                                                n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         la
                                                                                                         Tr




                                                                                                                                                                                             io




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ov
                                                                                                                                                                 ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ov
                                                                          al




                                                                                                                                                                                           at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      na
                                                                                                      d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     lG
                                                                                                                                                            lG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                          ur




                                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                                                                                        uc




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                      at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  si


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ra
                                                                                                                                                       ca




                                                                                                                                                                                      Ed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  at
                                                                      N




                                                                                                 e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                es


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                de
                                                                                               ad




                                                                                                                                                      Lo




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  St


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              of


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fe
                                                                                             Tr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pr




                                                                                                                                                                           Industry


Notes: This figure plots estimates of the effect of fracing on employment by industry five years after the start of fracing. Each bar reports results of fitting
Equation 5.2 for the given industry, which corresponds to Column (2) in the tables. Equation 5.2 allows for differential pre-trends in event time, as well as
a trend break in outcomes and a mean shift for Rystad top-quartile counties. The model also includes play-year and county fixed effects. All Rystad Top
Quartile variables are interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample. The reported estimates correspond to the balanced sample. Data on
employment by industry from 1990 to 2013 come from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
US Department of Labor (2014). Counties are included in the sample if the given employment variable is non-missing in all years from 1990-2013. Red bars
report 95 percent confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the county level.




                                                                                                                                                                           40
10       Tables

                             Table 1: Treatment and control counties by shale basin

             Shale Play                              Shale Basin                    Play First          Top Quartile            Outside Top
                                                                                    Frac Year            Counties             Quartile Counties
               (1)                                      (2)                            (3)                  (4)                       (5)
 Woodford-Anadarko                       Anadarko                                     2008                   1                        10
 Marcellus                               Appalachian                                  2008                  28                        95
 Utica                                   Appalachian                                  2012                   7                        18
 Woodford-Ardmore                        Ardmore                                      2007                   4                         5
 Fayetteville                            Arkoma                                       2005                   1                        13
 Woodford-Arkoma                         Arkoma                                       2006                   2                         7
 Niobrara-Denver                         Denver                                       2010                  13                         4
 Barnett                                 Forth Worth                                  2001                   5                        41
 Niobrara-Greater Green River            Greater Green River                          2012                   2                         9
 Permian All Plays                       Permian                                      2005                  11                        34
 Niobrara-Powder River                   Powder River                                 2010                   1                         5
 Haynesville                             TX-LA-MS Salt                                2008                   5                        21
 Eagle Ford                              Western Gulf                                 2009                   7                        21
 Bakken                                  Williston Basin                              2007                   8                        27
 Total                                                                                                        95                       310
 Notes: This table shows the number of counties by shale play and Rystad prospectivity value. Top Quartile = 1 if the county is in the top-quartile of
 the Rystad max prospectivity measure within its shale-play and 0 otherwise. Different shale plays have different geological features and were
 developed at different time periods. Column (3) shows the first year the fracing potential of the shale play became public.




                                                                         41
   Table 2: Comparison of pre-trends and levels across treatment and control counties

                                                                                             Mean Value in          Basin vs.           Play vs.          Rystad Top          Rystad Top Quartile          Quartiles 1-3
                                                                                                 US                Rest of US            Basin            Quartile vs.        vs. Pscore Matched            vs. Pscore
                                                                                                                                                             Play                   Sample                   Matched
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sample
                                                                       (1)                                               (2)                (3)                 (4)                      (5)                    (6)
Panel A: Covariate Balance (All Variables measured in 2000 unless noted)
 Panel A1: Non-Crime Variables
  Log(Real Median Home Values)                                       11.897                                         -0.402***           -0.071**              0.039                    -0.103                 -0.149***
                                                                                                                     (0.037)             (0.031)             (0.050)                  (0.067)                   (0.041)
   Log(Real Median Home Rental Prices)                                                            6.621             -0.179***            -0.023               0.055                    -0.091                 -0.095***
                                                                                                                     (0.032)             (0.030)             (0.045)                  (0.066)                   (0.037)
   Log(Total Housing Units)                                                                       9.427             -0.159***           0.413***              0.082                    -0.193                 -0.342***
                                                                                                                     (0.055)             (0.087)             (0.143)                  (0.169)                   (0.111)
   Log(Total Employment)                                                                          9.533             -0.242***           0.402***              0.057                    -0.283                 -0.397***
                                                                                                                     (0.060)             (0.104)             (0.161)                  (0.180)                   (0.119)
   Log(Total Income per capita)                                                                   13.594            -0.279***           0.416***              0.032                    -0.309                 -0.408***
                                                                                                                     (0.062)             (0.103)             (0.171)                  (0.195)                   (0.123)
   Share of Population with Bachelor's Degree or more                                             0.241             -0.041***             0.003              0.042*                    -0.001                  -0.026**
                                                                                                                     (0.010)             (0.016)             (0.025)                  (0.027)                   (0.013)
   Share of Population Ages 18-64                                                                 0.619              -0.003             -0.011**              -0.003                   -0.001                    0.003
                                                                                                                     (0.003)             (0.004)             (0.007)                  (0.010)                   (0.006)
   Log(Real Total Government Revenue: 2002 - 1992)                                                11.512            -0.273***           0.374***              0.050                   -0.314*                 -0.411***
                                                                                                                     (0.059)             (0.101)             (0.159)                  (0.178)                   (0.115)
   Log(Real Total Government Expenditures: 2002 - 1992)                                           11.515            -0.283***           0.373***              0.063                   -0.309*                 -0.421***
                                                                                                                     (0.060)             (0.102)             (0.162)                  (0.181)                   (0.117)
   Total Value of Hydrocarbon Production: 2000 - 1992                                             56.238            81.559***          78.570***            108.280*                  99.435                     -1.201
                                                                                                                    (19.990)           (17.698)             (58.527)                 (67.217)                 (42.595)
F-statistic                                                                                                            23.7                7.6                 1.7                      3.1                      3.3
P-value                                                                                                                0.00               0.00                 0.08                     0.00                     0.00
Counties Exposed                                                                                    -                   715               316                   64                       64                      252
N                                                                                                 2,842                2,842              792                  401                     1,384                    1,599
 Panel A2: Crime-Variables
  Log(Violent Crimes)                                                                             6.453             -0.405***             0.102               0.163                  -0.793***                -0.951***
                                                                                                                      (0.096)            (0.185)             (0.229)                  (0.252)                  (0.198)
   Log(Property Crimes)                                                                           4.127              -0.223**             0.177               0.113                  -0.706***                -0.791***
                                                                                                                      (0.097)            (0.172)             (0.216)                  (0.256)                  (0.200)
F-statistic                                                                                                            12.7                0.6                 0.2                      3.3                      8.7
P-value                                                                                                                0.00               0.64                 0.90                     0.02                     0.00
Counties Exposed                                                                                                        523                266                  56                       56                      210
N                                                                                                 2,071                2,071               586                 340                      879                     1,061
Panel B: Pre-Trends (Change 1990 - 2000 unless noted)
 Panel B1: Non-Crime Variables
  Log(real median home values)                                                                    0.110               0.020              -0.022               -0.011                  0.043**                   0.012
                                                                                                                     (0.026)             (0.014)             (0.028)                  (0.020)                  (0.020)
   Log(real median home rental prices)                                                            0.012              0.055***          -0.027***              0.003                    -0.013                   -0.007
                                                                                                                     (0.016)             (0.006)             (0.008)                  (0.018)                  (0.015)
   Log(Total Housing Units)                                                                       0.124             -0.035***          -0.054***              0.009                  -0.036***                -0.047***
                                                                                                                     (0.005)             (0.008)             (0.012)                  (0.014)                  (0.008)
   Log(Total Employment)                                                                          0.179             -0.040***           -0.028**             0.028*                    -0.013                 -0.039***
                                                                                                                     (0.007)             (0.012)             (0.016)                  (0.018)                  (0.012)
   Log(Total Income per capita)                                                                   0.268             -0.044***          -0.068***             0.034*                    -0.022                 -0.054***
                                                                                                                     (0.007)             (0.014)             (0.018)                  (0.021)                  (0.014)
   Share of Population with Bachelor's Degree or more                                             0.040             -0.012***             0.002             0.013***                  0.011**                   -0.003
                                                                                                                     (0.003)             (0.003)             (0.005)                  (0.005)                  (0.003)
   Share of Population Ages 18-64                                                                 0.001              0.005***             0.000               -0.006                   -0.003                   0.004
                                                                                                                     (0.002)             (0.003)             (0.004)                  (0.005)                  (0.003)
   Log(Real Total Government Revenue: 2002 - 1992)                                                0.286             -0.063***          -0.113***              0.042                    -0.023                 -0.064***
                                                                                                                     (0.011)             (0.019)             (0.027)                  (0.027)                  (0.021)
   Log(Real Total Government Expenditures: 2002 - 1992)                                           0.290             -0.029***          -0.124***              0.034                    -0.026                 -0.059***
                                                                                                                     (0.011)             (0.020)             (0.029)                  (0.031)                  (0.022)
   Total Value of Hydrocarbon Production: 2000 - 1992                                             7.934               6.845*              4.036              28.929                    2.638                   -27.676
                                                                                                                     (4.150)             (7.246)            (18.096)                 (22.938)                 (19.179)
F-statistic                                                                                                            14.1                8.8                 1.4                      2.4                      4.0
P-value                                                                                                                 0.0                0.0                 0.2                      0.0                      0.0
Counties Exposed                                                                                                        715                316                 64                        64                      252
N                                                                                                 2,842                2,842               792                 401                     1,384                    1,599
 Panel A2: Crime-Variables (Change 1992 - 2000)
  Log(Violent Crimes)                                                                             -0.093              -0.043             -0.125*              0.104                    -0.022                 -0.130***
                                                                                                                      (0.026)            (0.066)             (0.074)                  (0.065)                  (0.048)
   Log(Property Crimes)                                                                           -0.020              -0.026              0.132              0.191*                   0.187*                    -0.055
                                                                                                                      (0.039)            (0.089)             (0.108)                  (0.104)                  (0.074)
F-statistic                                                                                                             0.9                 3.0                1.5                       1.1                      2.5
P-value                                                                                                                0.44                0.03                0.21                     0.34                     0.06
Counties Exposed                                                                                                        523                266                  56                       56                      210
N                                                                                                 2,071                2,071               586                 340                      879                     1,061
Notes: This table shows coefficients from regressions of baseline outcomes (Panel A) and pre-trends (Panel B) on different measures of exposure to Fracing activity. Column (1) shows the mean value for the entire
US. Column (2) shows regressions of covariates and pre-trends on an indicator for being in a shale basin. Column (3) shows regressions of covariates and pre-trends on an indicator for being in a shale-play
(restricting the sample to counties in a shale basin). Column (4) shows regressions of covariates and pre-trends on an indicator for being in the top quartile of max prospectivity (restricting the sample to counties in a
shale basin). Column (5) shows regressions of covariates and pre-trends on an indicator for being in the top quartile of max prospectivity, but the sample is top quartile counties and the corresponding pscore-matched
counties for each shale play. Column (6) shows regressions of covariates and pre-trends on an indicator for being in quartiles one through three of max prospectivity, but the sample is the bottom three quartile counties
and the corresponding pscore-matched counties for each shale play. All specifications include both the fracing exposure measure and the fracing exposure measure interacted with an indicator for being in the
unbalanced sample (defined as having a first-frac date after 2008). The coefficients reported correspond to the balanced sample. Column (3) includes basin fixed effects and Columns (4), (5), and (6) include play
fixed effects. Below Panel A we report the joint F-test that all the coefficients are equal to 0 in the covariate regression. Below Panel B we report the joint F-test that all coefficients are equal to 0 in the pre-trends
regression. Estimated outcome variables (such real median home values) are weighted by the sample size for the estimate (such as number of owner occupied homes for real median home values). All monetary
figures are shown in 2010 USD. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses in Columns (2)-(4). Columns (5) and (6) cluster standard errors at the county level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                                    42
      Table 3: Impact of fracing on the value of hydrocarbon production

                                          (1)                                    (2)                     (3)
Panel A: Total Value of Oil and Gas Production
1(Fracing Exposure)*1(Post)             242***                                   36                      36
                                         (68)                                   (47)                    (23)
t*1(Fracing Exposure)                                                             3
                                                                                 (6)
t*1(Fracing Exposure)*1(Post)                                                  124***                  125***
                                                                                (37)                    (38)
Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=3                        242***                 409***                  410***
                                                         (68)                  (123)                   (115)
Fracing Exposure Group                             Top Quartile            Top Quartile            Top Quartile
Control Group                                      Quartiles 1-3           Quartiles 1-3           Quartiles 1-3
Fracing Exposure Level Shift                               Y                      Y                       Y
Fracing Exposure Trend                                     N                      Y                       Y
Fracing Exposure Trend Break                               N                      Y                       Y
County Fixed Effects                                       Y                      Y                       Y
County-Specific Trends                                     N                      N                       Y
Year-Play Fixed Effects                                    Y                      Y                       Y
Restricted to Balanced Sample                              N                      N                       Y
Notes: This table reports regressions of oil/gas production variables on fracing exposure. Fracing exposure is
measured using an indicator for whether the county is in the fourth quartile of the Rystad max prospectivity score
among counties within the shale play with a non-missing Rystad value. Oil and gas production data come from
HPDI well data aggregated to the county level. Column (1) allows for a level shift in Rystad top quartile counties.
Columns (2) and (3) allow for pre-trends, a post-fracing level shift, and a post-fracing trend break in Rystad top
quartile counties. In Columns (1) and (2), all Rystad top quartile variables are included by themselves, as well as
interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date after 2008.
The reported coefficients are for the balanced sample. Column (3) adds county-specific trends and restricts the
sample to the balanced sample. 1(Post) = 1 if the year is after the first-frac date for the shale, defined as the first
year that there is any fracing within the counties shale play. The coefficients and standard errors for Fracing
Exposure Effect at tau=3 correspond to the 1(Fracing Exposure)*1(Post) coefficient plus 3 times the t*1(Fracing
Exposure)*1(Post) coefficeint. Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Sample: Columns (1) and (2) include 8100 county-year observations from 405 total counties, of which 65 Rystad
top quartile and 253 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Column (3) includes 4,134
observations from 318 total counties, of which 65 Rystad top quartile and 253 outside top quartile counties are in
the balanced sample.




                                                        43
Table 4: Impact of fracing on employment and aggregate income: time-series specifications

                                                                          (1)                        (2)                     (3)
        Panel A: Log(Total Employment)
        Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4                              0.036**                     0.054*                 0.049***
                                                                      (0.016)                     (0.029)                (0.019)
        Panel B: Income
        Log(Total Income)
        Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4                 0.056***              0.069**                                    0.044**
                                                         (0.015)               (0.028)                                    (0.021)
          B1. Log(Total Wage/Salary Income): 56 percent of total personal income
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4               0.076***             0.130***                                   0.089***
                                                         (0.021)               (0.035)                                   (0.030)
          B2. Log(Total Rents/Dividends): 19 percent of total personal income
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4               0.070***              0.080**                                    0.068**
                                                         (0.019)               (0.038)                                    (0.028)
          B3. Log(Total Transfers): 10 percent of total personal income
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4                0.012                 0.001                                     -0.005
                                                         (0.012)               (0.020)                                    (0.008)
          B4. Log(Total Proprieter's Income): 18 percent of total personal income
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4                0.036                -0.101                                     -0.041
                                                         (0.040)               (0.064)                                    (0.069)
        Panel C: Migration
          C1. Log(In Migration)
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4               0.044**               0.073*                                      0.005
                                                         (0.017)               (0.038)                                    (0.042)
          C2. Log(Out Migration)
          Fracing Exposure Effect at tau=4                -0.001                0.007                                     -0.047
                                                         (0.013)               (0.031)                                    (0.035)

        Fracing Exposure Group                                     Top Quartile               Top Quartile            Top Quartile
        Control Group                                              Quartiles 1-3              Quartiles 1-3           Quartiles 1-3
        Fracing Exposure Level Shift                                      Y                           Y                       Y
        Fracing Exposure Trend                                            N                           Y                       Y
        Fracing Exposure Trend Break                                      N                           Y                       Y
        County Fixed Effects                                              Y                           Y                       Y
        County-Specific Trends                                            N                           N                       Y
        Year-Play Fixed Effects                                           Y                           Y                       Y
        Restricted to Balanced Sample                                     N                           N                       Y
        Notes: This table reports regressions of aggregate economic outcomes on fracing exposure measured using an indicator for
        whether the county is in the fourth quartile of the Rystad max prospectivity score among counties within the shale play with a
        non-missing Rystad value. Employment and income variables in variables in Panels A and B come from the REIS data
        produced by the BEA. Migration measures in Panel C come from the IRS' county migration data. Column (1) allows for a
        level shift in fracing exposed counties. Columns (2) and (3) allow for pre-trends, a post-fracing level shift, and a post-fracing
        trend break in counties exposed to fracing. In Columns (1) and (2), all fracing exposure variables are included by
        themselves, as well as interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date
        after 2008. The reported coefficients are for the balanced sample. Column (3) adds county-specific trends and restricts the
        sample to the balanced sample. The reported estimates and standard errors correspond to the top quartile level shift
        coefficient + 4 times the top quartile trend break coefficient. Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in
        parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



        Sample: Includes all counties in any shale play with non-missing data in all years from 1990 to 2012. Panels A, B, B1, B2,
        and B3, Columns (1) and (2) include 9246 observations from 402 total counties, of which 65 Rystad top quartile counties
        and 252 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Panels A, B, B1, B2, and B3, Column (3) include 5,072
        observations from 317 total counties, of which 65 Rystad top quartile and 252 outside top quartile counties are in the
        balanced sample.

        Panel B4, Columns (1) and (2) include 8,740 observations from 380 total counties, of which 60 Rystad top quartile and 237
        outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Panel B4, Column (3) includes 4,752 observations from 297 total
        counties, of which 60 Rystad top quartile and 237 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample.


        Panel C, Columns (1) and (2) include 7,900 observations from 395 total counties, of which 63 Rystad top quartile and 248
        outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Panel C, Column (3) includes 4,043 observations from 311 total
        counties, of which 63 Rystad top quartile and 248 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample.




                                                                     44
Table 5: Impact of fracing on employment and aggregate income: long-difference specifications
           Table 5. Aggregate Economics Outcomes: Difference in Difference Models
                                                                          (1)
           Panel A: Employment Outcomes:
             A1. Log(Total Employment)
                                                                      0.048***
                                                                       (0.017)
             A2. Employment-to-Population Ratio
                                                                      0.026***
                                                                       (0.009)
             A3. Unemployment Rate
                                                                       -0.006*
                                                                       (0.003)
           Panel B: Household Income:
             B1. Log(Mean Real Household Income)
                                                                      0.058***
                                                                       (0.012)
             B2. Log(Mean Real Household Wage and Salary Income)
                                                                      0.075***
                                                                       (0.017)
             B3. Log(Mean Real Rent and Dividend Income)
                                                                       0.093**
                                                                       (0.037)
           Panel C: Population:
             C1. Log(Population)                                        0.027*
                                                                       (0.016)
           Fracing Exposure Group                                                         Top Quartile
           Control Group                                                                  Quartiles 1-3
           Play Fixed Effects                                                                     Y
           Notes: This table reports long-difference regressions of the change in county aggregate economic
           outcomes between 2000 and 2009/2013 on a measure of fracing exposure. Fracing exposure is
           measured using an indicator for the county being in the fourth quartile of the Rystad max prospectivity
           score among counties within the shale with a non-missing Rystad value, and the control group are
           quartiles one through three. The fracing exposure measure is included by itself, as well as interacted
           with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date after 2008. The
           reported estimates are for the balanced sample. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

           Sample: Panels A1, B, and C include observations from 404 total counties, of which 65 Rystad top
           quartile and 253 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample.
           Panels A2 and A3 include observations from 403 total counties, of which 64 Rystad top quartile and 253
           outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample.




                                                             45
                          Table 6: Impact of fracing on crime

                                                     (1)                    (2)                  (3)
Panel A. Log(Total Crime)
Top Quartile Effect at tau=5                       0.072                  -0.042               -0.004
                                                  (0.056)                (0.082)              (0.101)
Panel B: Log(Violent Crime)
Top Quartile Effect at tau=5                      0.116*                 0.208*                0.109
                                                  (0.068)                (0.124)              (0.142)
Panel C: Log(Property Crime)
Top Quartile Effect at tau=5                       0.065                  -0.057               0.000
                                                  (0.057)                (0.087)              (0.106)

Fracing Exposure Group                         Top Quartile          Top Quartile          Top Quartile

Control Group                                  Quartiles 1-3         Quartiles 1-3         Quartiles 1-3

Fracing Exposure Level Shift                          Y                     Y                     Y
Fracing Exposure Trend                                N                     Y                     Y
Fracing Exposure Trend Break                          N                     Y                     Y
County Fixed Effects                                  Y                     Y                     Y
County-Specific Trends                                N                     N                     Y
Year-Play Fixed Effects                               Y                     Y                     Y
Restricted to Balanced Sample                         N                     N                     Y
Notes: This table reports regressions of crime rates on fracing exposure. Fracing exposure is measured
using an indicator for being in the Top Quartile of max prospectivity among the counties with Rystad data
within the shale play. The fracing exposure variables are included by themselves, as well as interacted with
an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date after 2008. The reported
estimates are for the balanced sample. Crime data come from the FBI Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)
system. Crime reports law enforcement agencies are aggregated to the county level. Data from a law
enforcement agency is only included if the agency reports crimes to the FBI UCR system in every year
from 1990 to 2013. Columns (2) and (3) allow for pre-trends, a post-fracing level shift, and a post-fracing
trend break in Rystad top quartile counties. In Columns (1) and (2), all Rystad top quartile variables are
included by themselves, as well as interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined
as having a first-frac date after 2008. The reported coefficients are for the balanced sample. Column (3)
adds county-specific trends and restricts the sample to the balanced sample. The reported estimates and
standard errors correspond to the top quartile level shift coefficient + 5 times the top quartile trend break
coefficient. Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1



Sample: Columns (1)-(3) include all counties in any shale play with non-missing data in all years from 1992
to 2013. Columns (1) and (2) include 7480 observations from 340 total counties, of which 56 Rystad top
quartile and 210 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Column (3) includes 3,990
observations from 266 total counties, of which 56 Rystad top quartile and 210 outside top quartile counties
are in the balanced sample.




                                                    46
Table 7: Impact of fracing on local government revenues and expenditures

                                                                                         (1)
                Panel A: Log(Total Expenditures): 2012 - 2002
                                                                                      0.129***
                                                                                      (0.034)
                   A. Log(Direct Expenditures)
                                                                                      0.123***
                                                                                      (0.033)
                    A1. Direct Expenditures by Type
                     A1a. Log(Current Operating Expenditure):
                                  [84%]                                               0.107***
                                                                                      (0.028)
                      A1b. Log(Capital Outlays):
                                  [12%]                                                0.181
                                                                                      (0.135)
                    A2. Direct Expenditures by Purpose
                     A2a. Log(Education Expenditures):
                                  [48%]                                                0.025
                                                                                      (0.032)
                      A2b. Log(Public Safety Expenditures):
                                   [8%]                                               0.195***
                                                                                      (0.063)
                      A2c. Log(Welfare and Hospital Expenditures):
                                  [10%]                                                0.240
                                                                                      (0.154)
                    A2d. Log(Infrastructure and Utility Expenditures):
                                   [18%]                              0.242***
                                                                       (0.071)
                    A2e. Log(Other Expenditures):
                                   [16%]                               0.122*
                                                                       (0.063)
                Panel B: Log(Total Revenues): 2012 - 2002
                                                                      0.155***
                                                                       (0.032)
                   B1. Revenues by Type
                    B1a. Log(Property Tax Revenues):
                                   [24%]                              0.133***
                                                                       (0.042)
                    B1b. Log(Sales Tax Revenues):
                                    [4%]                              0.594***
                                                                       (0.120)
                    B1c. Log(Other Tax Revenues):
                                    [2%]                                0.038
                                                                       (0.155)
                    B1d. Log(Intergovernmental Revenues):
                                   [42%]                                0.100
                                                                       (0.081)
                    B1e. Log(Charges Revenues):
                                   [14%]                                0.095
                                                                       (0.079)
                    B1f. Log(Other Revenues):
                                   [14%]                              0.261***
                                                                       (0.066)
                Panel C: Government Balance Sheets
                  C. Net Financial Position as Share of Revenues
                                                                        -0.020
                                                                       (0.067)

                Panel D: Log(Elem/Sec Education Spending per Pupil)
                                                                0.008
                                                               (0.034)
                Fracing Exposure Group                                             Top Quartile
                Control Group                                                      Quartiles 1-3

                Play Fixed Effects                                                        Y
                Notes: This table shows regressions on the change in government spending and revenues
                between 2002 and 2012 on fracing exposure measured using an indicator for the county
                being in the fourth quartile of the Rystad max prospectivity score among counties within the
                shale with a non-missing Rystad value, and the control group are quartiles one through
                three. The fracing exposure measure is included by itself, as well as interacted with an
                indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date after 2008.
                The reported estimates are for the balanced sample. Data come from the 2012 and 2002
                Census of Governments. Panels A1 and B1 show the share of total government revenues
                or expenditures represented by the given category in brackets below the category name.
                Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                Sample: Panels A, B, and C, include all counties in any shale play, 405, of which 65 Rystad
                top quartile and 253 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample. Panel D
                includes all 385 counties in shale plays with non-missing school enrollment data for all
                districts in 1997, 2002, and 2012, of which 61 Rystad top quartile and 244 outside top-
                quartile counties are in the balanced sample.




                                                           47
                 Table 8: Impact of fracing on housing outcomes

                                                                                     (1)
Panel A: House Values
  A1. Log(Median House Value)
                                                                                  0.057***
                                                                                  (0.018)
   A2. Log(Mean Housing Value)
                                                                                  0.057***
                                                                                  (0.018)
   A3. Log(Mobile Housing Units: Median Housing Value)
                                                                                  0.079**
                                                                                  (0.037)
Panel B: Rental Prices
  B1. Log(Median Rental Price)
                                                                                  0.020*
                                                                                  (0.010)
   B2. Log(Mean Rental Price)
                                                                                  0.029***
                                                                                  (0.011)
Panel C: Housing Quantities
  C1. Log(Total Housing Units)
                                                                                   0.011
                                                                                  (0.012)
   C2. Log(Total Mobile Homes)
                                                                                   0.022
                                                                                  (0.028)
   C3. Share of Housing Units Vacant
                                                                                  -0.010**
                                                                                   (0.005)
   C4. Log(Acres of Agricultural Land)
                                                                                   -0.099
                                                                                  (0.144)

Fracing Exposure Group                                                        Top Quartile
Control Group                                                                 Quartiles 1-3
Play Fixed Effects                                                                    Y
Notes: This Table shows regressions of the change in different housing outcomes between 2000 and 2009-
2013 (with the exception of acres of agricultural land, which is measured in 2002 and 2012) on a measure
of fracing exposure. Fracing exposure is measured using an indicator for the county being in the fourth
quartile of the Rystad max prospectivity score among counties within the shale with a non-missing Rystad
value, and the control group are quartiles one through three. The fracing exposure measure is included by
itself, as well as interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-
frac date after 2008. The reported estimates are for the balanced sample. 2013-2009 housing data come
from the American Community Survey. 2000 Housing data come from the Decenniel Census. 2002 and
2012 agricutlural land data come from the 2002 and 2012 Census of Agriculture respectively. All housing
values are converted to 2010 dollars. Observations are weighted by the number of owner (renter) occupied
units in the county. Non-mobile specific regressions are adjusted for changing owner (renter) occupied
housing characteristics. Housing characteristics included are: fraction of units with 0, 1, 2, 3, or 5 or more
bedrooms, fraction of units with full indoor plumbing, fraction of units with a complete kitchen, fraction of
units that are mobile units, fraction of units by type of electricity, and fraction of units by age of unit. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Sample: Includes all counties in any shale play. Panels A1, A3, B1, B2, C1, C2, and C3 contain
observations from 404 total counties, of which 65 Rystad top quartile and 253 outside top quartile counties
are in the balanced sample. Panel C4 contains observations from 345 total counties, of which 53 Rystad
top quartile and 211 outside top quartile counties are in the balanced sample.




                                                       48
                                                                                                                                             Table 9: Play specific Estimates

                                                                  All  Bakken      Barnett  Fayetteville Haynesville   Marcellus                                                                 Woodford, Anadarko Woodford, Ardmore                        Woodford, Arkoma Permian Plays                             Joint F-test               Eagle Ford
                                                                  (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)                                                                          (7)                (8)                                     (9)            (10)                                      (11)                      (12)
     Panel A: Average Characteristics of Top Quartile Counties
       Population (2000)                                       64,860   6,307     109,202     24,046       24,576      112,911                                                                            45,516                        19,537                       9,955                   15,221                                                  36,836
       Oil Share of Hydrocarbon Production Value (2011)          0.33     0.94        0.42      0.00         0.01         0.07                                                                             0.34                          0.48                         0.01                    0.64                                                    0.65
     Panel B: Hydrocarbon Production
       B1. Total Value of Hydrocarbon Production
                                                               409***    972**       322*         69       1,730*        185***                                                                           -452***                        123*                          199                     169            F-stat         11.4                   1,412***
                                                                (123)    (414)       (183)       (78)       (903)         (70)                                                                              (65)                         (70)                         (158)                   (134)          p-value         0.00                    (270)
     Panel C: Labor Markets
       C1. Log(Mean household total income)
                                                              0.058*** 0.293***    0.045*       0.099       0.080      0.049***                                                                            0.069                         -0.013                      0.000                  0.170***                         5.4                      -0.015
                                                              (0.012)  (0.083)     (0.025)    (0.110)     (0.053)       (0.012)                                                                           (0.084)                       (0.079)                     (0.134)                 (0.049)                          0.00                    (0.046)
       C2. Log(Mean household wage and salary income)
                                                              0.075*** 0.286***      0.031     -0.014       0.078      0.078***                                                                            0.079                         -0.028                      0.075                  0.177***                         5.5                      -0.003
                                                              (0.012)  (0.100)     (0.030)    (0.133)     (0.064)       (0.014)                                                                           (0.102)                       (0.095)                     (0.161)                 (0.059)                          0.00                    (0.056)
       C3. Log(Mean household rent, dividend, and interest income)
                                                              0.093**  0.833***      0.061      0.671       0.078       0.086*                                                                             -0.171                        0.116                       0.495                    -0.006                         1.7                      0.173
                                                              (0.038)  (0.313)     (0.095)    (0.417)     (0.201)       (0.045)                                                                           (0.319)                       (0.297)                     (0.505)                  (0.183)                         0.09                    (0.174)
       C4. Log(Population)
                                                               0.027*  0.130***      0.071     -0.014      -0.045        0.018                                                                             0.060                         0.042                       -0.038                   -0.007                         1.4                     -0.090*
                                                              (0.016)  (0.045)     (0.053)    (0.115)     (0.055)       (0.024)                                                                           (0.117)                       (0.075)                     (0.089)                  (0.039)                         0.20                    (0.048)
     Panel D: Housing Prices
       D1. Log(Median home values)
                                                              0.057*** 0.228***     -0.046      0.018      -0.071      0.089***                                                                            -0.074                        -0.032                      0.051                    0.029           F-stat         6.0                      -0.021
                                                              (0.012)  (0.086)     (0.030)    (0.111)     (0.057)       (0.014)                                                                           (0.091)                       (0.082)                     (0.138)                  (0.051)         p-value         0.00                    (0.055)
     Panel E: Annual Change in WTP for Amenities and Welfare per Household, Using Change in Mean Home Values (dollars)
       E1. Change in amenities                                 -$964   -$2,395    -$1,518       $631      -$4,455        -$484                                                                            -$3,882                        $729                       -$1,466                  -$5,409                                                 -$1,543
       E2. Change in welfare                                   $1,931   $9,068       $157     $2,884      -$1,784       $2,583                                                                            -$1,352                        $197                        $1,182                   $533                                                    -$873
     Top Quartile Counties                                                            65                   8                  5               1                   5                  28                      1                              4                           2                       11                                                      7
     Outside Top Quartile Countiesa                                                  253                  27                 41               13                  21                 95                      10                             5                           7                       34                                                      21
     Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of outcome variables on Rystad top quartile variables interacted with dummies for being in particular shale plays. Column (1) shows the estimate for all counties with first-frac dates in or before 2008. Columns (2)-(10) show play-specific results for all plays with first-frac dates in or before
     2008. Column (11) presents results from the Join F-test that the coefficients are equal for all plays with first-frac dates in or before 2008. Column (12) reports results for the Eagle Ford, the one shale play with a first-frac date in 2009. Panel A shows summary statistics on average county population and the oil share of hydrocarbon




49
     production. All specifications except for housing prices are time series estimates corresponding to column (2) in the main tables. Panel B allows for pre-trends, a level shift, and a trend break in the top quartile indicators, and also include play-year fixed effects. The reported estimates in Panel B correspond to the top quartile mean shift
     coefficient + tau (= T - 2008) times the top quartile trend break coefficient, where T is the latest year of data for the given outcome variable. In practice, this means evaluating the effect of being in a top quartile county 3 years after the start of fracing for Panel B and 4 years after the start of fracing for Panel B. Panels C and D report long
     difference specifications of the change in the given outcome between 2000 and 2009-2013 on an indicator for being in the Rystad top quartile. Panel D also includes controls for changes in average county owner(renter) occupied housing characteristics. In all panels, all Rystad top quartile variables are included by themselves, as well as
     interacted with an indicator for being in the unbalanced sample, defined as having a first-frac date after 2008. The reported coefficients are for the balanced sample. Panel B data come from HPDI well data aggregated to the county level. Panel C and D data come from the 2000 Decennial Census and the 2009-2013 American Community
     Survey. In Panel B standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. In Panels C and D, robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

     Panel E reports estimates of the effect of fracing on amenities and welfare in dollars for each shale play. The calculations are made using our preferred values of the share of wage and salary income spent on housing (β) and the standard deviation of idiosynchratic preferences for location (s) of β = .65 and s=.4 respectively. Panel E shows
     estimates where the change in housings costs is measured using the estimated percentage change in median home prices. We report both the estimated change in amenities and the estimated change in total welfare. The calculations are converted to dollars using the mean household wage and salary income and mean household
     interest and dividend income in top quartile counties in each shale play. We aggregate these figures to the total impact of fracing in aggregate welfare in top quartile counties assuming a discount rate of 5 percent, and using the mean number of households in top quartile counties and total number of top quartile counties in each shale play.
     Overall calculations are made excluding the Eagle Ford play.

     a All panels include the same number of balanced sample top quartile and outside top quartile counties.
                                 Table 10: Welfare estimates


                                            Δ in housing costs = 2.9%              Δ in housing costs =
                                                                                          5.7%
                                                                WTP for change in:
                                Amenities                       Welfare    Amenities               Welfare
                                   (1)                           (2)          (3)                   (4)
Panel A: Annual Impacts per household
s = 0.4 and β = 0.65             -$1,582                         $1,313              -$964          $1,931

s = 0.2 and β = 0.33                           -$2,084            $812             -$1,770          $1,125
s = 0.4 and β = 0.33                           -$1,901            $995             -$1,587          $1,308
s = 0.6 and β = 0.33                           -$1,718           $1,178            -$1,404          $1,491
s = 0.2 and β = 0.65                           -$1,765           $1,130            -$1,147          $1,748
s = 0.4 and β = 0.65                           -$1,582           $1,313             -$964           $1,931
s = 0.6 and β = 0.65                           -$1,399           $1,496             -$781           $2,114

Panel B: Total Aggregate Impacts for Top Quartile Counties (in billions)
s = 0.4 and β = 0.65                -$53         $44           -$32                                   $64

s = 0.2 and β = 0.33                             -$69              $27               -$59             $38
s = 0.4 and β = 0.33                             -$63              $33               -$53             $44
s = 0.6 and β = 0.33                             -$57              $39               -$47             $50
s = 0.2 and β = 0.65                             -$59              $38               -$38             $58
s = 0.4 and β = 0.65                             -$53              $44               -$32             $64
s = 0.6 and β = 0.65                             -$47              $50               -$26             $70
Notes: This table reports estimates of the effect of fracing on amenities and welfare in dollars under different
assumptions regarding the share of wage and salary income spent on housing (β) and the standard deviation
of idiosynchratic preferences for location (s). Different rows report values for different assumptions regarding
the standard deviation of idiosynchratic preferences and the share of wage and salary income spent on
housing. Columns (1) and (2) report results where the change in housing costs is measured using the
estimated percent change in median rents (.029), while Columns (3) and (4) show estimates where the
change in housings costs is measured using the estimated percentage change in median home prices. For
each measure of the change in housing costs, we report both the estimated change in amenities (Columns (1)
and (3)) and the estimated change in total welfare (Columns (2) and (4)). Our preferred parameter values are
s=.4 and β = .65. The calculations are converted to dollars using the mean household wage and salary
income in top quartile counties of of $34,382 and mean household interest and dividend income in top quartile
counties of $3,236. Panel B aggregates these figures to the total impact of fracing in aggregate welfare in top
quartile counties assuming a discount rate of 5 percent, and using the mean number of households in top
quartile counties of 25,650 and the total number of top quartile counties of 65.




                                                    50
