                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ISRAEL’S TRIUMPH OVER INFLATION:
                             THE LONG AND WINDING ROAD

                                           Assaf Razin

                                       Working Paper 23061
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23061


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Israel’s Triumph over Inflation: The Long and Winding Road
Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 23061
January 2017
JEL No. E0,F0

                                         ABSTRACT

The paper gives an economic-history perspective of the long struggle with inflation. It covers the
early acceleration to three-digit levels, lasting 8 years; The stabilization program, based on
political backing triggered sharp fall in inflationary expectation, and consequently to sharp
inflation reduction to two-digit levels; The convergence to the advanced countries’ levels during
the “great Moderation”; and Israel’s resistance to the deflation-depression forces that the 2008
crisis created. The emphasis is on the forces of globalization and the building of institutions,
political, regulatory, financial, budget design, and monetary, which helped stabilize prices and
output.


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Globalization, the integration of markets in goods, services and capital, whose pace accelerated in

the 1990s with the fall of communism, is currently under attack. Globalization and new-technology

forces accelerated the decline in low-tech manufacturing industries, the rise of the financial and

the surge of immigration. Brexit may have been the first wave of anti-globalization and rising

populism that gushes over most advanced nations. Then came the 2017 change of guards in the

US. Meanwhile, European countries, straightjacketed inside the confines of the single currency

area like Germany, France, Greece, the Netherland, Spain, Poland and others, witness the anti-EU

forces gather strength. Israel in many ways provides a counter example. Globalization-technology

forces, like the technology surge, the new markets in East Asia, and immigration waves, have been

a boon. Israel’s remarkable developments provides an historical counter example.1




1
    Israel fast development although unique, is not unknown elsewhere. Ireland somewhat

parallels Israel in awesomely benefitting from globalization. Ireland entered the 1950s as a very

poor post-colonial society. However, it realized major successes by the integration into the EU,

and reaching an elite hi-tech status. Ireland, was able to attract from the rest of the world (other

than the EU) massive FDI, thanks to its being a tax-sheltered gate to the EU massive markets.

Ireland however poorly regulated its banking sector and allowed the credit bubble to flourish in

the wake of the 2008-global-financial crash. It’s over exposed banking sector collapsed during

the financial crisis. Ireland has continued to be burdened by the Eurozone’s nearly secular

stagnation.1 Israel robust performance during the crisis is partly attributable to not being a

member of a single currency area.
Israel has had a remarkable development, emerging from a low-income high-inflation developing

economy in the 1970s, to a medium to high income advanced economy in the 2000s; at all stages

of its development globalization played a key role.


    1.   The Inflation Crisis

Israel’s Inflation accelerated in the 1970s, rising steadily from 13% in 1971 to 111% in 1979.

Some of this higher inflation was "imported" from the world economy, instigated by extreme oil

price rises in 1973 and 1979. Inflation kept gathering pace. From 133% in 1980, it leaped to 191%

in 1983 and then to 445% in 1984, threatening to become a four-digit figure within a year or two.

After several failed efforts, the successful phase of the stabilization of the Israeli economy began

with the heterodox program introduced in July 1985. The initial success of the stabilization

program included a decrease in inflation, from 445 percent in 1984 to 185 percent in 1985 and 20

percent in 1986. There was also an increase in real economic activity, with the annual growth in

business sector product per capita rising from 0.4 percent in 1984 to 4.3 percent in 1985 and 3.6

percent in 1986. However, in the second half of 1987, the economy slid into recession, an after-

shock event. Inflation however did not converge to advanced countries’ inflation.2


Figure 1.1 describes the price level and the exchange rate paths for the inflation-rising period in

the wake of the hyperinflation crisis, and the aftermath of the 1985 stabilization program.




2
  Calvo and Vegh (2001) observe that in many high-inflation stabilization programs around the world inflation failed
to converge to world averages. Real economic activity expanded in the early years of the stabilization program.
Later in the program, a recession set in. Unlike Israel stabilization program, in many developing economies the
program later collapsed.
 Figure 1.1: Price Level and Exchange Rate, 1977-1986

   3.5


    3


   2.5


    2

                                                                          Inflation‐Stabilization
   1.5                                                                           Program

    1


   0.5


    0




                       log of Consumer Price Index    log of US Dollar Exchange Rate



 Source: Bank of Israel


The figure demonstrates the accelerated path of inflation, and the lagging path of exchange-rate

depreciations in the 1980s. It highlights the sharp flattening of inflation that took place

immediately after the implementation of the 1985 stabilization-policy package. All along, the

depreciations fell short of inflation; therefore, the real exchange has been markedly appreciated

throughout the period. The real-exchange-rate appreciation naturally corresponds also to the rise

in unemployment, and output growth decline. Figure 1.2 describes the path of major output-and-

employment indicators. They point out to severe slackness in economic activity during the

hyperinflation crisis leading to unprecedented unemployment.
 Figure 1.2: Output Growth and Unemployment, 1977-1986


   8%



   6%



   4%



   2%



  -1%



  -3%
          1977    1978     1979      1980       1981         1982    1983     1984      1985   1986

                          GDP per capita growth (annual %)          Unemployment Rate



 Source: Israel CBS, World Bank


Economic activity was impacted severely by the swelling credit frictions. Because the inflation

crisis undermined the well functioning of credit institutions. Banks and financial market regulation

also failed during the 1980s. At the time, bank stocks accounted for more than 90% of all issued

stocks in the stock market. Their monopoly power in the stock market allowed the large banks to

build up low-cost loan portfolio, and give it out to borrowers with poor selection, and poor

monitoring. Central bank oversight of commercial banks was almost non-existent. Israel’s

Securities and Exchange Commission was powerless, legally and administratively. Massive stock

issues allowed banks to increase their available capital as a source of investments, loans, etc. To

get market participants to continue investing in the large bank's stock, it began buying back its
own stock. On October 6, 1983, known as the “Black Thursday", an onslaught of banks’ stock

sales brought down the stock market. Largest banks became state-owned through a swift bailout.




            1.1 Economic-Regime Switch


        The economic crisis started to develop when the opposition “Gahal” (now “Likkud”)

party gained power for the first time since independence. The political upheaval in 1977, the so-

called “Maapach”, was a game changer for economic policy in Israel. The newly elected

government abruptly switched away from a long-running economic regime, which had been able

to maintain fiscal discipline in the presence of strong external shocks (the Yom Kippur War and

the first Oil Crisis). Monetary policy was moderately accommodative, underpinned by a fixed

exchange rate regime; shielded from capital flights by capital controls. Notwithstanding the oil

price shock, inflation was low double digit.


        A useful way to understand the framework within which the economic policy was

conducted prior to the political regime switch, and afterwards, is to think about the basic tri-

lemma in international finance.3 In international finance, the tri-lemma stems from the fact that,

in almost every country, economic policy makers would like to achieve the following goals:

First, make the country’s economy open to international capital flows, because by doing so,

policy makers of a country enable foreign investors to diversify their portfolios overseas and

achieve risk sharing. The country also benefits from the expertise brought to the country by


3
  The trilemma as a situation in which someone faces a choice among three options, each of which comes with some
inevitable problems. In international finance it is cast in terms of economic regime choices. The international
finance trilemma goes back to the classical works of Flemming (1962), and Mundell (1963). See Mankiw for blog
interpretation (2010). For a balance of payments crisis model in the trilemma regime-switch framework, see
Appendix 1A.
foreign investors. Second, use monetary policy as a tool to help stabilize inflation, output, and

the financial sector in the economy. This is achieved as the central bank can increase the money

supply, reduce interest rates when the economy is depressed and reduce money growth, and raise

interest rates when it is overheated. Moreover, the central bank can serve as a lender of last resort

in case of financial panic. Third, maintain stability in the exchange rate. This is because a

volatile exchange rate, at times driven by speculation, can be a source of broader financial

volatility and makes it harder for households and businesses to trade in the world economy and

for investors to be able to plan.


       The problem, however, is that a country can only achieve two of these three goals. In

order to maintain a fixed exchange rate and capital mobility, the central bank loses its ability to

control the interest rate or equivalently the monetary base—its policy instruments—as the

interest rate is anchored to the world interest rate by the interest rate parity, and the monetary

base is automatically adjusted. This is the case of individual members of the European Monetary

Union. In order to keep control over the interest rate or equivalently the money supply, the

central bank has to let the exchange rate float freely, as in the case of the United States. If the

central bank wishes to maintain both exchange rate stability and control over the monetary

policy, the only way to do it is by imposing capital controls, as in the case of China.


Following the 1977 political change the economic regime switched from pegged exchange rate,

capital controls and fiscal discipline to loosely managed exchange rate, relaxed controls on

outgoing capital flows, and fiscal laxness. Right from the beginning, the new government lifted

some capital controls without putting safe guards in place; that is, no prudent financial and banking

regulatory measures existed. Intensive shifts in demand and supply for foreign exchange followed

almost instantly. Key to the steady increase in inflation, the new populistic government also
embarked on an uncontrolled path of fiscal expansion accommodated by monetary expansion.

Exchange rate and capital flow fluctuations called for the Bank of Israel to intervene occasionally,

at first, and significantly later, in the foreign exchange market on a day-to-day basis to smooth out

these fluctuations;. A massive wave of capital flight caused over a few years a fast depletion of the

stock of international reserves, which weakened the ability of Bank of Israel to intervene in the

foreign exchange market. The exchange rate was at a free fall. Following up on the open economy

tri-lemma; asserting that a fixed exchange rate regime and perfect capital mobility must erode the

ability of the central bank to stabilize employment and price fluctuations. Therefore, Israel lost

control over inflation. Lax safeguards brought stock market crashes. The lesson learned from the

first-generation currency crisis literature is that such inconsistent set of policies become quickly

unsustainable; leading to massive speculative attacks on international reserves, followed rounds of

financial and stock market crashes.


         1.2 Political Deadlock Ends


Following almost 8 years of the hyperinflation economic chaos, the Israeli voters brought about

some major political rebalancing towards the political center. The newly established Unity

Government (“Likkud” plus “Avoda”) implemented successfully key stabilization measures; all

of them required political consensus.4 A new legislation (“Khok Hahesderim”) allowed the


4
  Schneider and Tornell (2004) provide a model of boom-bust episodes in middle-income countries which may
explain the logic of the boom-bust episodes which followed the stabilization program. It is based on sectoral
differences in corporate finance: the non-tradable sector (e.g., real estate and financial services) is special in that it
faces a contract enforceability problem and enjoys bailout guarantees (e.g. bailing out mortgages). As a result,
currency mismatch in the balance sheet arise endogenously in that sector. This sectoral asymmetry allows the model
to replicate the main features of observed boom-bust episodes. In particular, episodes begin with a lending boom and
a real appreciation, peak in a self-fulfilling crisis during which a real depreciation coincides with widespread
bankruptcies, and end in a recession and credit crunch. Israel’s economy fully recovered in the late 1980s and early
1990s, a time when there was a new wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union (Chapter 2). For detailed
account of the stabilization policy, see Razin and Sadka (1993).
government to exercise tighter control over its spending and taxation. A new law forbade the

Central Bank to monetize the budget deficit (“Khok Iee Hadpassa”), and ended the

accommodating monetary policy. A Tri-Party agreement between the government, the Federation

of Labor (“Histadrut”) and the association of private-sector employers stabilized the wage-price

dynamics and enabled a sharp nominal devaluation that ended in a competitiveness-boosting real

devaluation. The exchange rate depreciation had not passed through to wages and prices; in high

likelihood because the entire macro regime has changed; as in the modern expectations-based

macroeconomic setup. Because of the credibility of the policy measures, backed by the Tri-Party

agreement between the unified government, the Federation of Labor and the industry employer

organization, and the greater independence of the central bank, inflation expectations adjusted

rapidly to the policy steps.5


        1.3. Inflation and Fiscal Revenues


Israel's high inflation calamity amounted to a crisis of political and economic institutions. Failing

economic governance made it essential for the government to raise revenue through money

expansion. At the time when the newly elected government was catering to populistic demands,

the printing press was used to finance the fast-expanding government spending and transfers.


Dividends from seigniorage (the profit made by a government by issuing currency) are derived

from the exclusive ability of the central bank to issue bank notes. In addition, central bank can

hold required reserves from commercial bank deposits, which pay no interest. Central banks can

also inflate the non-indexed portion of the public debt and raise the real revenue intake with



5
 This expectations-changing episode is akin to Volcker-policy effect on inflationary expectations in the US, see
Sargent (1999).
progressive tax schedule. However, how much can the central bank lower the consolidated-

government fiscal burden depends not just, on how actual inflation is consistent with expected

inflation. 6


The central lesson from the Friedman (1971) is that steady-state seigniorage from revenue

maximizing central bank is small. However, Israel, as well as previous historical episodes, offer a

counter example. Inflation spikes can be a significant source for government revenue. Time

inconsistency on the part of the central bank in producing these spikes are due to harmful

incentives. They lead policymakers to implement inflation levels that they may eventually come

to regret. These incentives are no rarity; they are very common in economies that do not have the

instruments to reach a first-best equilibrium. Moreover, these incentives cannot be ruled out, even

under rational expectations in such a time-inconsistent setup. On this issue, Calvo (2016) writes:

“Repeated use of surprise inflation is unlikely to be successful in increasing seigniorage, because

the public will start to expect a rate of inflation larger than the one that optimizes steady-state

revenue from inflation. Thus, eventually the economy may land on the excessive-inflation territory

highlighted in Friedman (1971). However, this is not due to an elementary economics error on the

side of the central bank, as Friedman's results might lead us to conclude. An inflation spike is, in

the short run, one of the cheapest and most expeditious manners for securing additional fiscal

revenue. Moreover, this "carrot" is always there. As noted, though, a problem arises if the

government repeatedly reaches out for the carrot. However, even in this case, the evidence




6
 Indeed, Edi Karni (1983), made rough calculations and found significant seignorage revenue that Israel’s
hyperinflation generated. In a related context, Cukierman (1998) brings evidence for a significant share of revenue
attributable to seigniorage in the 1920s’ German hyperinflation.
presented in Friedman (1971) does not prove that authorities were making an error. To assess that,

one needs information of how quickly the public catches up with the inflation-spike strategy".


Even in the time inconsistency paradigm7, however, there is room for policy. One could try to

neutralize the harmful incentives if the central bank banned from extending loans to the fiscal

authority. This is why the 1985 Israel inflation stabilization package included the non-printing

item, preventing the Bank of Israel to purchase from the treasury directly government treasuries:

"Chok Iee Haadpasa".


Sargent (1999) argues that high inflation can be stopped quickly, and at a low cost. His argument

is that inflationary expectations are quick to adjust when the economic regime shifts considerably.

However, he ignores the fiscal burden and the income distribution that follow.


What are the fiscal implications of deep-rooted inflation expectations, before hyperinflation is

stopped?


Imagine a simple economy where there is a stock of public debt denominated in domestic currency,

    . 8 We denote one-period nominal interest rate by . Then, the next-period full service of the

government debt (i.e., principal plus interest) will be 1               . We choose the units of

measurement so that the present price level is equal to one, and assume that the real interest rate is

equal to zero. We also denote the one-period expected inflation rate,        , so that inclusive of the

inflation premium, the nominal (gross) interest rate is       1      , and the next-period price level

is equal to1          . If the government surprise market participants by setting the actual inflation




7
    See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978).
8
    See Calvo (1992).
rate equal to zero, so that the actual bond-return gross return is equal to one, the actual real burden

of servicing the next-period debt is equal to:


 1         .


On the other hand, if the government fulfills the private sector entrenched inflationary expectations

and set the actual inflation equal to expected inflation, the real burden of the debt is just


     .


Thus, the temptation not to stop inflation in its tracks may be irresistible.


Similarly, if the government surprise market participants by abrupt stopping of hyperinflation in

the presence of entrenched inflation expectations, the fiscal burden of public sector wage bill and

subsidies to basic food must rise. Therefore, the government may hesitate to do so.


To overcome this difficulty there must be a full-fledged social agreement between the government,

savers (who hold government bonds), public sector wage earners, and recipients of food subsidies.

To fix the inflated outlays on debt service, wage bill, and subsidies, some major redistribution of

income must accompany the inflation-halting step. This is in essence the lesson from Israel’s

inflation stabilization policy.
       1.4. A Balance of Payments’ Crisis


Inflation crises are often intertwined with balance-of-payment crises. Budget deficits were the root

cause of the balance-of-payment- cum - inflation crisis. The high-inflation period (1977-1985)

comprised with prolonged balance-of-payments crisis. Large budget deficits make the inflation-

employment tradeoff acute, under the regime of pegged exchange rate and liberalized international

capital flows; the pre-stabilization regime in Israel. In order to maintain a pegged exchange rate

and liberalized capital mobility, the central bank lost its ability to control the interest rate. Both

inflation and unemployment ensued. The stabilization package resulted in a regime switch; the

government effectively shifted the regime from the first goal of the tri-lemma to the second goal,

while being able to sharply reduce budget deficits. Balance-of-payment crises occur when a

country lift restrictions on capital mobility (in Israel it begun in 1977) without the consolidation

its fiscal stance and regulatory institutions; especially those overseeing the financial

intermediaries. If under these conditions the country is trying also to maintain a fixed exchange

rate regime, it then unavoidably faces conflicting policy needs (such as fiscal imbalances, or a

fragile financial sector) that need to be resolved by independent monetary policy.



1.5 Institutional Changes

        Some of the macroeconomic institutional changes, brought about by the inflation

stabilization have lasted until these very days. The hyperinflation cum financial collapse episode

has not reoccurred. Thanks to more disciplined monetary and fiscal policies, and well-regulated

banks, the inflation rate converged to low rates, enjoyed by the advanced economies during the

Great Moderation era.
        In contrast, inflation stabilization programs adopted by other developing countries,

especially in Latin America, proved not to have similar long-term durability. Argentine’s

stabilization program, relying on a rigid currency-board setup as its major pillar, was different. A

lack of adequate budget discipline and importantly inadequate bank regulations, were some of

the major weaknesses of the program. With a sovereign debt crisis and international capital flow

reversal, “all hell broke loose”. The abruptly collapsed currency board and the run on the banks

created a severe liquidity shortage. Sovereign debt default ensued. The world had cut Argentina

from the international capital market. More than 10 years later, prices are not stabile. The

country was able only recently to have better access to the international capital markets. Chile’s

stabilization program, however, had long-lasting outcomes, similarly to the Israeli program.


        In contrast to the crisis-management experience in Latin America, the Asian crisis has

been a game changing event that put the Asian Economies (particularly South Korea and

Indonesia) on a durable growth track. To a large measure, the post-crisis Asian financial and

monetary institutions restructuring enabled the entire region to escape the 2008 global crisis.




   2.   Disinflation and Globalization

The globalization wave has swept emerging markets in Latin America, European transition

economies, East Asian emerging economies, and Israel, over the last decades. The 1992 single-

market reform in Europe and the formation of the euro zone were watersheds of globalization.

Emerging markets, including China and India, likewise became significantly more open. Wynne

and Kersting (2007) note that in the 1970s more than three quarters of industrial countries had
restrictions of some sort on international financial transactions. By the 2000s, none did. Likewise,

restrictions on these transactions among emerging markets fell from 78 percent in the 1970s to 58

percent in the 2000s. Israel was exposed intensively in the globalization forces and was able to

exploit them to climb down from three-digit inflation rates in the early 1980s, and the double-digit

rates in the late 1980s and early 1990s.


Economic integration of the world economy has been reinforced by the transition from

communism to capitalism in the former Soviet Union. Spontaneous privatizers, including the

military industrial complex (vpk) began mass sales of natural resources abroad. The USSR’s entire

prolonged war strategic mineral reserves were shipped out of Russia’s Far East ports to Asia,

contributing to a decade long plunge in natural resources prices, setting in motion a broad drop in

energy products’ inflation.


The “Great Moderation” refers to the significant in business-cycle volatility starting in the mid-

1980s, believed at that time to be permanent, in developed nations in the later part of the twentieth

century. Sometime during the mid-1980s major economic variables such as real GDP growth,

industrial production, monthly payroll, and the unemployment rate began to decline in volatility.

These reductions are primarily due to greater independence of the central banks from political and

financial influences which has allowed them to follow macroeconomic stabilization.


Figure 4.1 describes deviations from trend of the unemployment rate and the bond-yield corporate-

treasury spread, for the period 1953-2014. The figure highlights the significant reduction in the

fluctuations of the unemployment rate and the bond-yield spread between Baa corporation rates

and the treasury rate.
    Figure 4.1: HP Filter de-trended unemployment rate and 5-year bond-yield

    (corporate/treasury) spread, US, 1953-2014


            0.6

                                                                       The Great Moderation
            0.4                                                               Period

            0.2


            0.0


           ‐0.2


           ‐0.4                                                                         Unemployment
                                                                                        Spread
           ‐0.6
                  '53 '56 '59 '62 '65 '68 '71 '74 '77 '80 '83 '86 '89 '92 '95 '98 '01 '04 '07 '10 '13


        Source: FRED, BLS, FRED, BLS, an extension to Eckstein, Setty and Weiss (2015).

    Notes: De-trended unemployment rate obtains through HP-filter, in SD. Bond yield spread is
    defined as the difference between two things: 5-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate, and
    Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield, HP filtered, in SD.




    Global inflation declined from 30 percent to 4 percent between 1993 and 2003.9 Rogoff (2003,

    2004) conjectures that globalization—interacting with deregulation and privatization—has

    played a strong supporting role in the past decade’s disinflation. An important feature of

    openness relates to international labor flows. International migrants constituted 2.9 percent of

    the world population in the 2000s, up from 2.1 percent in 1975. In some countries, changes

    have been more dramatic. In Israel in the 1990s, there was a surge of immigrants of up to 17


9
 Kenneth Rogoff’s paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on "Monetary
Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy" Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2003.
     percent of the population, and the central bank achieved a sizable decline of inflation. It is

     possible that the two events are related. In Spain in 1995, the percentages of foreigners in the

     population and in the labor force were below 1 percent and below 0.5 percent. At the end of

     2006, these rates were around 9 percent and 14 percent.


        By easing labor bottlenecks, migrants help to keep down prices of goods and services. Pass

        through of world low inflation, and low interest rates, to domestic prices and interest rates,

        the effects of migration on wages, is to be addressed by the standard Phillips curve

        analysis.10


     Independence of central banks is a way to overcome dynamic inconsistency: Expected inflation

     leads to output, employment, and financial-market distortions; surprise inflation is

     employment and output boosting (through the Phillips Curve mechanism). In the absence of

     central bank independence, the non-commitment equilibrium is one of high-expected inflation.

     Central bank independence is a necessary condition for overcoming the dynamic inconsistency

     and consequently weakening the inflation bias. Accordingly, Rogoff (2003, 2004) attributes

     the moderation in world inflation to a broad-based move towards having them run by

     conservative anti-inflation oriented central bankers; similar developments happened also in

     Israel. The increased competitiveness was a result of the interplay of globalization,

     deregulation and a decreased role for governments in many economies. Given this diagnosis

     he foresaw continued disinflation and even deflationary pressures (which came into a stark

     relief in the Great Recession) arguing that the most important factor supporting world-wide

     disinflation has been the mutually reinforcing mix of goods market and financial deregulation


10
  Bentolila, Dolaldo, and Jimeno (2007) have addressed the impact of the Spanish immigration boom on the
Phillips curve.
      and globalization, and the consequent significant reduction in monopoly pricing power. These

      developments increased competitiveness; diminishing the gains, a central bank can reap via

      unanticipated inflation, because it reduces the gap between the economy's monopolistically

      competitive equilibrium, and the more socially desirable competitive equilibrium. In addition,

      both theory and empirics suggest that economies that are more competitive have more flexible

      nominal prices, making smaller the Barro-Gordon-type output gain the central bank can

      achieve by inflating; and making them more ephemeral. In a standard, stylized political

      economy model, Rogoff shows that it is easier to credibly sustain low inflation in a competitive

      than in a highly monopolistic economy.11


      Evidence of the effect of globalization on the Phillips curve is provided by Loungani, Razin,

      and Yuen (2001), Razin and Loungani (2007), and Clarida (2008). Previously, Romer (1993,

      1998) and Lane (1997) showed that inflation and trade liberalization are negatively

      (significantly) correlated among the large (flexible exchange rate) OECD economies.


The core mechanism in the New Keynesian paradigm depends on the Phillips Curve; that is, the

tradeoff between surprise inflation and the level of economic activity. The reason why the New

Keynesian framework is capable of generating such a trade-off between inflation and economic

activity is that producer-desired prices (once prices are adjusted) rise with the economy’s output,




11
     Rogoff’s prediction has proven correct. Global inflation moved sideways also after 2003, and

then fell sharply asymptotically, approaching zero after 2008, despite massive monetary and credit

expansion in the United States and the European Union.
when marginal costs slope upward due to diminishing returns to scale. Furthermore, when the

labor supply increases, workers tend to experience increasing marginal disutility of labor efforts.

The resulting increased real-wage demands must rise. Increased wage demands put an upward

pressure on the marginal cost, and consequently on the producer-desired price setting.


Bean (2006) succinctly summarizes the effect of globalization on the Phillips curve in the era of

globalization:


     “One of the most notable developments of the past decade (that is, the 1990s) has been the

     apparent flattening of the short-run trade-off between inflation and activity. The seventies were

     characterized by an almost vertical relationship in the United Kingdom, in which attempt to

     hold unemployment below its natural rate resulted in rising inflation. In the eighties, the

     downward sloping relationship reappears, as inflation was squeezed out of the system by the

     slack of the economy. However, since the early nineties, the relationship looks to have been

     rather flat. Three factors—increased specialization; the intensification of product market

     competition; and the impact of that intensified competition and migration on the behavior of

     wages—should all work to flatten the short-run trade-off between inflation and domestic

     activity.”12


Evidently, changes in the foreign price pass through into domestic inflation in the open-economy

case even if the exchange rate depreciation trend does not change. If, in addition, the exchange


12
  Similarly, Mishkin (2007) writes about the U.S. inflation-output trade-off: “The finding that inflation is less
responsive to the unemployment gap, suggests that fluctuations in resource utilization will have smaller implications
for inflation than used to be the case. From the point of view of policy makers, this development is a two-edged
sword: On the plus side, it implies that an overheating economy will tend to generate a smaller increase in inflation.
On the negative side, however, a flatter Phillips curve also implies that a given increase in inflation will be more
costly to wring out of the system.”
rate depreciation tapers down, and once the foreign exporters to the home country are also given a

chance to adjust prices in response to the moderation in the exchange rate depreciation, the home

country import price inflation moderates as well. In the world of the Great Moderation the home

country inflation abates.


Opening up of the economy to capital, goods, and labor mobility also flattens the Phillips curve.

In the New Keynesian framework, Binyamini and Razin (2010) show how increased volume of

trade in goods, greater financial openness, and labor migration affect the trade-off between output

and inflation by flattening the Phillips curve.13 Minimizing the (utility-based) loss function implies

moderate inflation, akin to the Great Moderation. They demonstrate analytically how the opening

up of the domestic economy to trade in goods, international borrowing and lending and migration

flatten the Phillips Curve (see Appendix). Every successive round of the opening up of the

economy contributes to flatten the aggregate supply curve. The intuition is that when an economy

opens up to trade in goods, it tends to specialize in production but to diversify in consumption.

This means the number of domestically produced goods, is less than the number of domestically

consumed goods. Consequently, the commodity composition of the consumption and output

baskets, which are identical if the trade account is closed, are different when trade in goods is

possible. As a result, the correlation between fluctuations in output and in consumption (which is

equal to unity in the case of a closed trade account) is less than unity if the economy opens up to

international trade in goods. The decomposition of utility based Phillips Curve to the various forces

of migration, output gap, and real exchange rate is shown in an Appendix. In words, these

globalization forces work analytically as follows.




13
     See Appendix.
When the capital account is open, then the correlation between fluctuations in consumption and

domestic output is further weakened, this is because with open capital accounts the representative

household can smooth consumption through international borrowing and lending and thereby

separate current consumption from current output. The inflation effects of shocks to the marginal

cost are therefore reduced, because the fluctuations in labor supply are also smoothed, because of

the consumption smoothing.


When the labor market is internationally closed to outward-migration, wage demands faced by

domestic producers are upward sloping, both under in-migration and under a completely closed

labor market. However, when the labor market is open to in-migration, domestic producers face

an expanded labor supply: additional to the skilled native-born labor supply (with upward sloping

wage demand), they also face a complementary unskilled foreign labor supply (with exogenously

determined wage demand). That means that in-migration acts on the Phillips Curve essentially like

a domestic productivity shock.


There has been some evidence of greater restraints on domestic prices and wage growth in sectors

more exposed to international competition, such as textiles and electronics. Chen, Imbs, and Scott

(2004) analyzed disaggregated data for EU manufacturing over the period 1988–2000. They find

that increased openness lowers prices by reducing markups and by raising productivity. In

response to an increase in openness, markups show a steep short-run decline, which partly reverses

later, while productivity rises in a manner that increases over time. If globalization reduces the

markup, our model predicts that this effect, by itself, leads to a more forceful anti-inflation policy

and lessens the attention given by the policy maker to the fluctuations in economic activity. One

can conjecture that more frequent price updating steepens the trade-off between inflation and

activity; however, to our knowledge, neither theory nor empirical evidence exists in support of any
systematic relationship between globalization and frequency of price updating. Notably, Gopinath

and Rigobon (2007) report that the time frequency of price adjustment of U.S. imported goods

trended downward, on average, during the Great Moderation. Gopinath and Itskhoky (2008)

exploit the open economy environment, which provides a well-identified cost shock; namely

sizeable exchange rate shocks. They use this identification method to test the effects of price-

adjustment frequencies and pass through. They demonstrate that high frequency adjusters have a

long-run pass-through that is at least twice as high as low frequency adjusters in the data are. Borio

and Filardo (2007) present cross-country evidence in support of their contention that global factors

have recently become empirically more relevant for domestic inflation determination. 14




             2.1 Switch from two to one-digit inflation


There are several countries, including Israel that went through hyperinflation crisis in some stage

of their development. Following the 1977 change of guards at the government level (the political

“Ha'Mahapach”) in Israel, the newly elected “Likkud” government abruptly eased its control over

the economy. In particular, capital controls largely lifted, initially bringing in short-term capital,

followed later by a reversal when the economy faltered. At the same time, a populist economic


14
   See Binyamini and Razin (2010). See also Gali (2008) for a comprehensive treatise of the open-economy New
Keynesian model. Borio and Filardo (2007) present cross-country evidence in support of their contention that global
factors have recently become empirically more relevant for domestic inflation determination. But Ihrig et al. (2007)
have shown that their result is very specific to the econometric method used. Based on cross-country analysis,
Badinger (2007) finds that globalization is also correlated with more aggressive policy toward inflation. Tetlow and
Ironside (2007), although not dealing with globalization, find that for the United States, the slope of the Phillips
curve has—largely and continuously—lessened during recent years. However, Ihrig et al. (2007) have shown that
results are very specific to the econometric method used. Based on cross-country analysis, Badinger (2007) finds
that globalization is also correlated with more aggressive policy toward inflation. Tetlow and Ironside (2007),
although not dealing with globalization, find that for the United States, the slope of the Phillips curve has—largely
and continuously—lessened during recent years.
policy led to high budget deficits and big wage increases. The absence of constraining rules on

actions of the central bank rendered it strongly accommodating the treasury in its expansionary

monetary policy. With improper bank regulation, (“Visut Menayot”) banks were on the verge of

collapsing. All these led to a hyperinflation, which climaxed in mid-1985. Following the

hyperinflation crisis in the early 1980s under the populistic “Likkud” government, a major political

restructuring in Israel toward the political center enabled a unity government (“Likkud” plus

“Avoda”) to stabilize the economy. Indeed, some key measures, requiring a political consensus

were taken and new legislation helped to immunize, in part the economy from similar extreme

crisis features. In particular, a new legislation (“khok Hahesderim”) allowed the government to

exercise more tight control over the budget. A new law forbade the Central Bank to monetize the

budget deficit (“Khok Iee Hadpassa”). A Tri-Party agreement between the government, the

Federation of Labor (“Histadrut”) and the association of private sector employers dampened the

wage-price dynamics and enabled a sharp nominal devaluation that ended in a real devaluation.15


The macroeconomic changes, brought about by the stabilization program, have lasted until these

very days. The Hyperinflation episode has not reoccurred.16 The 1985 inflation stabilization

program laid the foundation for the increasing independence of central banks. Such independence

is critical for the successful conquest of inflation (see Chapter 1). We document how a strong was




15
   The expectations-based framework whereby a change in monetary and fiscal regime help conquest inflation is in
Sargent, (1999).
16
   Oil consuming developed economies, hit by the oil price shock like Israel, however were able to crush the nascent
inflation pressures. Other developing countries experienced similar hyperinflation episodes. Many Latin American
countries, particularly Argentine in 2002, went through similar processes. The 1997 Asian crisis had also similar
features, except that a more disciplined fiscal policy had been maintained before the crisis erupted.
the correlation between the convergence to advanced countries’ inflation and the globalization

process; both took a sharp upturn in the mid-1990s.


                 2.1 Convergence of inflation rates


Globalization—interacting with deregulation and privatization—has played a strong supporting

role in Israel’s disinflation. The moderation is due to a large extent to the increasing independence

of the Bank of Israel, conducting effective anti-inflation policies in the presence of worldwide dis-

inflation.17


Figure 2.1 shows the convergence of Israel inflation rate to US, Germany and OECD rates.

Inflation fall started after the 1985 inflation stabilization policy but converged to the low one-digit

rates of advanced economies in the 1990s.18




17
   Globalization affected also conduct of central banks. Inflation targeting was born in New Zealand in 1990.
Admired for its transparency and accountability, it achieved success there, and soon in Canada, Australia, the UK,
Sweden and Israel. It subsequently became popular as well in Latin America (Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, and
Peru) and in other developing countries (South Africa, South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand and Turkey, among
others).
18
   Leiderman (1999) comprehensively analyze Israel’s dis-inflation with a focus on monetary policies related to
inflation and disinflation in Israel. He especially focus on inflation targeting as an instrument of disinflation.
 Figure 2.1: Inflation Rates (Annual GDP Deflator, percentage)

           28
                                                       Israel
           23

           18
                                                                 OECD
                                                                members
           13
                                                                      United
                                                                      States                             Canada
             8
                                                                                               Germany

             3

            -2
                  1988
                  1989
                  1990
                  1991
                  1992
                  1993
                  1994
                  1995
                  1996
                  1997
                  1998
                  1999
                  2000
                  2001
                  2002
                  2003
                  2004
                  2005
                  2006
                  2007
                  2008
                  2009
                  2010
                  2011
                  2012
                  2013
                  2014
 Source: The World Bank

           (i)       International Financial Integration


           Full international financial integration requires that in the long run (when prices adjust to

various shocks and markets clear), the following arbitrage equation holds.


                                                                          ⁄            ,
                                           1                    1                               ,
                                                                               ⁄           ,



Where stands for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom; and q stands for the real

exchange rate vis a vis the US dollar19:




19
     Recall that by the Fisher equation:
                                                   ,                   ⁄       ,                             ,   ⁄       ,
                      1           1                    , That is, 1                                 1                            .
                                               ,                           ⁄       ,                     ,           ⁄       ,
                                                               ,
                                         ⁄   ,     ⁄   ,           ,
                                                           ,



In addition,   stands for the nominal exchange rate, vis a vis the US dollar; and     stands for the

price level.


        Figure 2.2 plots the graphs of the real-interest-rate, adjusted for real exchange rate

changes, the yields on three-month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the

United Kingdom, and the yields on three-month US government bonds. International financial

integration generates more synchronized country-specific yields. Time series are filtered to wash

out short-run idiosyncratic fluctuations. Figure 2.2 demonstrates strikingly that in the 1990s

Israel integrate significantly into the world financial markets.
 Figure 2.2: Gross Real Interest Rate Adjusted for Real Exchange Rate Changes (US
 benchmark)
 1.25

 1.20
                                Israel
 1.15            UK

 1.10

 1.05

 1.00                 Germany
                         Canada                      USA
 0.95                                        (real exchange rate)

 0.90
        1988
        1989
        1991
        1992
        1993
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2015
 Note: Series are HP-filtered. Monthly data are shown in the background.

 Source: Stats Bureau, FERD, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-
 month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields
 on three-month US government bonds.


        2.3 Implications


The absence of constraining rules on actions of the Bank of Israel and on Israel's fiscal authority

has induced strongly accommodative monetary policies and uncontrolled inflation. With improper

financial sector regulation, (e.g., the so-called “Visut Menayot”) banks were on the verge of

collapsing in the 1984 crisis. They were able to recapitalize making their investment portfolios

less risky over the next two decades, thanks to more rigorous bank regulations.
         3. Depression-Deflation Resistance

         Israel’s resilience to the external financial shock during the global crisis is

rooted in (a) the absence of credit boom in the wake of the crisis, and (b) the

relatively small commercial banks' exposure in terms of toxic assets that for the

European countries played a major role.


The newly emerging macroeconomic paradigm spans the gamut from an analytical framework that

features full capital-market arbitrage, smooth credit, Ricardian-equivalence properties,

representative agents, and efficient monetary management, to a framework with multiple agents,

incorporating debt frictions, liquidity traps, and relatively ineffective monetary management and

provides a role for fiscal policy in aggregate demand management. The analytical framework

based on the frictionless paradigm captures well the role of globalization forces and the reduction

in inflation in the 1990s Great Moderation era. The multiple-agent, market-friction revised

analytical framework captures some key features of the Great Recession that occurred in the

aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. It gives insight about the macroeconomic effects of

debt overhang on economic activity and inflation, when the monetary policy rate reaches its lower

bound.


The concern at the time was that Israel, being well integrated in to the world markets and the world

finance, might suffer contagion that will be long lasting. At the end of the day, Israel suffered only

a temporary trade shock because of the decline in world demand.
As shown in figure 3.1, Israel did not have a significant credit boom in the wake of the 2008 crisis.

The US and the UK, in contrast, were vulnerable to a gigantic credit expansion (Germany, as if

Israel escaped such credit bubbles).


 Figure 3.1: Domestic Credit to Private Non-Financial Sector (% of GDP)


  250

  200                                                                              United
                                                                                   States
  150                                                                              United
                                                                                   Kingdom
  100                                                                              Germany

   50                                                                              Israel

     0
         1970
         1972
         1974
         1976
         1978
         1980
         1982
         1984
         1986
         1988
         1990
         1992
         1994
         1996
         1998
         2000
         2002
         2004
         2006
         2008
         2010
         2012
         2014



 Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, data files, and World
 Bank and OECD GDP estimates.

 Note: Domestic credit provided by the financial sector includes all credit to various sectors on
 a gross basis, with the exception of credit to the central government, which is net. The
 financial sector includes monetary authorities and deposit money banks, as well as other
 financial corporations where data are available (including corporations that do not accept
 transferable deposits but do incur such liabilities as time and savings deposits). Examples of
 other financial corporations are finance and leasing companies, moneylenders, insurance
 corporations, pension funds, and foreign exchange companies.


Nevertheless, GDP growth has averaged 4 percent over the 2005-2010 period years, compared

with 0.7 percent on average for OECD countries. The overall living standards continue to improve

gradually, with per capita real GDP growing more rapidly than in other OECD countries. The
economy’s resilience has been underpinned by solid economic fundamentals, including large

foreign reserves, a dynamic high tech export sector, and the absence of economy wide deleveraging

pressures leading to the downfall in economic activity. Because, Israel did not have a credit bubble

in the years preceding the global financial crash, like the other major advanced economies, which

burst during the financial crisis.


Israel's growth performance depicted in Figure 3.2, during and after the global crisis, however,

was not unique. Figure 3.3 shows that among similar small open economies Israel's GDP grew

over the recent 20 years, including the 2008-2010 period at a similar cumulative rate as Chile; but

at a much higher rate than Greece, Spain and Portugal; which had a financial sector crash.


 Figure 3.2: Real GDP, Israel and Selected Countries (Jan 2003 = 100)

 170
                                                                                        Chile
 160
                                                                                        Israel
 150
 140                                                                                    Switzerland
 130                                                                                    Canada
 120                                                                                    Norway
 110                                                                                    Spain
 100
                                                                                        Portugal
  90
                                                                                        Greece
  80
  70




 Source: FRED
Furthermore, Figure 3.3 depicts GNP levels for Israel, Turkey, Brazil and Canada; economies,

which spared financial, sector crash. Israel exhibits a more moderate drop of output than all these

countries.


 Figure 3.3: Real GNP, Countries with No Financial Crisis (January 1998 = 100)


 180
                                                               Israel
 160
                                             Turkey
 140
                                                                                    Canada
 120                                                                       Brazil


 100

  80
       1996
       1996
       1997
       1998
       1999
       2000
       2001
       2002
       2003
       2004
       2005
       2006
       2007
       2007
       2008
       2009
       2010
       2011
       2012
       2013
       2014
 Source: FRED


       3.1 International Capital Flows


Capital flows provide another measure of the resilience of the Israeli Economy to the shocks. In

the aftermath of the global financial crisis, expansionary monetary policy in advanced economies

conventional or unconventional, that were conducted to boost up the economy, has affected

emerging market economies and others, such as Israel, through three channels:


       (1) Reduced exports;
        (2) Exchange rate appreciation; and,


        (3) Effects of capital inflows on the domestic financial system.


A number of studies have found an effect of monetary policy on specific gross flows. Bruno and

Shin (2015) for example, using a VAR methodology over the pre-crisis period (1995:4 to 2007:4)

find an effect of the federal funds rate on cross-border bank to bank flows; the effect is however

barely significant. Fratzscher et al (2013), using daily data on portfolio equity and bond flows, find

significant effects of different monetary policy announcements and actions since the beginning of

the crisis. Their results however point to the complexity of the effects of apparently largely similar

monetary measures. For example, they find QE1 announcements decreased bond flows to EMs,

while QE2 announcements increased them. In terms of the equations above, this suggests that, in

each case, monetary policy worked partly through its effects on the risk premium. These studies

cannot settle the further issue of whether or not total gross inflows increase with advanced

economies monetary expansions: The increase in the inflows the researchers have identified may

be offset by a decrease in other inflows20. However, studies of total inflows, or of the set of inflows

adding up to total inflows, yield some mixed conclusions. A representative and careful paper, by

Cerutti et al (2015), using quarterly flows over 2001:2 to 2013:2, suggests two main conclusions.

The most significant observable variable in explaining flows into Emerging Markets (EMs) is the

VIX index21: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs. The coefficients on

the monetary policy variables, namely the expected change in the policy rate and the slope of the




20
   See Blanchard (2016) who surveyed the literature about post 2008 crisis in advanced economies and emerging
economies that were hit to different degrees by the global financial crisis. To a large extent, the emerging markets
escaped the brunt of the crisis. Israel evidently belongs to the second group.
21
   The VIX is the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index. It is a measure of the implied volatility
of S7P 500 index options. The VIX
yield curve, typically have the expected sign. Several studies found that movements in the VIX

are strongly associated with global capital flows.22


It is worth looking now at capital inflows to EMs and Israel from the US, the epicenter of the

global financial crisis, and the country, which adapted with virtually no lag a brief expansionary

fiscal policy and a persistent expansionary monetary policy.


Figure 2.6 describes the portfolio capital outflows from the US to selected countries. Israel is in

the middle of the pack of countries that enjoy inflow of portfolio capital investments in the

aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. These inflows put appreciation pressures on the

exchange rates. Some central banks, including BOI, conducted a policy of a massive purchase of

foreign currency denominated assets, to protect against the declining competitiveness in the world

trade.




22
     See Rey (2015).
 Figure 3.4: Portfolio Flows, Crisis Economies (Index, Dec 1994 = 100)


    8000

    6000                                                                          Portugal

    4000

    2000                                                                           Israel

        0
                                                                                     Chile
   -2000                                                         Greece
                                                                              Spain
   -4000

   -6000
            1994
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
            2014
 Source: Anusha Chari


       4.    Exchange-Rate Policy Reaction

How did the Israeli policy makers react to the 2008 world financial-depression, and global trade-

diminishing shocks? Policy makers’ concern was three-fold: First, banks exposures to toxic assets

such as mortgage based securities and foreigners’ debt obligations. Partly because Israel skipped

the credit bubble, and bank regulations were relatively tight, Israel showed a sound resilience to

the global financial shock. Second, Israel export markets softened and demand conditions

deteriorated. Third, Israel domestic currency was strengthened. Bank of Israel addressed the last

two issues by a massive foreign exchange market intervention to weaken the value of the domestic

currency, and stimulate exports.
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, expansionary monetary policy in advanced

economies’ conventional or unconventional, that were conducted to boost up the economy, has

appreciated the currencies of the emerging market economies, including Israel. The question for

these economies was whether an expansionary monetary policy, which tends to depreciate the

currency and boost exports requires a direct foreign exchange market intervention, or whether the

latter can succeed without the former.23


Israel monetary authorities were concerned about the “Great Recession” downward pressures on

the demand for Israel’s exports and the strengthening of the Israeli currency as capital inflows

rose. They engaged in an intensive (sterilized) intervention in the foreign exchange market to

prevent the appreciation of the currency. However, there is evidently limits to how much such

policy can stimulate the demand for Israel’s output.


Sterilized intervention is ineffective when there is high private capital mobility to the extent that

domestic and foreign securities viewed by a large group of investors, are close substitutes.

Conditions under which sterilized intervention is effective happen to exist for a crisis economy,

however, when there is a probability of capital flow reversal, liquidity shortage, or major real trade

shock, leading to financial-intermediaries collapse. (See Appendix 5B). Under conditions where

foreign and domestic assets are close substitutes, sterilized intervention is ineffective. Through a

central-bank sale of domestic government debt assets, following a purchase of foreign currency in

the foreign exchange market, the money supply fully adjusts to bring back the pre-intervention



23
  In the presence of trending capital exports, the central bank cannot persistently appreciate the domestic currency
by selling foreign exchange denominated assets in the foreign exchange market, because depleted international
reserves could quickly reach their lower bound. However, In the presence of trending financial capital imports, the
central bank can persistently depreciate the domestic currency by purchasing foreign exchange denominated assets
in the foreign exchange market through money issue. This is why the foreign exchange market intervention is
referred to as a “half instrument” in the hands of the central bank.
expected rates of return on domestic and foreign currency bonds into equilibrium (the standard

interest parity). Therefore, sterilized foreign- exchange-market intervention, by the monetary

authorities, where the domestic money supply is unchanged, is incapable of pushing the exchange

rate up or down. However, the proposition may change in the presence of imperfect asset

substitutability, where domestic and foreign bonds command a different liquidity premium and

risk premium. Changing the composition of central bank assets, between foreign and domestic

assets (the case of sterilized foreign exchange rate market interventions), can then have real

economic effects in the presence of credit market spreads and frictions. In this case, sterilized

foreign-exchange-market intervention could effectively change the value of the foreign currency

in terms of domestic currency. A sterilized purchase of foreign assets may change the liquidity

premium that domestic bonds command, relative to foreign bonds, even though the money supply

is left unchanged. A similar outcome may transpire when foreign exchange intervention changes

market views of future foreign-exchange-market interventions. Similarly, liquidity-based

imperfect asset substitution between domestic government and domestic private-sector bonds

during liquidity crises can be exploited by the central bank.24 Israel's foreign exchange market

half-decade episode started when credit frictions were relatively intensive following the Lehman

moment in the USA in October 2008. As Appendix 5B indicates, under the conditions the

intervention aimed at keeping the exchange-rate overly depreciated are effective. However, over

time, as credit conditions improved, the policy became potentially less and less effective, as

Appendix 4A demonstrates.


Recall that the most significant observable variable in explaining short-term flows into Emerging

Markets (EMs) is the VIX index: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs.


24
     See Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz. (2015).
The VIX index is directly related to the risk adjusted return on domestic government bonds in the

periphery countries, like Israel. Sterilized foreign-exchange market purchase of US government

bonds by the central bank is then capable of blocking exchange rate appreciation. This was the

rationale for the Bank of Israel policy in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. However, the

effectiveness of such policy is short lived. Once the VIX index falls, sterilized-foreign-exchange-

market intervention becomes ineffective. Excessively high foreign reserves also have fiscal

medium term costs.


Figure 4.1 describes the changes in foreign exchange reserves for selected countries during the

aftermath of the 2008 financial shock. Israel foreign exchange reserves grew significantly more

than those of the advanced economies did but not much different from those among the non-OECD

countries.25 Figure 5.7 describes the portfolio capital outflows from the US to selected countries.

Israel is in the middle of the pack of countries that enjoy inflow of portfolio capital investments in

the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. These inflows put appreciation pressures on the

exchange rates. Some central banks, including BOI, conducted a policy of a massive purchase of

foreign currency denominated assets, to protect against the declining competitiveness in the world

trade.




25
  The phenomenon of a group of countries intervening to retain undervalued exchange rate is often referred to as
"currency war".
 Figure 4.1: Portfolio Flows, Crisis Economies (Index, Dec 1994 = 100)


    8000

    6000                                                                            Portugal

    4000

    2000                                                                              Israel

        0
                                                                                       Chile
   -2000                                                           Greece
                                                                                 Spain
   -4000

   -6000
            1994
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
            2014
 Source: Anusha Chari




Figure 2. describes the nominal exchange rate of various countries that engaged in the "currency

war" period: Israel, Sweden, Switzerland, Brazil and Indonesia. Israel seems to have undervalued

its currency the least among these countries; possibly because thanks for its international financial

integration and almost no capital controls, the effectiveness of sterilized intervention was weak.


       4.1 Leaning against the Winds


How did the Israeli policy makers react to the 2008 world financial-depression, and global trade-

diminishing shocks? Policy makers’ concern was three-fold: First, banks exposures to toxic assets
such as mortgage based securities and foreigners’ debt obligations. Partly because Israel skipped

the credit bubble, and bank regulations were relatively tight, Israel showed a sound resilience to

the global financial shock. Second, Israel export markets softened and demand conditions

deteriorated. Third, Israel domestic currency was strengthened. Bank of Israel addressed the last

two issues by a massive foreign exchange market intervention to weaken the value of the domestic

currency, and stimulate exports.


In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, expansionary monetary policy in advanced

economies’ conventional or unconventional, that were conducted to boost up the economy, has

appreciated the currencies of the emerging market economies, including Israel. The question for

these economies was whether an expansionary monetary policy, which tends to depreciate the

currency and boost exports requires a direct foreign exchange market intervention, or whether the

latter can succeed without the former.26


Israel monetary authorities were concerned about the “Great Recession” downward pressures on

the demand for Israel’s exports and the strengthening of the Israeli currency as capital inflows

rose. They engaged in an intensive (sterilized) intervention in the foreign exchange market to

prevent the appreciation of the currency. However, there is evidently limits to how much such

policy can stimulate the demand for Israel’s output.


Sterilized intervention is ineffective when there is high private capital mobility to the extent that

domestic and foreign securities viewed by a large group of investors, are close substitutes.


26
  In the presence of trending capital exports, the central bank cannot persistently appreciate the domestic currency
by selling foreign exchange denominated assets in the foreign exchange market, because depleted international
reserves could quickly reach their lower bound. However, In the presence of trending financial capital imports, the
central bank can persistently depreciate the domestic currency by purchasing foreign exchange denominated assets
in the foreign exchange market through money issue. This is why the foreign exchange market intervention is
referred to as a “half instrument” in the hands of the central bank.
Conditions under which sterilized intervention is effective happen to exist for a crisis economy,

however, when there is a probability of capital flow reversal, liquidity shortage, or major real trade

shock, leading to financial-intermediaries collapse.. Under conditions where foreign and domestic

assets are close substitutes, sterilized intervention is ineffective. Through a central-bank sale of

domestic government debt assets, following a purchase of foreign currency in the foreign exchange

market, the money supply fully adjusts to bring back the pre-intervention expected rates of return

on domestic and foreign currency bonds into equilibrium (the standard interest parity). Therefore,

sterilized foreign- exchange-market intervention, by the monetary authorities, where the domestic

money supply is unchanged, is incapable of pushing the exchange rate up or down. However, the

proposition may change in the presence of imperfect asset substitutability, where domestic and

foreign bonds command a different liquidity premium and risk premium. Changing the

composition of central bank assets, between foreign and domestic assets (the case of sterilized

foreign exchange rate market interventions), can then have real economic effects in the presence

of credit market spreads and frictions. In this case, sterilized foreign-exchange-market intervention

could effectively change the value of the foreign currency in terms of domestic currency. A

sterilized purchase of foreign assets may change the liquidity premium that domestic bonds

command, relative to foreign bonds, even though the money supply is left unchanged. A similar

outcome may transpire when foreign exchange intervention changes market views of future

foreign-exchange-market interventions. Similarly, liquidity-based imperfect asset substitution

between domestic government and domestic private-sector bonds during liquidity crises can be

exploited by the central bank.27 Israel's foreign exchange market half-decade episode started when

credit frictions were relatively intensive following the Lehman moment in the USA in October



27
     See Krugman et al. (2015).
2008; intervention aimed at keeping the exchange-rate overly depreciated are effective. However,

over time, as credit conditions improved, the policy became potentially less and less effective.


Recall that the most significant observable variable in explaining short-term flows into Emerging

Markets (EMs) is the VIX index: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs.

The VIX index is directly related to the risk adjusted return on domestic government bonds in the

periphery countries, like Israel. Sterilized foreign-exchange market purchase of US government

bonds by the central bank is then capable of blocking exchange rate appreciation. This was the

rationale for the Bank of Israel policy in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. However, the

effectiveness of such policy is short lived. Once the VIX index falls, sterilized-foreign-exchange-

market intervention becomes ineffective. Excessively high foreign reserves also have fiscal

medium term costs.


Figure 4.2 describes the changes in foreign exchange reserves for selected countries during the

aftermath of the 2008 financial shock. Israel foreign exchange reserves grew significantly more

than those of the advanced economies did but not much different from those among the non-OECD

countries. The Figure describes the nominal exchange rate of various countries that engaged in the

"currency war". period: Israel, Sweden, Switzerland, Brazil and Indonesia. Israel seems to have

undervalued its currency the least among these countries; possibly because thanks for its

international financial integration and almost no capital controls, the effectiveness of sterilized

intervention was weak28 .




28
  The phenomenon of a group of countries intervening to retain undervalued exchange rate is often referred to as
"currency war".
 Figure 4.2: Nominal Exchange Rate of Various Countries that Engaged in the "Currency
 War" Game: Israel, Switzerland, Sweden, Brazil and Indonesia (2007=100)


                                                 Indonesia
  130
                                                  Sweden
  120                                             Brazil
                                              Israel
  110
                                         Switzerland
  100

    90

    80

    70
         2005        2006           2007          2008          2009           2010          2011


 Source: FRED


         4.3 Some Implications


Historical patterns of booms and busts typically exhibit frequent small recessions interrupted by

rare but deep and long recessions. Traditional macroeconomic models, used often by central banks

and many other policy-making institutions, do not capture the full features of crises: frequent small

recessions punctuated by rare depressions. They do not illuminate how small open economies, like

Israel, which are substantially integrated into the world economy, perform when a global financial

shock takes place, leading to recession as deep and persistent as the Great Recession. We discussed

in this Section the relatively robust performance of Israel (as well as some other advanced

economies (e.g., Canada), and major Emerging Markets in the aftermath of the 2008 global
financial crisis. Factors contributing to this robustness are the absence of credit and real estate

bubbles, and banks’ tight regulation in the wake of the crisis, which precluded the deleveraging

process following the financial crisis.


4. Conclusion

The state of Israel, founded in 1948, benefited immensely from the post-1945 globalization

wave. Steadily reforming its financial and commercial institutions, and becoming increasingly

globalized in trade, labor market, and finance, Israel became a member of the OECD; the

accession took place in 2010. Currently, Israel’s is a thriving economy, integrated tightly into the

world economy, Israel also feature a remarkable technological prowess. The Israeli economy is a

remarkable development success story. A middle-income economy in the midst of a

hyperinflation in the early 1980s, Israel grew into one of the most thriving economies in the

world: and this despite the ongoing security challenges, that are most certainly a drain on its

resources. However, technology, globalization, and domestic policies created high income

inequality.
           Appendix: Globalization and the Phillips Curve


Binyamini and Razin (2010) show how trade in goods, financial openness, and labor in- and out-

migration affect the trade-off between output and inflation by successively flattening the Phillips

Curve. In the case of perfect mobility of labor, capital, and goods, the log‐linear approximate

aggregate supply curve (Phillips Curve) is given by29:


               
               t    
                            p n
                                               xt 
                                                        p  (1  n)  F  N
                                                                     Yt  Yt  
                                                                                       1      
                                                                                             wtW 
                                                                                                    1  n   q 
                                                                                                                 t 
                           1   p                   1   p                   1   p            n           

                     
                         1  n   q          
                                                               
                                                qt 1    Et  t 1 
                                                                          1  n  q  q  ,
                                                                                             
                                          t                                          t 1 t 
                            n                                               n              



where      t      is the deviation of CPI inflation from its target;                       x t  Y t H  Y t N
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                     is the domestic output

gap;     Y
           t
               F     
                    YtN    is the difference between foreign output and domestic natural output; the

parameter  p is the elasticity of the marginal cost with respect to producer's output,  is the

intra industry elasticity of substitution,                               stands for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,

and   denotes the subjective discount factor. The term n denotes the mass (number) of

domestically produced goods, w is domestic wage, and superscript F, N, and W, denotes Foreign,

Natural and World variable, respectively.




29
     See also Razin (2014), Chapter 11.
The term  
                   1 -  1 -     , captures the degree of price flexibility; and                  1-   is the probability
                          

of receiving a price‐updating signal. The variable                                is the real exchange rate, formally defined
                                                                             qt


as:


                                                                                   
                                                             q t   t  PF , t - Pt   ,


Where,          denotes the foreign consumer-price index.
         PF ,t



Denote the slope of the Phillips equation by ; for the open-economy expression slope of the

                                                    n  p
aggregate supply, equation is  1                          .
                                                   1   p


Let us turn to the case of no labor mobility and no capital mobility. If the domestic economy is not

integrated to the international financial market, then there is no possibility of consumption

smoothing, and we have that the value of aggregate current spending equals the value of aggregate

domestic output:



                                           PˆC ,t Cˆt  PˆY ,t Yˆt    ; PˆC ,t CˆtN  PˆY ,t Yˆt N ,



Where PˆC ,t is the CPI-based price level, and PˆY ,t is the GDP deflator. In this case, the aggregate

supply curve is


                                            n             (1  n)  F  N 1  n  
                              
                              t                     xt                     
                                                                           Yt  Yt         
                                                                                           qt 
                                          1                 1                  n        

                                       1  n                                      1  n q  q  .
                                                   q
                                                      t    qt 1     Et  t 1 
                                                            
                                                                                               t 1 t 
                                          n                                              n             
The Phillips-curve slope is:


                                                       n   
                                             2                  .
                                                       1  


In the closed economy case the aggregate supply equation (Phillips Curve) reduces to


                                                                      
                                   t                 xt   Et  t 1 ,
                                          1  


In the case of the closed economy, the Phillips Curve slope is:


                                             n           n p
                       3                 2               1           .
                                1               1             1   p


The Phillips curve is steeper in the closed economy case, compared to the open-trade case with

no-labor, no-capital. The latter is steeper than the slope with perfect mobility of labor, capital, and

goods.


Furthermore, changes in the foreign price pass through into domestic inflation in the open-

economy case, but these effects are absent in the closed economy case. This observation validates

the proposition the globalization in the world of great moderation exert inflation moderating

influences.


Badinger, H., (2007). "Globalization, Taylor Rules, and Inflation," mimeo,
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, Vienna, Austria.

Bean, Charles, (2006). "Globalization and Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4,
468-475.
Bentolila, Dolado and Jimeno (2007) “Does      immigration affect the Phillips
curve? Some evidence for Spain,”                European Economic Review Volume 52, Issue
8, November 2008, Pages 1398–1423.

Binyamini, Alon and Assaf Razin, (2008), “Inflation-Output Tradeoffs as Equilibrium Outcomes
of Globalization,” Israel Economic Review,6 (1):109-134.

Blanchard, Olivier, (2016). “Currency Wars, Coordination, and Capital Controls”. NBER
working paper 22388.

Borio, Claudio and Andrew, Filardo, (2007), "Globalization and Inflation: New Cross-Country
Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation," unpublished paper, Bank for
International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March).

Calvo, Guillermo, (1978). “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
Economy,” Econometrica 46, November, pp. 1411-1428.

Calvo, Guillermo (1992), " Are High Interest Rates Effective for Stopping High Inflation? Some
Skeptical Notes," The World Bank Economic Review, 6:55-69.


Calvo, Guillermo (2016) "From Chronic Inflation to Chronic Deflation: Focusing on
Expectations and Liquidity Disarray Since WWWII,” NBER working paper 22535.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Vegh (2001), “Inflation Stabilization and BOP
Crises in Developing Countries,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.)
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier.

Cerutti, E., Claessens, S., Laeven, L., (2015a). The Use and Effectiveness of Macro prudential
Policies: New Evidence. IMF Working Papers 15/61, International Monetary Fund. 1, 2.1

Chen, Nancy, Jean Imbs and Andrew Scott, (2004), "Competition, Globalization and the Decline
of Inflation," Journal of International Economics 63 (1), 93-118, 312.

Clarida, Richard, J., (2008), "Reflections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy", NBER
International seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and

Clarida, Richard, J., (2008), "Reflections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy", NBER
International seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Richard Clarida.

Fleming, Marcus (1962), “Domestic financial policies under fixed and under floating exchange
rates,” IMF Staff Papers 9, Nov., 369-380. Mundell
Fratzscher, M., Lo Duca, M., and Straub, R., (2013). On the international spillovers of US
quantitative easing.

Friedman, Milton, 1971, "Government Revenue from Inflation," Journal of Political Economy,
79, 4, pp. 846-856.


Gali, Jordi, (2008). Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
New Keynesian Framework. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gopinath, Gita (2004), Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and the Real, Exchange Dynamics,
Journal of International Economics, 62 (1), 1.

Karni, Edi, (1983), “Revenue from Inflation,” Yediot Aharonot.

Krugman, Paul, Maurice Obstfeld, And Marc Melitz, (2015), International Economics:Theory
and Policy, Tenth Edition, Pearson.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott, 1977. “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-493.


Leiderman, Leonardo. (1999), editor. Inflation and Disinflation in Israel, Bank of Israel.

Loungani, Prakash, and Assaf Razin (2001), "How Beneficial Is Foreign Direct Investment for
Developing Countries", Finance and Development, 38(2).

Loungani, Prakash, Assaf Razin and Chi-Wa Yuen, (2001). "Capital Mobility and the Output-
Inflation Tradeoff," Journal of Development Economics 64, 255-74.

Mankiw, N. Gregory., (2010). The trilemma of international finance. Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/11/business/economy/11view.html

Mishkin, Fredric. S., (2007). “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?,” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking, Volume 39, Issue 2-3 March–April 2007, Pages 259–294

Mishkin, Fredric. S., (2007). Remarks given at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California.

Mundell, Robert A. (1963), “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rates,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 29, pp.475-485.

Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (1993). The economy of modern Israel: Malaise and promise.
University of Chicago Press.
Rey, Helene (2015) “Dilemma Not Trilemma: Global Financial Cycles and Monetary Policy
Independence,” NBER working paper 21162.

Rogoff, Kenneth, (2003). "Disinflation: An Unsung Benefit of Globalization?", Finance and
Development, Volume 40, No. 4 (December), pp. 55–56.

Rogoff, Kenneth, (2004). "Globalization and Global Disinflation," in Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, proceedings
of the 2003 Jackson Hole symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.


Romer, D., (1993). "Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CVII (4), November, pp. 869-904.

Romer, David, (1998). "A New Assessment of Openness and Inflation: Reply," Quarterly

Sargent, Thomas. J., (1999). The conquest of American inflation. Princeton University Press.

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell (2004), “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees

Tetlow R. and B. Ironside, (2007). "Real-Time Model Uncertainty in the United States: The Fed,
1996-2003," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, No. 7 (October), pp. 1533-1561.

Wynne, Mark, A., and Erasmus K. Kersting, (2007). Openness and inflation. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper No. 2. Zhang, Yu. 2011. Essays on banking. Ph.D.

Wynne, Mark, A., and Erasmus K. Kersting, (2007). Openness and inflation. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper No. 2. Zhang, Yu. 2011. Essays on banking. Ph.D.
