                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FLEXIBLE PRICES AND LEVERAGE

                                      Francesco D’Acunto
                                           Ryan Liu
                                        Carolin Pflueger
                                        Michael Weber

                                      Working Paper 23066
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23066


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2017

This research was conducted with restricted access to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
BLS or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank our project coordinator at the BLS,
Ryan Ogden, for help with the data. We also thank Laurent Bach, Alex Corhay, Ralf Elsas,
Michael Faulkender, Josh Gottlieb, Lifeng Gu, Sandy Klasa, Catharina Klepsch, Mark Leary, Kai
Li, Max Maksimovic, Vikram Nanda, Boris Nikolov, Gianpaolo Parise, Gordon Phillips, Michael
Roberts, Philip Valta, Nicolas Vincent, Giorgo Sertsios, Hannes Wagner, Toni Whited, and
seminar participants at the 2016 NBER Corporate Finance, 2016 NBER Capital Markets and the
Economy, 2016 ASU Winter Finance, BYU, 2016 Edinburgh Corporate Finance Conference,
EFA 2015, 2016 FIRS Conference, 2016 ISB Summer Finance Conference, Frankfurt School,
2015 German Economist Abroad Conference, LMU Munich, McGill Risk Management
Conference, 2016 Corporate Finance Symposium, University of Arizona, SFI Geneva, and 2016
WFA. Pflueger gratefully acknowledges funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada (grant number 430-2014-00796). Weber gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Fama-Miller Center and the Neubauer Family Foundation.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23066.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Francesco D’Acunto, Ryan Liu, Carolin Pflueger, and Michael Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flexible Prices and Leverage
Francesco D’Acunto, Ryan Liu, Carolin Pflueger, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 23066
January 2017
JEL No. E12,E44,G28,G32,G33

                                          ABSTRACT

The frequency with which firms adjust output prices helps explain persistent differences in capital
structure across firms. Unconditionally, the most flexible-price firms have a 19% higher long-
term leverage ratio than the most sticky-price firms, controlling for known determinants of capital
structure. Sticky-price firms increased leverage more than flexible-price firms following the
staggered implementation of the Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act across states
and over time, which we use in a difference-in-differences strategy. Firms' frequency of price
adjustment did not change around the deregulation.


Francesco D’Acunto                               Carolin Pflueger
University of Maryland                           Sauder School of Business
R.H.Smith School of Business                     University of British Columbia
fdacunto@rhsmith.umd.edu                         2053 Main Mall
                                                 Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z2
Ryan Liu                                         Canada
University of California at Berkeley             carolin.pflueger@sauder.ubc.ca
2200 Piedmont Avenue
rliu@haas.berkeley.edu                           Michael Weber
                                                 Booth School of Business
                                                 University of Chicago
                                                 5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
                                                 michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23066
                                     I     Introduction
Firms differ in the frequency with which they adjust output prices to aggregate and
idiosyncratic shocks, and these differences are persistent across firms and over time.1
Firms with rigid output prices are more exposed to macroeconomic shocks, making
price flexibility a viable candidate to explain persistent differences in financial leverage
across firms (Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) and Weber (2015)). Moreover, managerial
efficiency, customer antagonization, or slowly moving firm characteristics could also be
reasons why firms adjust their output prices less frequently, which in turn might affect
the leverage choices of firms (Blinder et al. (1997) and Anderson and Simester (2010)).2
       Firms’ frequency of output-price adjustment has long been a focus in Macroeconomics
and Industrial Organization.          In New Keynesian models, monetary policy has real
effects because firms adjust product prices infrequently (Woodford (2003)). Research in
Macroeconomics has studied credit constraints and price rigidity to understand aggregate
fluctuations and the effectiveness of monetary policy (Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist
(1999)). In this paper, we provide an empirical link between these two drivers of aggregate
fluctuations, and we study their effect on firms’ leverage choices.
       We study the differences in financial leverage across sticky- and flexible-price firms,
both unconditionally and conditional on a shock to credit supply, the Interstate Banking
and Branching Efficiency Act (IBBEA). The banking deregulation might result in banks
with better monitoring technologies and increased geographic diversification, which would
allow those banks to lend more to previously financially constrained and underleveraged
firms.
       Figure 1 documents the novel stylized fact, which is the main result of the paper. We
sort firms into six equally sized groups with increasing output-price flexibility. Moving
from firms with the most rigid output prices to firms with the most flexible output prices
increases firms’ long-term leverage ratio from around 10% to over 30%.3 We use the
   1
     Alvarez, Gonzales-Rozada, Neumeyer, and Beraja (2011) show that firms’ frequency of price
adjustment changes little over time, even with inflation rates ranging from 0% to 16%.
   2
     We discuss micro foundations of price stickiness, how they might affect leverage, and their relation
to volatility and operating leverage in Section II.
   3
     Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) argue firms use short-term leverage to finance working capital, and
are therefore unlikely to change short-term leverage in response to changing credit supply. We therefore
choose long-term leverage as the main outcome variable. Results continue to hold if we look at total
leverage or net debt to assets (see Online Appendix).



                                                   1
                                        Figure 1: Flexible Prices and Financial Leverage



                                               .4
                  Long-Term Debt over Assets
                                               .3
                                               .2
                                               .1
                                               0




                                                    1       2           3          4            5   6
                                                                Flexibility of Product Prices

   This figure reports the average long-term-debt-to assets ratio (y-axis) for groups of firms with
   increasing output-price flexibility. We measure the flexibility of product prices at the firm level,
   using confidential micro data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (see Section III.A of the paper
   for a detailed description). For each bin, the graph reports 95% confidence intervals around the
   mean leverage ratio.



confidential micro data underlying the official Producer Price Index (PPI) of the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS) to document this fact. We observe monthly good–level pricing
data for a subsample of S&P500 firms from January 1982 to December 2014.
     In the baseline empirical analysis, we find a one-standard-deviation increase in our
continuous measure of price flexibility is associated with a 2.4-percentage-point-higher
long-term debt-to-assets ratio, which is 11% of the average ratio in the sample (see
column (1) of Table 2).                                 We estimate these magnitudes after controlling for size,
tangibility, profitability, stock-return volatility, and the book-to-market ratio.                           We
also control for industry concentration and for firm-level measures of market power
and concentration, which might be correlated with firms’ price flexibility because of
product-market dynamics.4                                Results are similar if we only exploit the variation in
price flexibility within industries and within years. This result is important, because
   4
     Ali, Klasa, and Yeung (2009) show that measures of industry concentration using only publicly listed
firms are weakly correlated with concentration measures using both public and private firms. They
find a strong correlation of their Census-based measure with price-to-cost margins. We add both a
Compustat-based measure of industry concentration and firm-specific measures of price-to-cost margins.


                                                                            2
product-market considerations at the industry level affect firms’ demand for debt (e.g., see
Maksimovic (1988) and Maksimovic (1990)). Results are also similar if we use alternative
industry definitions, such as the Fama-French 48 industries, or the Hoberg-Phillips 50
industries (Hoberg and Phillips (2010), Hoberg and Phillips (2016)), which are constructed
based on the distance across individual firms in the product space.          The size and
significance of results are unchanged when we account for measurement error using the
errors-in-variables estimator based on linear cumulant equations of Erickson, Jiang, and
Whited (2014).
    A growing consensus in the macroeconomics literature suggests prices at the micro
level are sticky (see Kehoe and Midrigan (2015)), but no consensus exists on what
causes firms to have sticky prices.     Potential explanations include physical costs of
price adjustment, customer antagonization, pricing points, market power, and managerial
inefficiencies. Blinder et al. (1997) summarize different theories and run an interview
study to disentangle 12 different explanations. They find support for eight theories, and
conjecture micro foundations for price stickiness might differ across industries. We do not
aim to pin down the specific channels through which price stickiness affects leverage in
the current paper, because the literature has not yet settled on the micro foundations of
these channels. Instead, we study in detail potential determinants of price stickiness and
alternative explanations for our findings, and we find none of these alternative channels
explains the relationship between the frequency of price adjustment and firms’ leverage
choices.
    An important concern is that price flexibility is a mere proxy for the volatility of
cash flows. To disentangle the relationship between price flexibility and volatility, we
note the association between return volatility and leverage varies widely in terms of
sign and statistical significance in our baseline specifications (see Table 2), in line with
the findings of Frank and Goyal (2009) and Lemmon et al. (2008). Time-varying risk
aversion, fades, noise trader risk, or components potentially endogenous to leverage itself
could be key drivers of total volatility and affect leverage with different signs. Once we
decompose volatility into a component predicted by the frequency of price adjustment
and a residual component (see Table 8), we find the predicted component of volatility
is robustly negatively associated with leverage, whereas no systematic association exists
between the residual component and leverage. Product price flexibility is, hence, not a


                                             3
simple proxy for firm-level volatility.
    Price flexibility is a highly persistent characteristic of the firms in our sample,
consistent with previous findings. A firm-level regression of post-1996 price flexibility
onto pre-1996 price flexibility yields a slope coefficient of 93%, and we fail to reject the
null that the coefficient equals 1 at any plausible level of significance. This persistence
suggests we can hardly consider a shock to firm-level price flexibility for identification
purposes in our sample.
    The paper does not aim to test for the causal effect of price flexibility on financial
leverage, which would require us to identify the persistent determinants of the price-
setting strategy of firms. At the same time, sticky-price firms have lower financial leverage
unconditionally and conditional on observables (Figure 1), which might indicate they are
financially constrained. We therefore test whether an exogenous shock to the supply of
credit affects the financial leverage of sticky-price firms more than the financial leverage of
flexible-price firms. We propose a strategy inspired by the financial constraints literature.
We (i) identify a positive shock to the supply of bank credit that firms can access, (ii)
show sticky-price firms increase leverage more than flexible-price firms after the shock,
and (iii) show the effect does not revert in the short run.
    We exploit the staggered state-level implementation of the Interstate Banking and
Branching Efficiency Act between 1994 and 2005 (Rice and Strahan (2010) and Favara
and Imbs (2015)) as a shock to the availability of bank credit. Restrictions on U.S. banks’
geographic expansion date back at least to the 1927 McFadden Act. The IBBEA of 1994
allowed bank holding companies to enter other states and operate branches across state
lines, dramatically reshaping the banking landscape in affected states. The step-wise
repeal of interstate bank branching restrictions increased the supply of credit. Banking
deregulation resulted in lower interest rates charged (Jayaratne and Strahan (1996)), more
efficient screening of borrowers (Dick and Lehnert (2010)), increased spatial diversification
of borrowers (Goetz, Laeven, and Levine (2013)), higher loan volume (Amore, Schneider,
and Žaldokas (2013)), more credit cards (Kozak and Sosyura (2015)), more credit lines and
subsequent trade credit (Shenoy and Williams (2015)), and increased lending to riskier
firms (Neuhann and Saidi (2015)).
    We interpret the staggered state-level implementation of the IBBEA as a shock to
financial constraints exogenous to individual firms’ financial decisions. This shock allows


                                              4
us to test whether sticky-price firms increase their financial leverage more than flexible-
price firms after the shock. One way the IBBEA may relax financial constraints is by
giving firms access to banks with a better monitoring technology. These banks might be
willing to lend more, consistent with the empirical evidence of Jayaratne and Strahan
(1996) and Stiroh and Strahan (2003). Dick (2006) and Bushman et al. (2016) propose a
slightly different view of banking deregulation. They argue the IBBEA allowed banks to
lend to underleveraged borrowers, possibly due to better geographic diversification. We
do not take a stance on how banking deregulation relaxes financial constraints, and focus
instead on how financial constraints interact with product-price flexibility.
    Our empirical design compares outcomes within firms before and after the
implementation of the IBBEA in the state where the firms are headquartered, across
firms in states that deregulated or not, and across flexible- and sticky-price firms. Firms
in states that had not yet deregulated act as counterfactuals for the evolution of the
long-term debt of treated firms absent the shock. To assess the plausibility of the required
identifying assumptions, we show that before the shock, the trends of long-term debt of
flexible- and sticky-price firms are parallel, and the price flexibility of firms does not
change around the shock.
    We find sticky-price firms increased leverage more than flexible-price firms after
the deregulation. Crucially, sticky-price firms with a lower cash-to-assets ratio and a
larger external finance gap, which were more likely to need external financing to fund
their operations, drive the effect.   The most flexible-price firms kept their leverage
virtually unchanged after the deregulation. The results remain unchanged when we
add interaction terms of the deregulation dummies with the Kaplan-Zingales index or
stock-return volatility. In untabulated results, we find similar effects across firms with
and without investment-grade bond ratings, alleviating concerns that access to the public
bond market drives differences in leverage (see Faulkender and Petersen (2006)).
    The availability of product-price micro data requires that we focus on large firms,
but to what extent do large firms use bank credit? We use data from Sufi (2009) on credit
lines, and find 94.6% of the firms in our sample have credit lines with at least one bank.
The average utilization rate is above 20%, which suggests bank relationships are relevant
in our sample. Moreover, both the likelihood of having credit lines and their sizes increase
after the implementation of the IBBEA. After the implementation, 94.9% of the firms in


                                             5
our sample have a credit line, whereas the share is 93.3% before the implementation of
the IBBEA. Moreover, the average credit line is $934K after the implementation of the
IBBEA, compared to $543K before the implementation. Consistent with our results on
leverage, sticky-price firms drive the increase in the size of credit lines. These facts are
consistent with Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2008), who find large firms are
more likely than small firms to rely on bank finance.
     We assess the validity of our results with two falsification tests. We split states
into early deregulators (between 1996 and 1998) and late deregulators (after 2000). In
the first falsification test, we use only observations prior to 1996, when no state had yet
deregulated. The placebo implementation date for early deregulators is 1992. We choose
1992 to have a placebo treatment of four years, the same time period between the IBBEA
implementation of early and late adopters. We do not find any differences in the capital
structure of sticky-price firms in early states compared to sticky-price firms in late states
before and after 1992.
     In the second falsification test, we use only observations prior to 1996 and after 2000,
and exclude all observations in the period 1996-2000. Before 1996, no states had yet
deregulated, and after 2000, all states had deregulated. Consistent with our interpretation
of the shock, sticky-price firms in both early states and late states have higher long-term
debt after 2000 compared to before 1996, whereas flexible-price firms in both sets of states
do not change their capital structure after 2000.


A.     Related Literature
Our paper adds to a recent literature studying the macroeconomic determinants of
financial leverage, default risk, and bond yields. Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010)
study the effect of time-varying macroeconomic conditions on firms’ optimal capital
structure choice. Kang and Pflueger (2015) show fear of debt deflation is an important
driver of corporate bond yields. Favilukis, Lin, and Zhao (2015) document that firms in
industries with higher wage rigidities have higher credit risk. Serfling (2016) finds more
stringent state-level firing laws lower financial leverage of firms headquartered in the state,
whereas Simintzi, Vig, and Volpin (2015) show that firms lower their financial leverage
in countries passing labor-friendly law changes. Determinants of labor market frictions
in this literature vary at the industry, state, or country level, and hence are unlikely

                                              6
to account for our findings, because we exploit variation at the firm level even within
industries. In the causal test that exploits the banking deregulation shock, we can also
absorb firm-level time-invariant characteristics, such as whether the firms’ workforces are
unionized or not, and our results do not change.
       The paper also speaks to the theoretical and empirical literatures studying the effect
of volume flexibility on firms’ capital structure. The sign of the effect of volume flexibility
on financial leverage is inconclusive. On the empirical side, MacKay (2003) finds that
volume flexibility reduces financial leverage, whereas Reinartz and Schmid (2015) find
the opposite using direct measures of volume flexibility for firms in the utilities sector.
On the theoretical side, volume flexibility can decrease default risk (e.g., see Mauer and
Triantis (1994)) and promote risk shifting and asset substitution (e.g., see Mello and
Parsons (1992)), which have opposite effects on financial leverage in equilibrium. In our
empirical analysis, we control for firms’ price-to-cost margin, which we define as a linear
transformation of operating leverage, to average out the effects of time-varying operating
leverage on financial leverage.



                          II      Hypothesis Development
In this section, we discuss the channels through which sticky-price firms might have lower
financial leverage compared to firms with flexible output prices.
       First, Anderson and Simester (2010) use a field experiment to document that
customers dislike both positive and negative price changes, an effect they label the
customer-antagonization channel of price stickiness. Blinder et al. (1997) find more
than 50% of managers answer customer antagonization is an important reason for rigid
output prices.5 According to this channel, managers want to avoid adjusting output
prices in fear of customer antagonization. They would therefore choose ex-ante lower
leverage for precautionary reasons to avoid default following large cost shocks. Under this
interpretation, price rigidity changes firms’ demand for leverage, and lower leverage is not
due to banks’ decisions to restrict lending to sticky-price firms because of volatile cash
flows.
       Second, less efficient managers, or managers with higher attention costs, might adjust
  5
      See Table 5.2 in Blinder et al. (1997).



                                                7
output prices less frequently, while at the same time not equalizing the costs and benefits
of financial leverage (Ellison, Snyder, and Zhang (2015)). Because firms that do not
optimize their leverage choices are on average underleveraged (Graham (2000)), we would
observe sticky-price firms having unconditionally lower leverage.
    Third, costs of price adjustment, including menu costs, information gathering,
and negotiation costs, could lead to sticky-output prices and volatile cash flows (see
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) and Weber (2015)). Sticky-price firms might obtain
less leverage due to their higher riskiness compared to flexible-price firms.
    All three channels imply sticky-price firms have unconditionally lower leverage than
firms with flexible prices. We therefore aim to test the following hypothesis in the data.

Hypothesis 1 Inflexible-price firms have lower leverage than flexible-price firms.

    One might be concerned that price stickiness merely proxies for firms’ cash-flow
volatility or for operating leverage.
    Note only the third channel we describe above operates via the riskiness of cash
flows, whereas the first two channels do not necessarily imply sticky-price firms have
lower leverage because of their riskier cash flows. Therefore, we do expect price stickiness
helps explain financial leverage on top of measures of firm-level risk.
    Moreover, output-price stickiness differs from operating leverage in several ways.
First, price stickiness is the key mechanisms in New Keynesian models for the real
effects of monetary policy (Woodford (2003)). If price stickiness were a mere proxy
for operating leverage, monetary policy would be neutral. Second, inflexible-price firms’
profits may decline both if demand turns out lower or higher than expected. This behavior
differentiates price stickiness from operating leverage, which increases a firm’s exposure
to shocks but preserves the sign of the original exposure. Therefore, we expect that price
stickiness helps explain financial leverage on top of measures of operating leverage.
    Based on the first hypothesis, sticky-price firms have lower financial leverage
conditional on observables, which might indicate they are financially constrained. We
therefore consider the differential effect of a shock to the supply of credit for sticky-price
firms and flexible-price firms. An exogenous increase in the supply of credit might change
the leverage of firms through three channels.
    First, banking deregulation increases competition across banks and hence the value


                                              8
of banking relationships. Banks might actively reach out to previously underleveraged
firms in order to cater a higher supply of credit to them.
      Second, banking deregulation might result in lower precautionary savings of firms,
because after the deregulation, firms can access additional sources of financing more easily
and faster when close to default.
      Third, banking deregulation leads to banks with better monitoring technologies and
better geographically diversified loan portfolios. These banks might increase lending to
riskier firms after the deregulation.
      Conditional on a positive shock to credit supply, we therefore expect a larger increase
in financial leverage for sticky-price firms relative to firms with flexible prices.           We
therefore aim to test the following hypothesis in the data.

Hypothesis 2 Following a positive shock to loan supply, inflexible-price firms increase
leverage more than flexible-price firms.

      The three channels through which price stickiness might affect financial leverage have
the same unconditional and conditional implications, and we do not aim to disentangle
their contribution. In fact, the micro foundations of the observed degree of price stickiness
are still an open question in macroeconomics.



                                        III      Data

A.      Micro Pricing Data
We use the confidential micro pricing data underlying the PPI from the BLS to construct
a measure of price stickiness at the firm level. We have monthly output price information
for individual goods at the establishment level from 1982 to 2014. The BLS defines prices
as “net revenue accruing to a specified producing establishment from a specified kind of
buyer for a specified product shipped under specified transaction terms on a specified day
of the month.” Unlike the Consumer Price Index (CPI), the PPI measures the prices from
the perspectives of producers. The PPI tracks the prices of all goods-producing industries
such as mining, manufacturing, and gas and electricity, as well as the service sector.6
  6
    The BLS started sampling prices for the service sector in 2005. The PPI covers about 75% of the
service-sector output.


                                                9
       We focus on firms that have been part of the S&P500 during our sample period
from January 1982 to December 2014 due to the availability of the PPI micro data. The
S&P500 contains large U.S. firms and captures approximately 80% of the available stock
market capitalization in the United States, therefore maintaining the representativeness
for the whole economy in economic terms. The BLS samples establishments based on the
value of shipments, and we have a larger probability of finding a link between BLS pricing
data and financial data when we focus on large firms. We have 1,195 unique firms in our
sample due to changes in the index composition during the sample period, out of which
we were able to merge 469 with the BLS pricing data.
       The BLS follows a three-stage procedure to select its sample of goods. First, it
compiles a list of all firms filing with the Unemployment Insurance system to construct
the universe of all establishments in the United States.               Second, it probabilistically
selects sample establishments based on the total value of shipments, or on the number of
employees, and finally it selects goods within establishments. The final data set covers
25,000 establishments and 100,000 individual items each month. Prices are collected
through a survey, which participating establishments receive via email or fax.
       We first calculate the frequency of price adjustment (FPA) at the good level as the
ratio of price changes to the number of sample months. For example, if an observed
price path is $4 for two months and then changes to $5 for another three months, one
price change occurs during five months, and the frequency of price adjustment is 1/5. We
exclude price changes due to sales. This assumption is standard in the literature and does
not affect the measure, because sales are rare in the PPI micro data (see Gorodnichenko
and Weber (2016)). We then perform two layers of aggregation to create a measure of the
frequency of price adjustment at the firm level. We first equally weight frequencies for all
goods of a given establishment using internal identifiers from the BLS.7 To perform the
firm-level aggregation, we manually check whether establishments with the same or similar
names are part of the same company. In addition, we use publicly available data to search
for names of subsidiaries and name changes due to, for example, mergers, acquisitions, or
restructuring occurring during the sample period for all firms in the data set.8
   7
    Weighing good-based frequencies by the associated value of shipments does not alter our results.
   8
    See Weber (2015) for a more detailed description of the data and the construction of variables.
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) discuss in detail the number of goods and price spells used to calculate
the frequencies at the firm level. The average number of products is 111 and the average number of price
spells is 203. See their Table 1.


                                                  10
      The granularity of the data at the firm level allows us to differentiate the effect of
price flexibility from the effect of other industry- and firm-level characteristics.
      The price flexibility of similar firms operating in the same industry can differ
substantially. This difference can arise from different costs of negotiating with customers
and suppliers, physical costs of changing prices, or managerial costs such as information
gathering, decision making, and communication (see Zbaracki et al. (2004)). Because our
results do not change when we control for firm-level market power and product-market
dynamics across industries, firm-level persistent characteristics are likely to determine
the within-industry variation in price flexibility across firms we exploit in the empirical
analysis.


B.     Financial Data
Stock returns and shares outstanding come from the monthly stock return file from the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Financial and balance-sheet variables
come from Compustat.


B.1     Determinants of Financial Leverage

We define our preferred measure of leverage, Lt2A, as long-term debt over total assets. In
the Online Appendix, we show our results are similar if we consider alternative measures
of leverage, such as total debt over total assets and net debt over total assets.
      We define all covariates we use in the analysis at the end the previous fiscal year. To
reduce the effects of outliers, we winsorize all variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles. We
follow Rajan and Zingales (1995), Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2008), and Graham,
Leary, and Roberts (2015) in the choice and definition of capital-structure determinants.
We define the common determinants of financial leverage as follows: Profitability is
operating income over total assets, Size is the log of sales, B-M ratio is the book-to-market
ratio, Intangibility is intangible assets defined as total assets minus the sum of net
property, plant, and equipment; cash and short-term investments; total receivables; and
total inventories to total assets. We also add stock return volatility as an additional
covariate. We calculate T otal vol as annualized return volatility in the previous calendar
year using daily data and idiosyncratic volatility relative to the CAPM and Fama and
French three-factor model (Idio volCAP M and Idio volF F 3 ) following Campbell et al.

                                              11
(2001). We set the volatility to missing if we have less than 60 daily return observations.


B.2       Market Power and Operating Leverage

In the analysis, we also use additional covariates that proxy for market power and
operating leverage at the firm level.        These controls are important, because the
industrial organization literature suggests product-market considerations might affect the
price-setting strategies of firms. Our preferred measure of market power at the firm level
is Price-Cost margin, which we define as the ratio of net sales minus the cost of goods
sold to net sales. This measure is equivalent to 1 minus operating leverage, and hence it
also controls for time-varying changes in operating leverage at the firm level. Our results
are unchanged if we control for alternative measures of operating leverage, the ratio of
fixed costs over total sales, or follow Novy-Marx (2011) and define operating leverage as
the ratio of cost of goods sold and selling, general, and administrative expenses to total
assets.
      To control for industry-level concentration, we use the Herfindahl-Hirschman index
(HHI) of annual sales at the Fama-French 48-industry level.          Moreover, we use the
firm-level definition of concentration within the Hoberg-Phillips industries (HP Firm-level
HHI ), which are constructed based on the distance between firms in the product space,
using textual analysis to assess the similarity of firms’ product descriptions from the
annual 10-K filings (see Hoberg and Phillips (2010), Hoberg and Phillips (2016)). These
data are available from 1996 onward, which reduces the time span of our analysis. We
therefore report the results for the full sample of firm-year observations, and for the
restricted sample after 1996 throughout the paper.
      Ali, Klasa, and Yeung (2009) show measures of industry concentration using only
publicly-listed firms are weakly correlated with concentration measures using both public
and private firms. They find a strong correlation of their Census-based measure with
price-to-cost margins. We add both a Compustat-based measure of industry concentration
and firm-specific measures of price-to-cost margins. In a robustness analysis, we also use
the four-firm concentration ratio from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. This measure
reports the share of sales for the four largest firms in an industry, and uses all firms, both
private and public.



                                             12
B.3     Alternative Definitions of Industries

Product-market considerations are likely to be most relevant across industries, as opposed
to within industries. In our analysis, we focus on within-industry variation, which can
hardly be driven by product-market considerations.
      A growing literature in finance shows traditional definitions of industries might not
capture the variety of product market spaces in which a firm operates (e.g., see Hoberg
and Phillips (2010), Hoberg and Phillips (2016), and Lewellen (2012)). For these reasons,
we consider two alternative industry definitions. The first definition is the Fama-French
48-industry taxonomy. The second definition is the Hoberg-Phillips set of 50 industries,
based on the distance between firms in their product space (see Hoberg and Phillips
(2010), Hoberg and Phillips (2016)).


C.     Descriptive Statistics
Panel A of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for our running sample. Firms in our
sample do not adjust their output prices for roughly seven months (−1/(log(1 − F P A)),
with substantial variation across firms as indicated by the large standard deviation.
F P ADummy is a dummy variable that equals 1 for the firms in the top 25% of the
distribution based on price flexibility, and 0 for the firms in the bottom 25% of the
distribution. The average total and idiosyncratic volatilities are 33% and 28% per year
(Total vol and Idio vol ). The average long-term-leverage ratio Lt2A is around 21%. Firms
have an operative income margin (Profitability) of 15%. The average book-to-market ratio
is 60% (B-M ratio), and the average firm size is USD 3.8 bn. (Size). Twenty-one percent of
assets are intangible (Intangibility). The average price-to-cost margin (Price-cost margin)
is 37%, and the average industry concentration (HHI ) is 0.11. Panel B of Table 1 reports
the pairwise unconditional correlations among the variables.
      Flexible-price firms have unconditionally higher long-term leverage, and the frequency
of price adjustment is unconditionally correlated with standard determinants of capital
structure. The frequency of price adjustment is lower in more concentrated industries
and for firms with high markups, and might, therefore, reflect more market power on the
side of firms. For this reason, in our multivariate analysis, we will control for firm- and
industry-level measures of market power.


                                             13
                             IV        Baseline Analysis

A.       Price Flexibility and Leverage
We move on to investigate the empirical relationship between leverage and price stickiness.
Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) argue firms use short-term leverage to finance working
capital, and are therefore unlikely to change short-term leverage in response to changing
tax benefits or credit supply. In addition, inflation is highly persistent (Atkeson and
Ohanian (2001), Stock and Watson (2007)), and uncertainty about the aggregate price
level increases with the forecast horizon. Price-setting frictions should therefore be most
relevant for long-term leverage. For these reasons, we focus on long-term debt, as opposed
to short-term debt, as the main dependent variable in our empirical analysis. In Table
A.1 in the Online Appendix, we replicate all the results using total debt and net debt as
our measures of leverage.9
       We first look at the raw data, and plot the long-term-debt-to assets ratio separately
for sticky- and flexible-price firms over time. In both panels of Figure 2, the blue solid
lines refer to the ratio of long-term debt to assets of firms in the bottom quartile by
price flexibility. The red dashed lines refer to the ratio of long-term debt over assets of
firms in the top quartile by price flexibility, and the black dashed-dotted lines are the
differences between the two ratios. In both panels, flexible-price firms have on average
higher long-term leverage than inflexible-price firms throughout the sample period.
       In the top panel of Figure 2, the red vertical line indicates 1996, which is the year the
first set of U.S. states started to implement the IBBEA, an event we describe and exploit
for our identification strategy below. In the bottom panel of Figure 2, the red vertical
line indicates 2000, which is the year a second group of U.S. states started to implement
the IBBEA. In both panels, the difference in the ratio of long-term debt to assets is stable
before the deregulation, that is, to the left of the vertical lines, and it declines after the
deregulation. We will exploit these events and the convergence of the ratios for the two
groups of firms below to test Hypothesis 2 in Section II.
   9
    Using net debt might be important because Dou and Ji (2015) argue theoretically sticky-price firms
have higher precautionary cash holdings.




                                                 14
B.       Ordinary Least-Squares Analysis
To assess the magnitude of the correlation between price flexibility and long-term debt to
assets, our most general specification is the following OLS equation:

                                               0
                   Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai + Xi,t−1 × γ + ηt + ηk + i,t .                          (1)


Lt2Ai,t is long-term debt to assets of firm i in year t; F P A is the frequency of
price adjustment, which is higher for firms with more flexible prices; X is a set of
standard determinants of capital structure, which include size, the book-to-market ratio,
profitability, intangibility, and total volatility; ηt is a set of year fixed effects, which absorbs
time-varying shocks all firms face, such as changes in economy-wide interest rates; and ηk
is a set of industry fixed effects, which absorbs time-invariant unobservable characteristics
that differ across industries.10
       The time period varies across specifications because of the availability of the Hoberg-
Phillips data. In columns (1) and (5) of Table 2, we consider the full time span of our
data from January 1982 until December 2014. In all other columns, the time period is
limited from January 1996 to December 2014. This restriction reduces our sample size by
about 50%.11
       We use two definitions of industry fixed effects. The first definition allows for variation
within the 48 Fama-French industries. The second definition follows the 50-industry
classification of Hoberg and Phillips (2010) and Hoberg and Phillips (2016). Across all
specifications, we cluster the standard errors at the firm level to allow for correlation of
unknown form across the residuals of each firm over time.
       In columns (1)-(4) of Table 2, F P A is the continuous measure of price flexibility.
In columns (5)-(8), it is a dummy variable that equals 1 for the firms in the top 25% of
the distribution based on price flexibility, and 0 for the firms in the bottom 25% of the
distribution to ensure certain parts of the distribution of the frequency of price adjustment
do not drive our results.
  10
     Untabulated results are similar if we limit the variation within industry-years, and hence allow for
different trends across industries.
  11
     Note we cannot restrict the variation within firms, because the measure of frequency of price
adjustment is time invariant. As we show below, even when we measure the frequency of price adjustment
in different subsamples of the data, the correlation of the variables at the firm level is statistically
indifferent from 1.



                                                   15
       In column (1) of Table 2, we regress the ratio of long-term debt to assets on price
flexibility and standard determinants of capital structure, as well as measures of market
power at the firm level and market concentration at the industry level. Firms with
more flexible output prices have a higher ratio of long-term debt to total assets. This
positive association is significantly different from 0 at the 1% level of significance. A one-
standard-deviation increase in price flexibility (0.14) is associated with a 2.4-percentage-
point increase in the ratio of long-term debt to assets, which is 11% of the average ratio
in the sample. In column (2), we add the firm-level measure of concentration within
the Hoberg-Phillips industries. The baseline association between the frequency of price
adjustment and long-term leverage is virtually unchanged. In columns (3)-(4), we only
exploit variation in leverage and the frequency of price adjustment across firms within
the same year, and across firms within the same industry. As expected, the size of the
association between price flexibility and leverage decreases in the within-industry analysis,
because industry-level characteristics are associated with price flexibility. The baseline
association remains economically large and statistically different from 0, which suggests
within-industry variation in price flexibility in also important to explain firm differences
in capital structure. A t-test for whether the coefficients in columns (3)-(4) differ from
the coefficient in column (1) fails to reject the null of no difference at plausible levels of
significance.
       In columns (5)-(8), we estimate specifications similar to equation 1, but using the
indicator for firms with the most flexible prices, and look only at the most flexible firms
(top 25% of the distribution by price flexibility) and the least flexible firms (bottom 25%
of the distribution by price flexibility). This restriction further reduces the sample size,
but the results are robust across the alternative sample cuts and we confirm the results we
obtained with the continuous measure of price flexibility.12 Being in the top quarter of the
distribution of firms by price flexibility is associated with a six-percentage-point-higher
ratio of long-term debt over assets. The results are qualitatively similar when we only
exploit within-year and within-industry variation in price flexibility across firms.
       The point estimate for some of our covariates differ from estimates in the literature.
Our specific sample period from 1982 to 2014, and the fact that we focus on a set of
large firms might explain these differences. In Tables A.2 and A.3, we estimate our
  12
   The results are similar when we add all other firms and assign them a value of 0 for the F P A dummy
measure (see Online Appendix).

                                                  16
baseline specification without the frequency of price adjustment and for all firms and
for all firms in the S&P 500 between 1982 and 2014. Point estimates are similar to our
baseline regressions, and we find large firms have higher leverage than small firms when
we do not restrict the sample to S&P500 firms. The findings are consistent with Graham
et al. (2015), who study the effect of balance-sheet variables on financial leverage over
different subsamples. For samples of firms listed on NYSE and starting in 1980, they
also do not detect any significant effect of tangibility on financial leverage, the effect
of the book-to-market ratio on leverage flips sign, profitability is negatively associated
with leverage, and size is uncorrelated with financial leverage in the last decade. For
cash-flow volatility, Lemmon et al. (2008) do not find a significant association with book
leverage, whereas Frank and Goyal (2009) show higher total stock return volatility is
negatively correlated with long-term-debt-to-asset ratios, but not with total leverage or
market leverage.
     In untabulated results, we find the correlation between price flexibility and leverage
does not change when we add other firm-level controls to equation (1), such as cash over
assets (see Faulkender et al. (2012)).


C.    Measurement Error
We only use a representative set of price spells at the firm level to construct our firm-
specific measure of the frequency of price adjustment. We have several hundred spells per
firms to construct the frequencies, but measurement error could still be a concern.
     Erickson, Jiang, and Whited (2014) propose a novel methodology to account for
the measurement error in explanatory variables using linear cumulant equations. They
show several firm-level determinants of capital structure change sign or lose statistical
significance once they allow for measurement error. We follow their methodology to assess
the robustness of the association between price flexibility and long-term leverage when
correcting for measurement error in key variables. Specifically, we follow Erickson et al.
(2014) in assuming measurement error possibly affects two key determinants of capital
structure: asset intangibility and the book-to-market ratio. In addition, we also assume
the measure of price flexibility is measured with error. This assumption seems plausible,
because the measure is based on the aggregation of frequencies of price adjustment at the
good level based on a representative sample of goods.

                                            17
        In column (1) of Table 3, we report the baseline OLS estimator from column (1)
of Table 2 to ease comparison across estimations. In columns (2)–(4), we report the
estimated coefficients when implementing the cumulant-equation method of Erickson et al.
(2014) for the third, fourth, and fifth cumulants. We do not report the results for higher-
order cumulants because of the sample size. Using higher-order cumulants results in
estimates of similar size and substantially lower standard errors. Comparing the estimated
association of price flexibility with long-term leverage across specifications, the size and
significance of the coefficients are similar in the baseline OLS specification and when
we allow for measurement error in the frequency of price adjustment. The results for
the other covariates are in general similar, but some lose statistical significance or switch
sign, including the two covariates we also assume are measured with error (book-to-market
ratio and asset intangibility).



       V       Banking Deregulation and Falsification Tests
To assess whether the effect of price flexibility on leverage is causal, one route would
be to estimate the effect of a shock to firm-level price flexibility on leverage, or to
propose an instrument for price flexibility. However, price flexibility is a highly persistent
characteristic of firms. For instance, in our sample, a firm-level regression of post-1996
price flexibility onto pre-1996 price flexibility yields a slope coefficient of 93%, and we
fail to reject the null that the coefficient equals 1 at any plausible level of significance.13
This persistence suggests we can hardly consider a shock to firm-level price flexibility for
identification purposes in our sample. Therefore, in this paper, we do not aim to test for
the causal effect of price flexibility on financial leverage.
        Instead, we test whether an exogenous shock to the supply of credit affects the
financial leverage of sticky-price firms more than the financial leverage of flexible-price
firms.       We propose an identification strategy inspired by the financial-constraints
literature. We (i) identify a positive shock to the supply of debt, (ii) show inflexible-price
firms increase leverage more than flexible-price firms, and (iii) show the effect does not
revert in the short run.          Our strategy exploits a quasi-exogenous shock to financial
constraints, and uses ex-ante unconstrained firms to assess the causal effect of financial
  13
       See also Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), Golosov and Lucas (2007), and Alvarez et al. (2011).



                                                    18
constraints on inflexible-price firms.
     To implement this strategy, we need a quasi-exogenous shock to firm-level financial
constraints, as well as a viable control group of firms to assess how inflexible firms’ long-
term leverage would have evolved absent the shock.
     The shock we use is the staggered state-level implementation of the IBBEA of 1994.
The IBBEA represented a shock to the ability of banks to open branches and extend
credit across state borders. This shock is relevant for the leverage of firms in our sample,
because in Section V.B., we find 95% of them have a credit line open with at least one
bank, and all firms use such lines, especially the inflexible-price firms (see Figure A.1 in
the appendix).
     For the control group, we use flexible-price firms in the same states and the same years
as inflexible-price firms to proxy for the behavior of inflexible-price firms absent the shock.
Below, we show the pre-shock trends of long-term leverage for inflexible- and flexible-price
firms are similar, which supports the parallel-trends assumption. In addition, we do not
detect a change in the price flexibility of firms around the shock, lowering the likelihood
that firms change leverage because their price flexibility changed.


A.     Institutional Details and Interpretation
We follow the literature on banking deregulation and use the IBBEA as an exogenous
shock to bank lending. Kroszner and Strahan (2014) and Rice and Strahan (2010)
discuss in detail the advantages of this empirical design and the political forces driving
the deregulation process. They argue technological progress, such as ATMs, accelerated
deregulation, whereas the timing of implementation across different states was tied to the
political process. Because of the staggered implementation, we can flexibly control for
any persistent cross-state differences with state fixed effects. Time fixed-effects control
flexibly for any unobservable concurrent U.S.-wide shocks, including but not limited to
national changes in banking regulation and economic conditions.
     Restrictions to banks’ geographic expansion have a long history in the United States
(Kroszner and Strahan (2014)). The McFadden Act of 1927 gave states the authority
to regulate in-state branching, and most states enforced restrictions on branching well
into the 1970s. In 1970, only 12 states allowed unrestricted in-state opening of branches,
and 16 states prohibited banks from opening more than a single branch. In addition to

                                              19
branching restrictions, the Douglas Amendment to the 1956 Bank Holding Company Act
effectively prohibited a bank holding company from acquiring banks outside the state
where it was headquartered (Strahan (2003)).
     Starting in the 1970s, the restrictions on acquiring banks across states were gradually
eased. Kroszner and Strahan (1999) argue the timing of this deregulation wave relates
to technological innovations, but not to time-varying local economic conditions. Instead,
before the IBBEA of 1994, banks needed the target state’s explicit approval to open
branches across state lines.
     The approval of IBBEA was a watershed event for interstate banking, but did not
immediately lead to nationwide branching in all states. The law permitted states to
(a) require a minimum age of the acquired institution, (b) restrict de novo interstate
branching, (c) disallow the acquisition of individual branches without acquiring the entire
bank, and (d) impose statewide deposit caps. We use Rice and Strahan’s (2010) time-
varying index for regulatory constraints between 1994 and 2005 to construct a dummy
variable that equals 1 in the year the state lifted at least one of the restrictions (a) through
(d), and in all the subsequent years. In the following sections, a state is deregulated when
this dummy variable equals 1, and it is not deregulated otherwise.14 We map our firms
to states based on the location of the firm’s headquarters. For both external financing
decisions and the management of internal capital markets, CFOs are crucial (Graham and
Harvey (2002)), which is why our empirical analysis identifies the company’s headquarters
as the relevant geographic unit for financial leverage choices.


B.     Financial Dependence and Bank Debt
Our sample includes firms in the S&P500 from January 1982 to December 2014, for which
we can observe the micro-pricing data. Our empirical design exploits a shock to bank-level
debt, and hence we first need to verify that the firms in our sample depend on bank debt
rather than only public bond markets. Colla et al. (2013) report that bank loans and
credit lines jointly account for at least 30% of the leverage for the largest Compustat
firms. This fact suggests bank debt is an important source of financing for firms with
similar characteristics to the ones in our sample.
  14
     No states reinstated any restriction they had already lifted. Several states lifted the restrictions (a)
through (d) in different years from 1996 until 2002.



                                                     20
       To assess whether the firms in our sample depend on bank debt, we use the data on
credit lines collected by Sufi (2009).15 These data allow us to observe an extensive margin
of credit lines—whether firms have an active credit line or not—and an intensive margin
of credit lines—the share of the line that has been used at each point in time. We can
construct the extensive margin for all the firm-year observations in our sample, whereas
the intensive margin is only available for those firms that match with the 5% random
sample of Compustat firms constructed by Sufi (2009).
       As for the extensive margin, the vast majority of the firm-year observations in our
sample have a credit line open with at least one bank (94.6%). Flexible-price firms are
more likely to have a credit line (97.3%) than inflexible-price firms (93.6%), and a t-test for
whether these ratios are equal rejects the null at the 1% level of significance. Moving on to
the intensive margin, we find the usage rate of credit lines for firms in our sample is 24.8%.
An economically significant difference exists in the usage rate across inflexible-price firms
(28.1%) and flexible-price firms (15.6%). A t-test for whether these ratios are equal rejects
the null at the 5% level of significance. In Figure A.1 of the Online Appendix, we plot the
density of the usage ratio for the two groups of firms. The full distribution of the usage
ratio for inflexible-price firms lies to the right of the distribution for flexible-price firms.
Although inflexible-price firms are less likely to have a credit line with banks, they are
more likely to draw down the credit line, indicating they might be more credit constrained
than flexible-price firms.


C.      Triple-Differences Strategy
We propose a triple-differences strategy exploiting the time variation in the implementa-
tion of the IBBEA. Moreover, we use flexible-price firms as counterfactual for the evolution
of long-term debt of inflexible-price firms absent the deregulation shock. The idea is that,
for several reasons, flexible-price firms were not borrowing constrained before 1996, as we
discuss in Section II.
  15
    In contrast to Capital IQ, Sufi (2009) has comprehensive coverage starting in 1996 and information
on drawn and undrawn credit lines.




                                                 21
C.1     Parallel-Trends Assumption

A necessary condition for identification is the parallel-trends assumption, which states that
the evolution of long-term debt of flexible- and inflexible-price firms would have followed
common trends across states before and after the shock, had the shock not happened.
The potential outcome absent the shock is unobservable, and hence we cannot test this
assumption directly. At the same time, we can assess the extent to which the trends of
long-term leverage across flexible- and inflexible-price firms are parallel before the shock.
If we are convinced the pre-trends are parallel, our identifying assumption would be that
any divergence in the trends after the shock is due to the shock itself, and not to other
possible concurrent shocks or alternative explanations. Under this identifying assumption,
the evolution of long-term debt of flexible-price firms represents a valid counterfactual to
the evolution of long-term debt of inflexible-price firms had they not been exposed to the
deregulation.
      Figure 3 proposes a visual assessment for whether the trends in long-term leverage
are parallel across flexible- and inflexible-price firms in the years before the first states
implement the IBBEA in 1996. Figure 3 plots the estimated coefficients, β̂t , and the 95%
confidence intervals from the following OLS specification:

                                    1996
                                    X
                  Lt2Ai,t = α +            βt × F P Ai + δ1 × F P Ai + ηt + i,t ,          (2)
                                  t=1983


which estimates year-specific coefficients of F P A for the years before the first IBBEA
implementations (1996). The excluded year is 1982, and we can interpret βt as the change
in the effect of price stickiness on firms’ leverage from 1982 to year t. The estimated
coefficient δ̂1 equals 0.092 (t-stat 5.54), and statistical inference is based on standard
errors clustered at the firm level. The sizes of the confidence intervals are similar if we
allow for correlation of unknown form across observations in the same state. We fail to
reject the null hypothesis that the effect of price flexibility is equal to that in the baseline
year for all years before the first implementations of IBBEA except 1995. The estimated
year-specific effect for 1995 is positive rather than negative, which decreases the likelihood
that pre-trends drive our result.




                                                  22
C.2     Price Flexibility around the Shock

A large literature in macroeconomics finds price flexibility is a highly persistent feature
of firms (e.g., see Alvarez et al. (2011) and Nakamura, Steinsson, Sun, and Villar
(2016)). We verify in our sample firm-level that price stickiness is extremely persistent
before and after the banking deregulation shock. This evidence alleviates concerns that
banking deregulation affects price flexibility. Ideally, we would like to test formally
that the firm-level frequency of price adjustment did not change over time, and the
bank-deregulation shock did not affect the frequencies. We cannot compute yearly values,
because to construct a meaningful measure, we need several price spells for a given good.
      We therefore proceed as follows. We identify the firms in our sample for which we
can observe monthly price spells for the three years before and after 1996. We construct
a measure of price flexibility before 1996, based on the monthly spells in the period
1993-1995, and a measure of price flexibility after 1996, based on the monthly spells in
the period 1996-1998. We then regress the post-1996 measure on the pre-1996 measure
and a constant. Our null hypothesis is that the regression coefficient equals 1; that is,
the pre-1996 measure is perfectly correlated with the post-1996 measure. Our estimated
coefficient equals 0.93, and we cannot reject the null that this coefficient differs from 1 at
any plausible level of significance. The 95% confidence interval around the point estimate
is (0.73; 1.12). We truncate price spells by only focusing on a three-year period, and hence
we introduce noise into our measures. The almost perfect correlation in the frequency of
price adjustment before and after 1996 is therefore hardly consistent with the notion that
firm-level price flexibility changed around the implementation of the IBBEA.


C.3     Triple-Differences Specification

To implement our strategy, we estimate the following specification:

                Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Deregulatedi,t
                                                                                          (3)
                        + δ1 × F P Ai + δ2 × Deregulatedi,t + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

where Deregulatedi,t is an indicator that equals 1 if firm i is headquartered in a state
that had implemented the deregulation in or before year t, and 0 otherwise; ηk and ηt are
a full set of industry and year effects. Alternatively, we can also include a full set of firm


                                             23
fixed effects (ηf ), because variation exists in the interaction between price flexibility and
deregulation within firms over time. When included, firm fixed effects absorb industry
fixed effects and the frequency of price adjustment. All the results are similar if we also
add the full set of controls in equation (1) (see Table A.4 in the Online Appendix).
    Equation (3) compares the long-term debt-to-assets ratio within firms before and after
their state implemented the deregulation, across firms in deregulated and regulated states,
and across flexible- and inflexible-price firms. We label our specification a triple-differences
specification to emphasize these three dimensions we use to compare the firms in the
sample, but note our specification only exploits one exogenous shock, captured by the
deregulation dummy.
    Based on the predictions we described in Section II, we expect the following regarding
the coefficients of equation (3): δ1 > 0 because, on average, higher price flexibility leads to
more long-term debt; and δ2 ≥ 0, because firms have more funds available to borrow after
the 1994 deregulation shock, which could be 0 because flexible-price firms were unlikely
to be financially constrained before the shock. The crucial prediction of our strategy is
that β < 0, because the most inflexible-price firms obtain disproportionally more funds
after the deregulation compared to the most flexible-price firms.
    For the purposes of statistical inference, we cluster standard errors at the firm level.
All t-statistics are higher if we instead cluster standard errors at the state level, which
is the level of the treatment. We only observe firms in 42 states. The low number of
clusters likely explains why standard errors are lower when we cluster at the state level
as compared to the firm level.
    Table 4 reports the estimates for the coefficients in equation (3). In columns (1)-(4),
F P A is the continuous measure of price flexibility; in columns (5)-(8), it is the dummy
that equals 1 for firms in the top 25% of the distribution based on price flexibility, and 0
for those in the bottom 25% of the distribution.
    For both sets of results, the first column reports estimates for the baseline
specification. In the second column, we add year fixed effects and the 48 industry-level
dummies for the Fama-French industry taxonomy. In the third column, we add year fixed
effects and the 50 industry-level dummies for the Hoberg-Phillips industry classification.
In the fourth column, we add year fixed effects and firm fixed effects.
    Across all specifications, the sign of the estimated coefficients are in line with


                                              24
Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 2 in Section II. Firms with higher price flexibility have
higher long-term debt on average (δ̂1 > 0). More importantly, across all specifications,
we find flexible-price firms increase their leverage less than inflexible-price firms after the
state-level implementation of the deregulation (β̂ < 0). The effect of price flexibility
post-deregulation (β̂ + δ̂1 ) is close to zero across all specifications. Comparing column
(1) with columns (2)-(4), and column (5) with columns (6)-(8), we see the size of
the estimated interaction effect does not change when we only exploit within-industry
variation. Therefore, whereas industry-level effects explain about half of the size of the
baseline effect of price flexibility on leverage, the variation across firms within the same
industries explains the full size of the effect of financial constraints across flexible- and
inflexible-price firms. This result survives when we only exploit variation within firms,
and hence we absorb any time-invariant determinant of financial leverage at the firm level.
      Tables A.4 and A.5 show our triple-difference design when we add all the covariates
from the baseline OLS analysis, as well as state fixed effects. State fixed effects control
flexibly for unobserved heterogeneity across states, such as differential growth paths, which
might affect demand for goods, investment prospects, and ultimately external finance
demands.
      Table A.7 in the Online Appendix shows the results are largely unchanged when we
exclude financial firms and utilities. Tables A.8 and A.9 in the Online Appendix, instead,
run our triple-differences identification design interacting the deregulation dummy also
with firm volatility and the Kaplan-Zingales index at the firm level, whereas Tables A.10
and A.11 reports the specification for volatility and the Kaplan-Zingales index without the
frequency of price adjustment. We do not detect any systematic interaction effect across
specifications, whereas our baseline results continue to hold: unconditionally, flexible price
firms have higher financial leverage, but the firms with less flexible output prices are the
ones that increase leverage more following the bank branching deregulation.


C.4     Effect on Impact and Over Time

Our tests so far have used observations for a same firm in different years, both before and
after the implementation of the IBBEA. Bertrand et al. (2004) show the autocorrelation
between observations of a same unit over time might understate dramatically the size of
the standard errors in difference-in-differences research designs. We tackle this issue in


                                              25
Table 5. First, we estimate equation (3) using only two data points for each firm. We
only keep firm-level observations in the year before the deregulation and the year after
the deregulation is implemented in their state. This test aims to estimate the effect of the
shock on impact, that is, around the year in which the shock happened. We report the
results for this test in column (1) of Table 5. We only have 599 observations compared
to 9,119 in our baseline sample. The coefficient on the frequency of price adjustment is
almost identical to the estimates in Table 4. The estimated coefficient on the interaction
term between the frequency with the deregulation dummy is negative. The size of the
coefficient is about half the size of the corresponding coefficient in column (1) of Table 4.
      In columns (2)-(5) of Table 5, we report the results for estimating equation (3) in
periods of different lengths. In column (2), we only use observations from 1994 until 2002,
which include the years in which the first and the last state implemented the IBBEA (1996
and 2001, respectively). In each of columns (3)-(5), we enlarge the time period by three
years going backward and forward. Qualitatively, our results are similar across these
different time periods. Interestingly, the size of the interaction between price flexibility
and the IBBEA implementation increases monotonically in absolute value when we add
observations in later years. At the same time, the baseline effect of price flexibility on
leverage stays identical across sub-periods. These results are consistent with the idea
that it took time for banks to expand across state borders and for firms to adjust their
leverage ratios. Diverging trends between flexible- and inflexible-price firms before the
shock cannot drive these results, because we find parallel trends before the shock in Figure
3.


C.5     Effect by dependence on external financing

To corroborate the interpretation of the deregulation shock, we exploit cross-sectional
variation in terms of the financial dependence. If the deregulation shock is truly driving
the interaction effect, then inflexible-price firms that depend more on external finance
should drive this effect. We thus estimate the specification in equation (3) separately for
firms in the top tercile of cash-to-assets and for other firms and firms in the top tercile
of the external finance gap and other firms. We follow Demirgüç-Kunt and Maksimovic
(2002a) to calculate the external finance need of firms in our sample, using the average
sales growth over the last three years, and subtract the sum of cash, total debt, and equity.


                                             26
We scale the difference by total assets to arrive at the external finance gap. The rationale
is that inflexible-price firms with high cash-to-assets ratios and low external finance gaps
will not depend much on external financing. The deregulation shock should instead affect
inflexible-price firms with lower cash-to-assets ratios and high external finance gaps.
Consistent with this interpretation, Table 6 shows the effect of deregulation on firms’
leverage is driven by inflexible-price firms with low cash-to-assets ratios and high external
finance gaps (columns (1) and (4)), as opposed to those with high cash-to-assets ratios and
low external finance gaps (columns (2) and (3)). In the Online Appendix, we introduce
triple interactions between the frequency of price adjustment, the deregulation dummy,
and the cash-to-assets ratio and find sticky-price firms with a higher cash-to-assets ratio
increase their leverage less after the deregulation compared to sticky-price firms with low
cash on hand (see Table A.12). We do not detect similar effects for triple interactions
with total or idiosyncratic volatility or the KZ index.


D.     Falsification Tests
To further assess the validity and interpretation of our triple-differences results, we propose
an empirical setup that allows the design of two falsification tests (Roberts and Whited,
2013). We exploit the fact that the state-level implementation of the IBBEA was not
only staggered over time, but also clustered in two periods. The majority of U.S. states
implemented the deregulation between 1996 and 1998. The second group of states only
implemented the deregulation after 2000. We call the first group of states “early states,”
and the second group, “late states.” This setup allows us to construct three tests across
three groups of years. Before 1996, no state had implemented the deregulation yet.
Between 1996 and 2000, firms in early states were exposed to the deregulation, but firms
in late states were not. After 2000, all firms were in deregulated states.
     We consider the following specification:

     Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Af ter1996i,t × Earlyi + δ1 × F P Ai × Af ter1996i,t
            + δ2 × F P Ai × Earlyi + δ3 × Af ter1996i,t × Earlyi + γ1 × F P Ai             (4)
                                                  0
            + γ2 × Af ter1996i,t + γ3 × Earlyi + Xi,t × ζ + i,t .

     Panel A of Figure 4 sketches our predictions for the specification in equation (4). It


                                              27
compares outcomes within firms before and after 1996, across firms before and after 1996,
across firms in early and late states, and across flexible- and inflexible-price firms. To
corroborate our triple-differences results in this alternative setup, we estimate equation
(4) using only firm-level observations up to 2000. The rationale is that firms in early states
were exposed to the deregulation between 1996 and 2000, whereas firms in late states were
not. Flexible- and inflexible-price firms in late states thus represent the control group for
the differential evolution of long-term debt in flexible- and inflexible-price firms in early
states, had they not been exposed to the deregulation shock.
     Our prediction is that β < 0, δ1 = 0, and γ1 > 0; that is, flexible-price firms have
higher leverage on average, and after the deregulation, only inflexible-price firms in early
states increase their leverage compared to flexible-price firms in early states. The baseline
effect of price flexibility on leverage should not change after 1996 for firms in late states.
     The estimates in column (1) of Table 7 support our predictions. In columns (2)-(3)
of Table 7, we repeat the analysis separately for firms with low and high cash-to-assets
ratios. Similar to our earlier results, the subsample of firms with cash-to-assets ratios
drive the effects.
     We then proceed to assess the validity of our designs by constructing two falsification
tests. Panel B of Figure 4 sketches our predictions for the first falsification test. We build
on the specification in equation (4), but we limit our estimation to observations before
1996. This limitation implies that no firms, neither in early nor in late states, were exposed
to the deregulation shock. Because in the baseline analysis we use a treatment period of
four years for early states, from 1996 to 2000, we assign 1992 as a placebo deregulation
year to observations in early states. We thus replace the dummy Af ter1996i,t in equation
(4) with the dummy Af ter1992i,t , which equals 1 for all firm-level observations after 1992.
Our falsification test consists of comparing flexible- and inflexible-price firms in early and
late states after 1992, and before the deregulation happened. If our earlier test was invalid,
and our baseline results captured the effect of state-level characteristics differently across
early and late states, but unrelated to the deregulation event, we should reject the null
hypothesis that β = 0. Column (4) of Table 7 shows that, instead, we fail to reject this
null hypothesis at a plausible level of significance. As expected, we find flexible-price firms
have higher leverage on average, irrespective of the states where they are located.
     We sketch the predictions for the second falsification test in Panel C of Figure 4. For


                                              28
this test, we exclude all firm-level observations between 1996 and 2000. This limitation
implies that in each year, the observations in early and late years are either not exposed
to the deregulation shock (before 1996), or they are all exposed to the deregulation shock
(after 2000). We thus estimate the same specification in equation (4), but the new setup
implies different predictions from those discussed above. On the one hand, we should not
be able to reject the null that β = 0, because early and late states are exposed to the
deregulation in the same years. On the other hand, we now do expect δ1 < 0 and γ1 > 0,
because flexible-price firms in both early and late states should have on average higher
leverage, and should react less than inflexible-price firms to the deregulation shock. We
find evidence consistent with these predictions in column (5) of Table 7.



VI      Robustness

A.     Price Flexibility, Volatility, and Leverage
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) and Weber (2015) argue sticky-prices firms are riskier
and have higher idiosyncratic and total return volatility. Higher volatility and risk might
result in lower leverage, but earlier literature on return volatility and financial leverage
finds ambiguous results.     Frank and Goyal (2009) document a negative relationship
between total volatility and long-term book leverage, whereas Lemmon et al. (2008) do
not detect a significant association between cash-flow volatility and book leverage. Higher
volatility can lead to higher or lower financial leverage depending on the specifications also
in our sample. In Table 2, total volatility is only weakly associated with financial leverage,
and the association flips sign based on the variation we exploit, in line with the literature.
Tables A.13 and A.14 in the Online Appendix document similar results for idiosyncratic
volatility with respect to the CAPM and to the Fama and French three-factor model.
     Several factors influence stock return volatility, and these factors could affect financial
leverage differently.   To study whether we can reconcile our findings with those of
Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) and Weber (2015), we decompose stock return volatility
into a part predicted by the FPA and a residual. Table 8 shows higher predicted volatility
by the frequency of price adjustment is negatively associated with financial leverage
across specifications. The residual part of volatility orthogonal to the frequency of price
adjustment, instead, does not show any robust association with financial leverage.

                                              29
B.    Additional Controls
The frequency of price adjustments depends on a number of factors that determine the
benefits and costs of price adjustment, such as the curvature of the profit function,
operating leverage, the volatility of demand, and marginal costs. In Table 9, we add a
wide range of controls to further disentangle the effect of price stickiness from potentially
confounding firm- and industry-level factors.
     In the first column, we repeat the baseline regression with year and industry fixed
effects at the Fama and French 48-industry level.
     In our baseline specification, we already control for market power at the firm
and industry levels using the price-to-cost margin and the Herfindahl index in annual
sales at the Fama and French 48-industry level.            Both of these measures have
potential shortcomings, because they are only based on publicly-listed firms or might
be mismeasured at the firm level. In column (2), we add the share of output accounted
for by the largest four firms within an industry. This measure has the advantage of
measuring concentration at the industry level for all firms using data from the economic
census. The concentration ratio does not affect our baseline conclusion.
     The volatility of demand might affect the frequency with which firms adjust their
output prices, or affect the stability of firms’ margins and hence optimal leverage choices.
To study this alternative channel, we explicitly control for the durability of output
in columns (3) and (4) using the classifications of Gomes, Kogan, and Yogo (2009)
and Bils, Klenow, and Malin (2012), respectively. The demand for durable goods is
particularly volatile over the business cycle, and consumers can easily shift the timing of
their purchases, thus making their price sensitivity especially high (see, e.g., D’Acunto,
Hoang, and Weber (2016)). Controlling for the cyclicality of demand has little impact on
the association between the frequency of price adjustment and financial leverage.
     Some heterogeneity of stickiness in output prices may reflect differences in the
stickiness of input prices. For instance, firms with inflexible output prices might also
have inflexible input prices, leading to stable profit margins. We show results are robust
to controlling for input-price stickiness at the industry level. Unfortunately, the BLS micro
data do not allow us to construct analogous measures of input-price stickiness at the firms
level, because the data do not contain the identity of buyers. We proxy for input-price
stickiness with the frequency of wage adjustment at the industry level from Barattieri,

                                             30
Basu, and Gottschalk (2014) in column (5). We indeed find firms in industries with
more flexible wages tend to have higher financial leverage, but controlling for input-price
stickiness has little effect on the association between the frequency of price adjustment
and financial leverage.
    Column (6) adds Engel curve slopes from Bils et al. (2012) to control for differences in
income elasticities, column (7) includes the Kaplan - Zingales index (excluding leverage)
to investigate the impact of financial constraints, column (8), the S&P long-term issuer
rating, and columns (9) and (10) include the ratio of fixed costs to sales and the ratio of
costs of goods sold and selling, general, and administrative expenses to total assets (Novy-
Marx (2011)) as alternative proxies for operating leverage. Firms with higher ratings and
lower operating leverage have higher financial leverage, whereas income elasticities have
no systematic association with financial leverage. Controlling for the additional variables,
however, has no impact on our estimate of price flexibility on financial leverage.
    Column (11) adds all covariates jointly. Whereas some of the covariates now lose
statistical significance or switch signs, the frequency of price adjustment is robustly
associated with higher financial leverage.
    Table A.1 in the Online Appendix shows our results do not change when we consider
two alternative definitions of financial leverage as our main outcome variable: total
debt over total assets and net debt over total assets. In Table A.15, we also find the
baseline results are virtually identical when we exclude financial firms and utilities from
the sample. In unreported results, we find similar effects when restricting the variation to
within industries × year combinations, both in terms of size and statistical significance.
Industry×year fixed effects control for industry-specific trends in leverage over time.
    The frequency of price adjustment varies at the firm level. In Table A.16 in the Online
Appendix, we show our results are economically and statistically similar if we collapse our
data at the firm level and run a single cross-sectional regression. Price stickiness explains
10% of the cross-sectional variation in leverage across firms. Size, volatility, intangibility,
the price-to-cost margin or industry concentration all explain less of the cross-sectional
variation (see Table A.17 in the Online Appendix).




                                              31
                               VII        Conclusion
We show that firms with inflexible output prices have lower leverage relative to firms with
flexible prices, after controlling for standard determinants of capital structure. Using the
staggered implementation of the 1994 Interstate Bank Branching Efficiency Act across
states, we test whether a larger supply of bank debt increases the financial leverage of
sticky-price firms more compared to flexible-price firms in a triple-differences strategy,
and find empirical support.
    These results suggest price flexibility is an important determinant of firms’ capital
structure. Because firm-level price flexibility is highly persistent over time, these results
also suggest price flexibility might help us understand the origin of persistent differences
in financial leverage across firms as documented by Lemmon, Roberts, and Zender (2008).
    Price rigidity has a long tradition in research across fields as different as Marketing,
Industrial Organization, and Macroeconomics. Our results open up exciting avenues for
future research at the intersection of Corporate Finance, Macroeconomics, and Industrial
Organization.




                                             32
References
Ali, A., S. Klasa, and E. Yeung (2009). The limitations of industry concentration
  measures constructed with Compustat data: Implications for finance research. Review
  of Financial Studies 22 (10), 3839–3871.
Alvarez, F., M. Gonzales-Rozada, A. Neumeyer, and M. Beraja (2011).                   From
  hyperinflation to stable prices: Argentina’s evidence on menu cost models. Unpublished
  Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Amore, M. D., C. Schneider, and A. Žaldokas (2013). Credit supply and corporate
  innovation. Journal of Financial Economics 109 (3), 835–855.
Anderson, E. T. and D. I. Simester (2010). Price stickiness and customer antagonism.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2), 729–765.
Atkeson, A. and L. E. Ohanian (2001). Are Phillips curves useful for forecasting inflation?
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25 (1), 2–11.
Barattieri, A., S. Basu, and P. Gottschalk (2014). Some evidence on the importance of
  sticky wages. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (1), 70–101.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and V. Maksimovic (2008). Financing patterns around the
  world: Are small firms different? Journal of Financial Economics 89 (3), 467–487.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999). The financial accelerator in a
  quantitative business cycle framework. Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, 1341–1393.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). How much should we trust
  differences-in-differences estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1),
  249–275.
Bhamra, H. S., A. J. Fisher, and L.-A. Kuehn (2011). Monetary policy and corporate
  default. Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (5), 480–494.
Bhamra, H. S., L.-A. Kuehn, and I. A. Strebulaev (2010). The levered equity risk premium
  and credit spreads: A unified framework. Review of Financial Studies 23, 645–703.
Bils, M., P. J. Klenow, and B. A. Malin (2012). Testing for Keynesian labor demand. In
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 27, pp. 311–349.
Blinder, A. S., E. Canetti, D. Lebow, and J. Rudd (1997). Asking about prices. New
  York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Bushman, R. M., B. E. Hendricks, and C. D. Williams (2016). Bank competition:
  measurement, decision-making and risk-taking. Journal of Accounting Research
  (forthcoming).
Calvo, G. A. (1983). Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12 (3), 383–398.
Campbell, J. Y., M. Lettau, B. G. Malkiel, and Y. Xu (2001). Have individual stocks
  become more volatile? an empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of
  Finance 56 (1), 1–43.
Colla, P., F. Ippolito, and K. Li (2013). Debt specialization. Journal of Finance 68 (5),
  2117–2141.
D’Acunto, F., D. Hoang, and M. Weber (2016). The effect of unconventional fiscal policy
  on consumption expenditure. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago Booth


                                            33
  School of Business.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (2002a). Funding growth in bank-based and
  market-based financial systems: evidence from firm-level data. Journal of Financial
  Economics 65 (3), 337–363.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (2002b). Funding growth in bank-based and
  market-based financial systems: evidence from firm-level data. Journal of Financial
  Economics 65 (3), 337–363.
Diamond, D. W. (1991a). Debt maturity structure and liquidity risk. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 106 (3), 709–737.
Diamond, D. W. (1991b). Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans
  and directly placed debt. Journal of Political Economy 99 (4), 689–721.
Dick, A. A. (2006). Nationwide branching and its impact on market structure, quality,
  and bank performance. The Journal of Business 79 (2), 567–592.
Dick, A. A. and A. Lehnert (2010). Personal bankruptcy and credit market competition.
  The Journal of Finance 65 (2), 655–686.
Dou, W. W. and Y. Ji (2015). External financing and customer capital: A financial theory
  of markups. Unpublished Manuscript, Wharton.
Ellison, S. F., C. M. Snyder, and H. Zhang (2015). Costs of managerial attention and
  activity as a source of sticky prices: Structural estimates from an online market.
  Technical report, Unpublished Manuscript, Massachusets Institute of Techonoly.
Erickson, T., C. Jiang, and T. Whited (2014). Minimum distance estimation of the errors-
  in-variables model using linear cumulant equations. Journal of Econometrics 183 (2),
  211–221.
Faulkender, M., M. Flannery, K. Hankins, and J. Smith (2012). Cash flows and leverage
  adjustments. Journal of Financial Economics 103 (3), 632–646.
Faulkender, M. and M. Petersen (2006). Does the source of capital affect capital structure?
  Review of Financial Studies 19 (1), 45–79.
Favara, G. and J. Imbs (2015). Credit supply and the price of housing. The American
  Economic Review 105 (3), 958–992.
Favilukis, J., X. Lin, and X. Zhao (2015). The elephant in the room: the impact of labor
  obligations on credit risk. Unpublished Manuscript, University of British Columbia.
Fisher, I. (1933). The debt-deflation theory of great depressions. Econometrica 1 (4),
  337–357.
Frank, M. Z. and V. K. Goyal (2009). Capital structure decisions: which factors are
  reliably important? Financial management 38 (1), 1–37.
Gale, D. and M. Hellwig (1985). Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period
  problem. Review of Economic Studies 52 (4), 647–663.
Goetz, M. R., L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2013). Identifying the valuation effects and
  agency costs of corporate diversification: Evidence from the geographic diversification
  of U.S. banks. Review of Financial Studies 26 (7), 1787–1823.
Golosov, M. and R. Lucas (2007). Menu costs and Phillips curves. Journal of Political
  Economy 115 (2), 171–199.
Gomes, J., L. Kogan, and M. Yogo (2009). Durability of output and expected stock

                                            34
  retums. Journal of Political Economy 117 (5), 941–986.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the
  stock market. The American Economic Review 106 (1), 165–199.
Graham, J. and C. Harvey (2002). How do cfos make capital budgeting and capital
  structure decisions? Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 15 (1), 8–23.
Graham, J. R. (2000). How big are the tax benefits of debt? The Journal of Finance 55 (5),
  1901–1941.
Graham, J. R., M. T. Leary, and M. R. Roberts (2015). A century of capital structure:
  The leveraging of corporate america. Journal of Financial Economics 118 (3), 658–683.
Heider, F. and A. Ljungqvist (2015). As certain as debt and taxes: Estimating the tax
  sensitivity of leverage from state tax changes. Journal of Financial Economics 118 (3),
  684–712.
Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2010). Product market synergies and competition in mergers
  and acquisitions: A text-based analysis. Review of Financial Studies 23 (10), 3773–3811.
Hoberg, G. and G. Phillips (2016). Text-based network industries and endogenous product
  differentiation. Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).
Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1996). The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank
  branch deregulation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (3), 639–670.
Kang, J. and C. E. Pflueger (2015). Inflation risk in corporate bonds. The Journal of
  Finance 70 (1), 115–162.
Kehoe, P. and V. Midrigan (2015). Prices are sticky after all. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 75, 35–53.
Kozak, S. and D. Sosyura (2015). Access to credit and stock market participation.
  Unpublished Manuscript, University of Michigan.
Kroszner, R. S. and P. E. Strahan (1999). What drives deregulation? Economics
  and politics of the relaxation of bank branching restrictions. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 114 (4), 1437–1467.
Kroszner, R. S. and P. E. Strahan (2014). Regulation and deregulation of the U.S. banking
  industry: Causes, consequences and implications for the future. In N. Rose (Ed.),
  Economic regulation and its reform: What have we learned? Chicago, IL: University of
  Chicago Press.
Lemmon, M. L., M. R. Roberts, and J. F. Zender (2008). Back to the beginning:
  Persistence and the cross-section of corporate capital structure. The Journal of
  Finance 63 (4), 1575–1608.
Lewellen, S. (2012). Firm-specific industries. Working Paper .
MacKay, P. (2003). Real flexibility and financial structure: An empirical analysis. Review
  of Financial Studies 16 (4), 1131–1165.
Maksimovic, V. (1988). Capital structure in repeated oligopolies. RAND Journal of
  Economics 19 (3), 389–407.
Maksimovic, V. (1990). Product market imperfections and loan commitments. Journal
  of Finance 5 (45), 1641–1653.
Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2002). Sticky information versus sticky prices: A proposal
  to replace the New Keynesian Phillips curve. Quarterly Journal of Economics 177 (4),

                                           35
  1295–1328.
Mauer, D. and A. Triantis (1994). Interactions of corporate financing and investment
  decisions: A dynamic framework. Journal of Finance 49 (4), 1253–1277.
Mello, A. and J. Parsons (1992). Measuring the agency cost of debt. Journal of
  Finance 47 (5), 1887–1904.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu
  cost models. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1415–1464.
Nakamura, E., J. Steinsson, P. Sun, and D. Villar (2016). The elusive costs of inflation:
  Price dispersion during the us great inflation. Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia
  University.
Neuhann, D. and F. Saidi (2015). Are universal banks better intermediaries? Working
  Paper .
Novy-Marx, R. (2011). Operating leverage. Review of Finance 15 (1), 103–134.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1995). What do we know about capital structure? Some
  evidence from international data. The journal of Finance 50 (5), 1421–1460.
Reinartz, S. and T. Schmid (2015). Production flexibility, product markets, and capital
  structure decisions. Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Rice, T. and P. E. Strahan (2010). Does credit competition affect small-firm finance?
  Journal of Finance 65 (3), 861–889.
Roberts, M. and T. Whited (2013). Endogeneity in empirical corporate finance. Handbook
  of the Economics of Finance 2, 493–572.
Serfling, M. A. (2016). Firing costs and capital structure decisions. Journal of Finance
  (forthcoming).
Shenoy, J. and R. Williams (2015). Trade credit and the joint effects of supplier and
  customer financial characteristics. Journal of Financial Intermediation (forthcoming).
Simintzi, E., V. Vig, and P. Volpin (2015). Labor protection and leverage. Review of
  Financial Studies 28 (2), 561–591.
Stiroh, K. J. and P. E. Strahan (2003). Competitive dynamics of deregulation: Evidence
  from U.S. banking. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35 (5), 801–828.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2007). Why has U.S. inflation become harder to forecast?
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39, 3–33.
Strahan, P. E. (2003). The real effects of U.S. bank deregulation. Federal Reserve Bank
  of St. Louis Review 85 (4), 111–128.
Sufi, A. (2009). Bank lines of credit in corporate finance: An empirical analysis. Review
  of Financial Studies 22 (3), 1057–1088.
Townsend, R. M. (1979). Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state
  verification. Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265–293.
Weber, M. (2015). Nominal rigidities and asset pricing. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and prices: Foundations of a theory of monetary policy.
  Princeton University Press.
Zbaracki, M. J., M. Ritson, D. Levy, S. Dutta, and M. Bergen (2004). Managerial and
  customer costs of price adjustment: Direct evidence from industrial markets. The

                                           36
Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2), 514–533.




                                        37
                                           Figure 2: Long-Term Debt and Price Flexibility

                Long{term Debt to Assets                     Early Adopter
                                           0.25




                                           0.15                                        Sticky
                                                                                       Flexible
                                                                                       Difference

                                           0.05
                                                   92

                                                         94

                                                                96

                                                                      98

                                                                             00

                                                                                   02

                                                                                          04

                                                                                                06
                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                               20
                                                                          Year
                Long{term Debt to Assets




                                                                           Late Adopter


                                           0.25


                                           0.15


                                           0.05
                                                   92

                                                         94

                                                                96

                                                                      98

                                                                             00

                                                                                   02

                                                                                          04

                                                                                                06
                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                               20




                                                                          Year
This figure plots the ratio of long-term debt to total assets for different percentiles of the frequency of price
adjustment distribution. Sticky-price firms are firms in the bottom quartile of the distribution. Flexible-price
firms are firms in the top quartile of the distribution. The sample period is January 1982 to December
2014. Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data
underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.



                                                                     38
                  Figure 3: Parallel Trends Assumption: Assessment of Pre-Trends
                           .1




                                                                                             First IBBEA Implementations
       Interaction Flexibility*Year fixed effect
            -.2           -.1
                           -.3           0




                                                   1982   1984   1986         1988         1990       1992       1994         1996   Post
                                                                                           Year


This figure plots the estimated coefficients β̂t and the 95% confidence intervals from the following linear
equation:
                                                                            1996
                                                                            X
                                                           Lt2Ai,t = α +            βt × F P Ai + δ1 × F P Ai + ηt + i,t ,
                                                                           t=1983

which includes a set of leads of the interactions between price flexibility and year fixed effects for the years
before the first IBBEA implementations (1996). The excluded year is 1982. The estimated coefficient δ̂1
equals 0.092 (t-stat 5.54). The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                        39
                                                                                               Figure 4: Falsification Tests

                                                                                                                                 Panel A: Quadruple-differences
                                                                                                                                                                 Early Adopter                                   Late Adopter




                                                                                                                                0.25




                                                                                                     Long{term Debt to Assets
                                                                                                                                0.20
                                                                                                                                              Sticky firms early
                                                                                                                                              Sticky firms late
                                                                                                                                              Flexible firms early
                                                                                                                                              Flexible firms late
                                                                                                                                0.15




                                                                                                                                0.10    92




                                                                                                                                                      94




                                                                                                                                                                      96




                                                                                                                                                                                  98




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    06
                                                                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                                    19




                                                                                                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                                                                                 19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                      Year



            Panel B: Falsification Test I                                                                                                                                                                                                  Panel C: Falsification Test II
                                                                         Early Adopter                                   Late Adopter                                                                                                                    Early Adopter               Late Adopter




                                         0.25                                                                                                                                                                           0.25
              Long{term Debt to Assets




                                                                                                                                                                                             Long{term Debt to Assets




                                         0.20                                                                                                                                                                           0.20
                                                      Sticky firms early                                                                                                                                                              Sticky firms early
                                                      Sticky firms late                                                                                                                                                               Sticky firms late
                                                      Flexible firms early                                                                                                                                                            Flexible firms early
                                                      Flexible firms late                                                                                                                                                             Flexible firms late
                                         0.15                                                                                                                                                                           0.15




                                         0.10                                                                                                                                                                           0.10
                                                 92




                                                              94




                                                                              96




                                                                                          98




                                                                                                                                 00




                                                                                                                                              02




                                                                                                                                                            04




                                                                                                                                                                            06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                92




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              94




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              96




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          98




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 06
                                                19




                                                            19




                                                                             19




                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                                20




                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                              Year                                                                                                                                                                            Year




This figure describes our falsification framework (Panel A) and two falsification tests (Panels B and C). The
shaded areas represent the years whose observations we exploit in each test. In each Panel, the two bottom lines
refer to inflexible-price firms in early states that implemented the deregulation of interstate branching between
1996 and 1998 (blue, solid), and in late states that implemented the deregulation after 2000 (blue, dashed).
The two top lines refer to flexible-price firms in early states (red, solid) and late states (red, dashed). In each
type of state, the increase in the ratio of long-term debt to assets increases more for inflexible-price firms than
for flexible-price firms after the deregulation. In Panel A, we only use observations up to 2000. In this setup,
we therefore compare financial leverage within firms before and after 1996, across firms before and after 1996,
between early and late states, and between flexible- and inflexible-price firms. Hypothesis 2 in section II states
that firms in early states increase their financial leverage in 1996, whereas firms in late states do not. Moreover,
sticky-price firms in early states increase their financial leverage more than flexible-price firms in 1996. In Panel
B, we depict the first falsification test, in which we only use observations up to 1996. Before 1996, no firm
was exposed to the deregulation, and hence we should see no differences in financial leverage across firms in
early and late states. Instead, we should detect the unconditional difference in leverage between flexible- and
inflexible-price firms, irrespective of their location. In Panel C, we depict the second falsification test, in which
we use only observations before 1996 and after 2000, and hence we exclude the period 1996-2000. In this case,
either all firms are in deregulated states, or they are all in regulated states. Thus, we should detect no differences
in the change in leverage across firms in early and late states. Instead, we should detect the baseline difference
in leverage across flexible- and inflexible-price firms, as well as the larger increase in leverage for inflexible-price
firms after the deregulation.



                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics
     This table reports descriptive statistics for the variables used in the empirical analysis in Panel A, and correlations across variables in Panel B. FPA measures
     the frequency of price adjustment. Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer
     Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. FPA Dummy is a dummy that equals 1 for firms in the top 25% of the distribution by the frequency of
     price adjustment and 0 for the bottom 25%. Total vol is the annual total stock return volatility, Idio volCAP M and Idio volF F 3 are idiosyncratic volatility with
     respect to the CAPM and Fama and French 3-factor model, Lt2A is long-term debt to total assets, Profitability is operating income over total assets, Size is the
     logarithm of sales, B-M ratio is the book-to-market ratio, Intangibility is intangible assets to total assets, Price-cost margin is the price-to-cost margin, and HHI
     is the Herfindahl-Hirschman index of sales at the Fama and French 48-industry level. The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014.

                                                                                      Panel A. Summary Statistics
                         FPA        FPA Dummy           Total vol      Idio volCAP M        Idio volF F 3       Lt2A      Prof          Size           BM     It2A     PCM        HHI
                          (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)      (7)           (8)            (9)    (10)     (11)       (12)
         Mean            0.14            0.25             0.33                0.28             0.28             0.21     0.15        8.25          0.60       0.26      0.37     0.10
         Median           0.07            0.00             0.29                0.25             0.24             0.20     0.15        8.29          0.49       0.23      0.34     0.08
         Std              0.14            0.43             0.16                0.14             0.14             0.13     0.08        1.39          0.41       0.17      0.18     0.10
         Min              0.00            0.00             0.02                0.02             0.02             0.00   −0.47        4.16          0.05       0.01      0.05     0.01




41
         Max              0.71           1.00             2.04                1.94             1.88             0.62     0.97       11.62          2.23       0.74      0.83     0.93
         Nobs            9,133           9,133            9,130               9,130            9,130            9,119    9,125       9,133         8,997      9,048     9,133    9,133
                                                                                                Panel B. Correlations
                                     FPA          FPA Dummy       Total vol    Idio volCAP M    Idio volF F 3      Lt2A          Prof           Size         BM       It2A       PCM
                                      (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)          (9)      (10)       (11)
         FPA Dummy                  0.869∗∗∗
         Total vol                −0.0636∗∗∗       −0.0415∗∗∗
         Idio volCAP M            −0.0538∗∗∗       −0.0295∗∗       0.953∗∗∗
         Idio volF F 3            −0.0617∗∗∗       −0.0358∗∗∗      0.948∗∗∗       0.998∗∗∗
         Lt2A                       0.249∗∗∗        0.200∗∗∗    −0.0727∗∗∗       −0.0567∗∗∗      −0.0579∗∗∗
         Profitability            −0.143∗∗∗        −0.115∗∗∗    −0.0932∗∗∗       −0.0975∗∗∗      −0.0987∗∗∗ −0.284∗∗∗
         Size                       0.129∗∗∗        0.117∗∗∗    −0.191∗∗∗        −0.272∗∗∗       −0.279∗∗∗         0.121∗∗∗ −0.0650∗∗∗
         B-M ratio                  0.342∗∗∗        0.274∗∗∗    −0.0276∗∗         0.0117           0.0116          0.258∗∗∗ −0.456∗∗∗ −0.0253∗
         Intangibility            −0.224∗∗∗        −0.187∗∗∗    −0.0505∗∗∗       −0.0923∗∗∗      −0.0898∗∗∗        0.109∗∗∗ −0.132∗∗∗          0.297∗∗∗ −0.192∗∗∗
         Price-Cost margin        −0.211∗∗∗        −0.194∗∗∗       0.0131         0.003            0.00291       −0.167∗∗∗   0.461∗∗∗ −0.190∗∗∗ −0.383∗∗∗             0.141∗∗∗
         HHI                      −0.0924∗∗∗       −0.0976∗∗∗      0.0474∗∗∗      0.0270∗          0.0297∗∗      −0.0647∗∗∗ 0.133∗∗∗           0.133∗∗∗ −0.164∗∗∗     0.136∗∗∗   0.0580∗∗∗
         t-stats in parentheses
         ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
                                                                                    -

                                          Table 2: Panel Regressions of Leverage on Price Flexibility
     This table reports the results for estimating the following linear equation:

                                                                                       0
                                                           Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai + Xi,t−1 × γ + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

                                                                                                         0
     where Lt2A is long-term debt to total assets, FPA is the frequency of price adjustment, and Xi,t−1        a vector of additional controls (see Table 1 for a detailed
     description). HP Firm-level HHI is the firm-level measure of product-space concentration based on the Hoberg & Phillips 300 industries. Fama-French 48 FE
     is a set of 48 dummies that capture the Fama and French 48-industries. Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE is a set of 50 dummies that capture the Hoberg and Phillips 50
     industries. The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014 in columns (1) and (5). The sample is restricted to the period January 1996 to December 2014
     in all other columns, due to the availability of the Hoberg-Phillips data. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Columns (1) - (4) use the continuous
     measure of the frequency of price adjustment, and columns (5) - (8) use a dummy that equals 1 if the firm is in the top quartile of the frequency of price
     adjustment distribution and zero if the firm is in the bottom quartile. Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the
     micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                                 FPA continuous                                        FPA dummy
                                                     (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)              (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                    ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗
                    FPA                            0.17∗∗∗      0.15       0.12       0.09∗∗           0.06∗∗∗      0.06       0.04       0.04∗∗
                                                 (4.95)        (3.54)     (3.07)     (2.09)           (3.92)       (2.80)     (2.15)     (2.30)
                                                                               ∗∗                                       ∗
                    Total vol                    −0.02        −0.03        0.05       0.07∗∗         −0.05∗∗      −0.05        0.03       0.01
                                                (−1.26)      (−1.46)      (2.19)     (2.56)         (−2.13)      (−1.97)      (1.05)     (0.48)
                    Profitability                −0.23∗∗∗     −0.11      −0.20∗∗∗ −0.22∗∗∗           −0.22∗∗∗     −0.05      −0.11      −0.13




42
                                                (−3.15)      (−1.29)    (−2.77)    (−2.79)          (−2.61)      (−0.46)    (−1.13)    (−1.33)
                    Size                           0.00       −0.00      −0.00      −0.00            −0.00        −0.01∗∗    −0.01      −0.01
                                                  (1.16)     (−0.81)    (−0.93)    (−0.71)          (−0.31)      (−2.01)    (−1.35)    (−1.65)
                    B-M ratio                      0.05∗∗∗      0.03∗∗   −0.01        0.00             0.06∗∗∗      0.04∗∗     0.01       0.01
                                                  (5.30)       (2.53)   (−0.55)      (0.16)           (5.29)       (2.51)     (0.62)     (0.99)
                    Intangibility                  0.11∗∗∗      0.10∗∗∗    0.14∗∗∗    0.10∗∗∗          0.14∗∗∗      0.13∗∗     0.17∗∗∗    0.13∗∗∗
                                                  (3.79)       (2.90)     (3.93)     (2.96)           (3.16)       (2.44)     (3.43)     (3.13)
                    Price-Cost margin            −0.00        −0.06∗       0.04       0.04             0.02       −0.05        0.06       0.07∗
                                                (−0.13)      (−1.84)      (0.98)     (1.01)           (0.46)     (−1.13)      (1.13)     (1.68)
                    HHi                          −0.03          0.05       0.06       0.00           −0.02          0.03       0.06     −0.15∗∗
                                                (−0.66)        (0.98)     (1.65)     (0.06)         (−0.35)        (0.41)     (0.93)   (−1.99)
                    HP Firm-level HHI                         −0.04        0.03       0.03                        −0.04      −0.03        0.01
                                                             (−1.27)      (1.06)     (0.98)                      (−1.03)    (−0.66)      (0.20)
                    Constant                       0.13∗∗∗      0.24∗∗∗    0.18∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗         0.17∗∗∗       0.31∗∗∗    0.20∗∗∗    0.23∗∗∗
                                                  (3.73)       (4.64)     (3.53)     (3.69)          (4.12)        (4.67)     (2.92)     (3.89)
                    Year FE                                                   X           X                                      X          X
                    Fama-French 48 FE                                         X                                                  X
                    Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE                                                 X                                                 X
                    Nobs                           8,821         4,706      4,706       4,671          4,406          2,265    2,265      2,256
                    Adjusted R2                     0.16          0.09       0.29        0.24           0.18           0.12     0.33       0.32
                    t-stats in parentheses
                    ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
Table 3: Panel Regressions of Leverage on Price Flexibility (Errors-in-
Variables)
This table reports the results of regressing long-term debt to total assets (Lt2A) on the frequency of price
adjustment, FPA, and a vector of additional controls (see Table 1 for a detailed description) using the linear
cumulant equations methodology of Erickson, Jiang, and Whited (2014). We assume FPA, B-M ratio, and
Intangibility are measured with error. The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. All columns use the continuous measure of the FPA. Equally-weighted
probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer
Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                             OLS            3rd cum       4th cum      5th cum
                                              (1)               (2)          (3)           (4)
                  FPA                       0.17∗∗∗           0.27∗∗∗      0.30∗∗∗       0.06∗∗∗
                                          (4.95)             (3.65)       (6.05)        (3.27)
                  Total vol               −0.02             −0.03          0.01        −0.02
                                         (−1.26)           (−1.07)        (0.29)      (−0.95)
                  Profitability           −0.23∗∗∗            0.03         0.58∗∗∗     −0.00
                                         (−3.15)             (0.12)       (6.69)      (−0.06)
                  Size                      0.00              0.02∗∗       0.02∗∗∗       0.03∗∗∗
                                          (1.16)             (2.36)       (3.79)        (6.31)
                  B-M ratio                 0.05∗∗∗         −0.02          0.04∗∗∗       0.04∗∗∗
                                           (5.30)          (−0.66)        (2.65)        (4.38)
                  Intangibility             0.11∗∗∗         −0.25∗∗      −0.28∗∗∗      −0.40∗∗∗
                                           (3.79)          (−2.06)      (−4.91)      (−16.01)
                  Price-Cost margin       −0.00             −0.04        −0.08∗∗         0.02
                                         (−0.13)           (−0.55)      (−2.07)         (0.57)
                  HHI                     −0.03             −0.02        −0.03         −0.00
                                         (−0.66)           (−0.42)      (−0.57)       (−0.01)
                  Constant                  0.13∗∗∗           0.13∗∗     −0.01           0.06∗
                                           (3.73)            (2.24)     (−0.22)         (1.66)
                  Nobs                                            8,821
                  Adjusted R2                                     0.16
                  t-stats in parentheses
                  ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                      43
            Table 4: Triple Differences: Interstate Bank Branching Efficiency Act, Price Flexibility, and Leverage
     This table reports the results for estimating the following linear specification:

                                                           Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Deregulatedi,t
                                                                  + δ1 × F P Ai + δ2 × Deregulatedi,t + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

     where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, F P A is the frequency of price adjustment, and Deregulatedi,t is an indicator that equals 1 if firm i is in a state that
     had implemented the deregulation in or before year t, and 0 otherwise. ηt and ηk are a full set of year and industry fixed effects. Fama-French 48 FE is a set
     of forty-eight dummies that capture the Fama and French 48 industries. Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE is a set of fifty dummies that capture the Hoberg and Phillips 50
     industries. Firm FE is a set of firm-level fixed effects, which absorbs the measures of price flexibility in columns (4) and (8). The sample period is January 1982
     to December 2014 except from columns (3) and (7), in which the sample period is January 1996 to December 2014, due to the availability of the Hoberg-Phillips
     data. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Columns (1) - (4) use the continuous measure of the frequency of price adjustment and columns (5) -
     (8) use a dummy that equals 1 if the firm is in the top quartile of the frequency of price adjustment distribution and zero if the firm is in the bottom quartile.
     Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the
     Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                                         FPA                                         FPA Dummy
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)     (7)            (8)




44
                                                        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                     FPA × Deregulated            −0.15      −0.16      −0.25      −0.16              −0.04      −0.04      −0.08      −0.05∗∗∗
                                                 (−4.08)    (−4.64)    (−4.60)    (−4.56)            (−2.41)    (−2.71)    (−3.30)    (−3.05)
                                                                                                            ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
                     FPA                            0.30∗∗∗    0.17∗∗∗    0.28∗∗∗                       0.09       0.06       0.10
                                                   (8.04)     (5.16)     (4.40)                        (5.77)     (3.58)     (3.46)
                     Deregulated                    0.05∗∗∗    0.03∗∗     0.04∗∗     0.02               0.04∗∗∗    0.01       0.02       0.02
                                                   (5.75)     (2.15)     (2.42)     (1.43)             (3.39)     (0.78)     (1.15)     (1.45)
                     Constant                       0.15∗∗∗    0.15∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗    0.18∗∗∗            0.16∗∗∗    0.16∗∗∗    0.15∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗
                                                  (19.75)    (17.84)     (9.91)    (28.36)            (15.67)    (14.42)     (8.94)    (22.20)

                     Year FE                                      X             X          X                         X          X          X
                     Fama-French 48 FE                            X                                                  X
                     Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE                                      X                                               X
                     Firm FE                                                                X                                               X
                     Nobs                           9,119        9,119         4,843      9,119         4,558      4,558       2,354      4,558
                     Adjusted R2                     0.08         0.27          0.21       0.58          0.09       0.30        0.26       0.55
                     t-stats in parentheses
                     ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
Table 5: Triple Differences: Effect Before/After and at Alternative Horizons
 This table reports the results for estimating the following linear specification:

                     Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Deregulatedi,t
                             + δ1 × F P Ai + δ2 × Deregulatedi,t + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

 where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, F P A is the frequency of price adjustment, and
 Deregulatedi,t is an indicator that equals 1 if firm i is in a state that had implemented the
 deregulation in or before year t, and 0 otherwise. The sample period is January 1982 to December
 2014. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. In column (1), the sample only includes
 firm-level observations in the year before and after the implementation of the interstate bank
 branching deregulation in the state where the firm is headquartered. In columns (2)-(5), the sample
 period is indicated at the top of each column. All columns use the continuous measure of the
 frequency of price adjustment. Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at
 the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau
 of Labor Statistics.

                                Before/After    1994-2002     1991-2005    1988-2008   1985-2011
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)
     FPA × Deregulated            −0.07∗∗       −0.10∗∗       −0.11∗∗∗     −0.12∗∗∗     −0.14∗∗∗
                                 (−2.22)       (−2.37)       (−3.08)      (−3.34)      (−3.81)
     FPA                           0.28∗∗∗        0.31∗∗∗       0.30∗∗∗      0.29∗∗∗     0.29∗∗∗
                                  (5.18)         (6.31)        (6.70)       (6.78)      (7.45)
     Deregulated                   0.03∗∗∗        0.04∗∗∗       0.04∗∗∗      0.04∗∗∗     0.04∗∗∗
                                  (4.00)         (4.45)        (4.61)       (4.36)      (5.03)
     Constant                      0.17∗∗∗        0.16∗∗∗      0.16∗∗∗       0.16∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗
                                 (16.24)        (16.64)      (18.24)       (18.82)     (19.35)

     Nobs                            599           2,795        4,605         6,286       7,857
     Adjusted R2                     0.08          0.08         0.08          0.07        0.07
     t-stats in parentheses
     ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                   45
Table 6: Triple Differences: Heterogeneous Effect by Dependence on External
Financing
This table reports the results for estimating the following linear specification:

                            Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Deregulatedi,t
                                    + δ1 × F P Ai + δ2 × Deregulatedi,t + ηt + i,t ,

where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, FPA is frequency of price adjustment, and Deregulatedi,t is an
indicator that equals 1 if firm i is in a state that had implemented the deregulation in or before year t,
and 0 otherwise. ηt are a full set of year fixed effects. The sample period is January 1982 to December
2014. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Columns (1) and (2) split the sample based on the
cash-to-asset ratios and columns (3) and (4) based on the external finance gap defined as in Demirgüç-Kunt
and Maksimovic (2002b). Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level
using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                                        Low External    High External
                                Low Cash      High Cash                 Finance Gap     Finance Gap
                                   (1)           (2)                        (3)              (4)
     FPA × Deregulated          −0.18∗∗∗       −0.06                        -0.06         −0.19∗∗∗
                               (−4.37)        (−0.85)                      (-1.10)       (−4.54)
     FPA                          0.26∗∗∗       0.14∗∗∗                    0.29∗∗∗         0.31∗∗∗
                                 (7.31)        (2.71)                       (7.72)        (7.58)
     Deregulated                  0.03∗         0.04∗∗                       0.02          0.02
                                 (1.95)        (2.12)                       (1.34)        (1.06)
     Constant                     0.18∗∗∗       0.08∗∗∗                    0.08∗∗∗         0.16∗∗∗
                                (17.49)        (7.59)                       (6.00)       (15.77)

     Year FE                         X            X                           X               X
     Nobs                          6,006        3,042                       2,888           5,871
     Adjusted R2                   0.08         0.08                        0.13            0.09
     t-stats in parentheses
     ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                        46
          Table 7: Falsification Tests: Early vs. Late Deregulating States
This table reports the results for estimating the following linear specification:

               Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai × Af ter1996i,t × Earlyi + δ1 × F P Ai × Af ter1996i,t
                       + δ2 × F P Ai × Earlyi + δ3 × Af ter1996i,t × Earlyi + γ1 × F P Ai
                                                             0
                       + γ2 × Af ter1996i,t + γ3 × Earlyi + Xi,t × ζ + i,t .

where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, F P A is the frequency of price adjustment, and Deregulatedi,t is
an indicator that equals 1 if firm i is in a state that had implemented the deregulation in or before year t,
and 0 otherwise. Af ter1996 is an indicator that equals 1 in years after 1996. Early is an indicator that
equals 1 for firms headquartered in states that implemented the interstate bank branching deregulation in
the first wave, between 1996 and 1998. The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. In columns (1)-(3), the sample period is January 1982 to December
1999. In the first falsification test of column (4), an indicator that equals 1 for years after 1992, Af ter1992,
replaces Af ter1996. In column (5), the sample period is January 1982 to December 1995. In column (5),
it is January 1982 to December 1995 and January 2001 to December 2014. Equally-weighted probabilities of
price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index
constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                                             Falsification     Falsification
                                      All      Low Cash     High Cash           Test 1            Test 2
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)                (4)               (5)
 FPA × After1996 × Early          −0.17∗∗      −0.16∗         0.21                              −0.01
                                 (−2.00)      (−1.78)        (0.84)                            (−0.09)
 FPA × After1996                    0.08         0.08       −0.23                               −0.14∗
                                   (0.99)       (0.95)     (−0.95)                             (−1.89)
 FPA × Early                        0.01         0.00       −0.06                0.04            0.01
                                   (0.16)     (−0.02)      (−0.44)              (0.52)          (0.16)
 After1996 × Early                  0.02         0.00         0.00                               0.00
                                   (0.88)       (0.17)     (−0.09)                              (0.12)
 FPA                                0.28∗∗∗      0.27∗∗∗      0.18               0.27∗∗∗         0.28∗∗∗
                                   (4.37)       (3.83)       (1.62)             (3.81)          (4.37)
 After1996                          0.02         0.02         0.02                               0.05∗∗
                                  (0.87)        (0.89)       (0.59)                             (2.40)
 Early                              0.00         0.03       −0.02               0.00             0.00
                                  (0.20)        (1.24)     (−0.86)                              (0.20)
 FPA × After1992 × Early                                                      −0.12
                                                                             (−1.39)
 FPA × After1992                                                                0.06
                                                                               (0.73)
 After1992 × Early                                                              0.02
                                                                               (0.88)
 After1992                                                                    −0.01
                                                                             (−0.48)
 Constant                           0.15∗∗∗      0.16∗∗∗      0.11∗∗∗           0.15∗∗∗           0.15∗∗∗
                                   (7.27)       (6.96)       (7.07)            (6.76)            (7.27)

 Nobs                               5,376        3,796         1,580                4,110          7,549
 Adjusted R2                        0.10         0.10          0.02                 0.10           0.08
 t-stats in parentheses
 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01              47
                                                        -

Table 8: Panel Regressions of Leverage on Price Flexibility with Total Volatility
Decomposition
This table reports the results for estimating the following linear equation:

                                                                                 0
    Lt2Ai,t = α + β1 × P redicted T otal voli,t + β2 × Residual T otal voli,t + Xi,t−1 × γ + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, P redicted T otal vol and Residual T otal vol are the predicted part of a
                                                                                                           0
regression of total volatility on the frequency of price adjustment and the residual, respectively, and Xi,t−1  is a
vector of additional controls (see Table 1 for a detailed description). HP Firm-level HHI is the firm-level measure
of product-space concentration based on the Hoberg & Phillips 300 industries. Fama-French 48 FE is a set of 48
dummies that capture the Fama and French 48 industries. Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE is a set of 50 dummies that capture
the Hoberg and Phillips 50 industries. The sample period is January 1982 to December 2014 in columns (1). The
sample is restricted to the period January 1996 to December 2014 in all other columns, due to the availability of
the Hoberg-Phillips data. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. All columns use the continuous measure
of the frequency of price adjustment. Equally-weighted probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm
level using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

                                                  (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)
                 Predicted Total vol          −2.77∗∗∗       −2.44∗∗∗     −1.83∗∗∗ −1.27∗∗
                                             (−5.00)        (−3.59)      (−3.00)    (−2.00)
                                                                                ∗∗
                 Residual Total vol           −0.02          −0.03          0.05       0.07∗∗
                                             (−1.26)        (−1.46)        (2.19)     (2.56)
                 Profitability                −0.23∗∗∗       −0.11        −0.20 ∗∗∗
                                                                                     −0.22∗∗∗
                                             (−3.15)        (−1.29)      (−2.77)    (−2.79)
                 Size                           0.00         −0.00        −0.00      −0.00
                                               (1.16)       (−0.81)      (−0.93)    (−0.71)
                 B-M ratio                      0.05∗∗∗        0.03∗∗     −0.01        0.00
                                               (5.30)         (2.53)     (−0.55)      (0.16)
                 Intangibility                  0.11∗∗∗        0.10∗∗∗      0.14∗∗∗    0.10∗∗∗
                                               (3.79)         (2.90)       (3.93)     (2.96)
                 Price-Cost margin            −0.00          −0.06∗         0.04       0.04
                                             (−0.13)        (−1.84)        (0.98)     (1.01)
                 HHi                          −0.03            0.05         0.07       0.00
                                             (−0.66)          (0.98)       (1.65)     (0.06)
                 HP Firm-level HHI                           −0.04          0.03       0.03
                                                            (−1.27)        (1.06)     (0.98)
                 Constant                      1.05∗∗∗         1.04∗∗∗      0.81∗∗∗    0.64∗∗∗
                                              (5.64)          (4.55)       (3.98)     (2.97)
                 Year FE                                                      X          X
                 Fama-French 48 FE                                            X
                 Hoberg-Phillips 50 FE                                                   X
                 Nobs                           8,821          4,706        4,706      4,671
                 Adjusted R2                     0.16           0.09         0.29       0.24
                 t-stats in parentheses
                 ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01




                                                     48
                                                                                                       -

                               Table 9: Panel Regressions of Leverage on Price Flexibility: additional controls
     This table reports the results for estimating the following linear equation:

                                                                                                   0
                                                                       Lt2Ai,t = α + β × F P Ai + Xi,t−1 × γ + ηt + ηk + i,t ,

                                                                                                0
     where Lt2A is long-term debt to assets, FPA is the frequency of price adjustment, and Xi,t−1    a vector of additional controls (see Table 1 and Section VI B. for
     a detailed description). Fama-French 48 FE is a set of 48 dummies that capture the Fama and French 48 industries. The sample period is January 1982 to
     December 2014. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. All columns use the continuous measure of the frequency of price adjustment. Equally-weighted
     probabilities of price adjustments are calculated at the firm level using the micro-data underlying the Producer Price Index constructed by the Bureau of Labor
     Statistics.
                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)        (11)
               FPA                                       0.09∗∗∗     0.08∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗     0.10∗∗∗        0.09∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗     0.10∗∗∗     0.08∗∗∗     0.11∗∗∗
                                                        (3.12)      (2.60)      (3.03)      (3.11)         (3.13)      (2.96)      (3.08)      (3.22)      (2.75)      (2.70)      (2.65)
               Total vol                                 0.06∗∗∗     0.06∗∗∗     0.06∗∗∗     0.05∗∗         0.06∗∗∗     0.05∗∗      0.06∗∗∗     0.07∗∗∗     0.08∗∗∗     0.07∗∗∗     0.09∗∗∗
                                                        (2.84)      (2.62)      (2.81)      (2.05)         (2.59)      (2.01)      (2.87)      (3.33)      (3.59)      (2.91)      (3.48)
               Profitability                         −0.30∗∗∗       −0.29∗∗∗    −0.30∗∗∗    −0.32∗∗∗    −0.30∗∗∗       −0.32∗∗∗    −0.29∗∗∗    −0.29∗∗∗    −0.44∗∗∗    −0.27∗∗∗    −0.43∗∗∗
                                                    (−5.53)        (−5.07)     (−5.48)     (−5.57)     (−5.49)        (−5.58)     (−5.31)     (−4.99)     (−6.35)     (−5.02)     (−5.62)
               Size                                      0.00        0.01∗       0.00        0.00           0.00        0.00        0.00       −0.00        0.00        0.00       −0.00
                                                        (0.76)      (1.66)      (0.83)      (0.87)         (1.14)      (0.79)      (0.83)     (−0.56)      (0.95)      (0.94)     (−0.29)
               B-M ratio                                 0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01           0.01        0.01        0.01        0.02∗       0.00        0.01       −0.00
                                                        (1.56)      (1.29)      (1.51)      (0.74)         (1.62)      (0.70)      (1.37)      (1.86)      (0.41)      (1.06)     (−0.34)
               Intangibility                             0.14∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗     0.14∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗        0.15∗∗∗     0.16∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗     0.14∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗     0.14∗∗∗
                                                        (5.29)      (5.76)      (5.27)      (5.63)         (5.39)      (5.69)      (5.49)      (5.09)      (5.22)      (4.62)      (4.72)
               Price-Cost margin                         0.06∗∗      0.04        0.06∗       0.07∗∗         0.05        0.07∗∗      0.07∗∗      0.06∗∗      0.22∗∗∗     0.00        0.17∗∗
                                                        (2.00)      (1.19)      (1.91)      (2.06)         (1.61)      (1.99)      (2.05)      (1.98)      (4.39)      (0.10)      (2.41)
               HHi                                       0.06        0.03        0.07        0.09           0.06        0.09        0.06        0.07        0.04        0.05        0.00
                                                        (1.36)      (0.76)      (1.41)      (1.59)         (1.34)      (1.51)      (1.31)      (1.42)      (0.74)      (1.12)      (0.07)




49
               4F Concentration ratio                                0.04                                                                                                          −0.00
                                                                    (0.61)                                                                                                        (−0.06)
               Nondur                                                            0.01                                                                                               0.05
                                                                                (0.28)                                                                                             (0.21)
               Serv                                                             −0.09∗∗                                                                                            −0.06
                                                                               (−2.30)                                                                                            (−0.92)
               Invest                                                            0.02                                                                                              −0.00
                                                                                (1.16)                                                                                            (−0.18)
               Giv                                                               0.01                                                                                              −0.03
                                                                                (0.54)                                                                                            (−1.38)

               NX                                                                0.02                                                                                              −0.00
                                                                                (0.84)                                                                                            (−1.19)
               Durability BKM                                                               −0.01                                                                                  −0.02
                                                                                           (−0.36)                                                                                (−1.17)
               FWA                                                                                          1.86∗∗                                                                 −0.48
                                                                                                           (2.22)                                                                 (−0.43)
               Engel curve slopes                                                                                      −0.08                                                       −0.04
                                                                                                                      (−0.88)                                                     (−0.47)
               KZ Index w/o Lev                                                                                                    −0.02                                           −0.01
                                                                                                                                  (−1.65)                                         (−0.56)
                                                                                                                                                    ∗∗∗
               S&P rating                                                                                                                       0.01                                0.02∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                               (3.90)                              (4.80)
               Fixed Costs to Sales                                                                                                                        −0.24∗∗∗                −0.20∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                          (−4.57)                 (−3.25)
               Operating LeverageN ovyM arx                                                                                                                            −0.04∗∗∗    −0.03∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                      (−4.46)     (−2.80)
               Constant                                  0.12∗∗∗     0.10∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗     0.13∗∗∗    −0.17           0.19∗∗      0.12∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗     0.18∗∗∗     0.33∗
                                                        (3.55)      (2.93)      (3.22)      (3.58)     (−1.29)         (2.19)      (3.48)      (4.21)      (3.13)      (5.19)      (1.78)
               Year FE                                     X           X           X           X              X           X           X           X           X           X           X
               FF 48 FE                                    X           X           X           X              X           X           X           X           X           X           X
               Nobs                                      8,821       8,093       8,821       7,999          8,648       7,999       8,819       8,486       7,585       8,749       5,906
               Adjusted R2                                0.34        0.35        0.34        0.35           0.35       0.35        0.34         0.35        0.29        0.36        0.29
               t-stats in parentheses
               ∗p < 0.10, ∗ ∗ p < 0.05, ∗ ∗ ∗p < 0.01
