NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC FINANCE IN A NUTSHELL:
A COBB DOUGLAS TEACHING TOOL FOR
GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM TAX INCIDENCE AND EXCESS BURDEN
Don Fullerton
Chi L. Ta
Working Paper 23064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23064

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

For comments and suggestions, we wish to thank Tengjiao Chen, Zhangliang Chen, Jonathan
Meer, David Quigley, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and students who solved our model as
homework to provide suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Don Fullerton and Chi L. Ta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Public Finance in a Nutshell: A Cobb Douglas Teaching Tool for General Equilibrium Tax
Incidence and Excess Burden
Don Fullerton and Chi L. Ta
NBER Working Paper No. 23064
January 2017
JEL No. A20,C63,C68,D04,D58,H21,H22,H23,H24,H25
ABSTRACT
To help first- or second-year graduate students in economics apply their theoretical training, this
paper shows how to solve a simple and intuitive computable general equilibrium (CGE) model
using a calculator. Because this simplified Harberger model uses Cobb Douglas functional forms
for utility and production, one can solve for all input and output prices and quantities with no
taxes and then solve for exact measures of output with a large tax change (not using derivatives).
We then show how to solve simultaneously for capital and labor prices (incidence on the sources
side of income), for both output prices (incidence on the uses side), for exact measures of overall
welfare loss such as the equivalent variation, for excess burden and marginal excess burden, and
for the effects on revenue in the form of a Laffer Curve.

Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
515 East Gregory Drive, BIF Box#30 (MC520)
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu
Chi L. Ta
Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
chita2@illinois.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Undergraduate economics students can draw a partial equilibrium diagram of supply and
demand in one market with one equilibrium price and quantity, and the good students understand
the assumption that all other markets are unaffected. Most of them hear about the idea of general
equilibrium, but they are told it is very complicated. First-year graduate students learn plenty of
theory, but may not get many practical applications. Few wish to build computational general
equilibrium (CGE) models because of the huge requirements of time, effort, data, and detail.
Many who read descriptions of a complicated CGE model may think it seems like a “black box.”
Yet many questions in economics cannot be addressed without a general equilibrium
model. For example, the full distributional incidence of an output tax requires knowing its effects
on prices in other markets — the return to capital, the wage rate, and effects on other output
prices. In some cases, use of a general equilibrium (GE) model may reverse results from a partial
equilibrium (PE) model. 1 Similarly, both the magnitude and sign of the overall welfare effect of
a tax in one market can depend on the magnitudes of pre-existing taxes in other markets.
This paper describes an extremely simple CGE model that can be solved on the “back of
an envelope.” The paper can be read by a good undergraduate, and the model can be solved by a
first- or second-year graduate student in economics. Our practical application illustrates the
theoretical tools that graduate students learn in their first year, which are employed widely across
all areas of public economics, including tax incidence, deadweight loss, marginal excess burden,
and the effects of tax rate increases on tax revenue (the Laffer curve). These are major topics of a
graduate course on taxation that might use various chapters in the Handbook of Public
Economics. This short paper is not a substitute for that technical material, nor can it serve as a
textbook for definitions of all of the concepts just listed. 2 We mean this paper only to
complement and supplement those chapters by providing a readily accessible example of all
those textbook concepts in a single CGE model where each step shows how changes in one
market affect other markets. 3
We start with the Cobb Douglas example in McLure and Thirsk (M&T), published in

1
Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995) describe an example from Bradford (1978) of a local tax on mobile labor
where the burden is on local profits in a PE model but on labor nationwide in a GE model.
2

See the Handbook chapters on “Tax Incidence” (Fullerton and Metcalf, 2002) and “Taxation and Economic
Efficiency” (Auerbach and Hines, 2002). For textbook definitions, see Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995).

3

For more complete discussions of CGE models in taxation, see Shoven and Whalley (1992) and Zodrow and
Diamond (2013).
1

1975 in the National Tax Journal, which one of us read in 1975 as a first-year graduate student
— and has used as a teaching tool since then while thinking of various “improvements.” The
other of us just started her first year of graduate school, undertook all of the calculations for this
paper, and also finds the M&T article very helpful. We hope that our paper will be widely read
and employed in teaching. Our goal is identical to that stated by M&T: “Since our aim is
pedagogical we present no new analytical results but, instead, try to disseminate established ones
to a wider readership” (M&T, 1975, p. 1).
No calculation in this paper requires a computer, though a calculator may be useful. The
reader can see exactly how to calculate each of these many concepts, all in less than half the
length of the paper by M&T. Our paper can be used either of two ways. It can be assigned to
students to read and replicate, or alternatively, our Appendix provides a homework assignment
that can be handed out to graduate students before they are assigned this paper as the answer key.
For a pedagogical paper, however, we make several contributions. The first is simply to
re-introduce this intuitive and helpful example, which has fallen into dis-use. Second, we
improve upon the approximations employed in that paper by showing equally simple ways to
solve for the exact equilibrium output and price of each commodity.
Third, we show that the Harberger (1964) triangle used to calculate deadweight loss is
also an unnecessary approximation, because the same model can easily be used to calculate
“exact” measures of welfare loss. To do this, we use the Cobb Douglas functions to solve for
indirect utility, the expenditure function, and the equivalent variation measure of excess burden.
Our exact measure of deadweight loss is almost 20 percent larger than the approximation
employed for the same numerical example in M&T.
Fourth, we also calculate the corresponding measure of marginal excess burden. For our
example with a 30 percent tax on one output, the average excess burden (total excess burden
divided by total revenue) is 8.7 cents on the dollar, while the marginal excess burden (the change
in excess burden divided by the change in revenue) is 21 cents. We discuss the implications of
this difference.
Fifth, we use the same model to calculate tax revenue resulting from each tax rate from 1
to 99 percent. These calculations yield the Laffer curve for the excise tax we analyze.
Section II presents a brief review of the simplified Harberger model, while Section III
shows the solutions of M&T (1975). Section IV then extends their example by showing how to
find exact solutions for outputs, prices, and tax incidence. Section V derives an exact measure of

2

excess burden, while Section VI shows how to calculate it. Section VII defines and calculates
marginal excess burden, while Section VIII plots the Laffer curve. Section IX concludes.
II. A REVIEW OF THE SIMPLIFIED HARBERGER MODEL
The corporate income tax might directly reduce the net return to investment in the
corporate sector, but reallocation of capital and labor might affect non-corporate returns, wages,
and output prices. To study the incidence of the corporate tax, Harberger (1962) assumes a
closed economy with a corporate sector producing one output (

) and a non-corporate sector

producing a different output ( ). The model includes two factor inputs, fixed factor supplies,
full employment, constant returns to scale, and all the “perfect” assumptions: perfect certainty,
perfect competition, perfect factor mobility, and perfect information. Each output is produced
using capital and labor in a general function [e.g.,

] allowing for any elasticity of

substitution between inputs. Pure profits are zero because of perfect competition, but the tax
applies to the normal return to owners of capital in the corporate sector (
models it as a tax at rate

on use of

), so Harberger

. He differentiates all equations to linearize the model

in derivatives, and then solves N linear equations for N unknowns (the change in each quantity
and price for a change in tax). A disadvantage is that this method is strictly valid only for a small
tax (or small change in tax). Harberger solves for the change in the economy-wide return to
capital relative to the wage rate (incidence on the sources side of income).
A major change by M&T (1975) is to use Cobb Douglas functions, which has both
advantages and disadvantages. The main limitation is that all elasticities of substitution are 1.0,
which obscures the fact that burdens on labor or capital can depend on each elasticity (though
incidence still depends on other parameters, as shown below). The main advantage of CobbDouglas forms, however, is that the model can be solved without taking derivatives. The
equations are solved directly, with tax rates of any size, for equilibrium levels of prices and
quantities. 4 We solve below for equilibrium with no taxes, and then with a large tax rate,
allowing exact comparisons of prices, quantities, and welfare. We also use the model to solve for
effects of a tax on one output (

), and to solve for both factor prices and output prices

(incidence on the uses side of income).
Kimbell and Harrison (1986) show how to solve analytically for levels of prices and quantities before and
after a large tax change using a general equilibrium model with constant elasticity of substitution (CES) utility
and production functions. Cobb-Douglas functions are used here because they are simpler to solve on the
back of an envelope; they are a special case of CES functions where the elasticities of substitution are all 1.0.

4

3

The model can be useful to study taxation of any two sectors (e.g., housing or agricultural
output versus manufacturing). It can represent any two inputs (e.g., polluting inputs versus nonpolluting inputs). For example, the M&T version of the Harberger model has two sectors (
each with Cobb-Douglas production. In their numerical example (
(1)

and

with constant parameters
the corporate sector,
sector

,

,

, while

and

, ),

), we have

,

, and

. Inputs

and

denote capital and labor used in

and

are the analogous factors used in the non-corporate

.
Because total factor supplies are fixed in this static model, households have no savings

decision and no labor supply decision. The economy-wide resource constraints are
(2)

and

.

M&T also assume a Cobb-Douglas utility function, where
(3)

in their example

.

Many identical households choose goods

and

budget constraint for such spending is

to maximize utility subject to income . The
, where

consumers (gross of any tax). The resulting demand for

and

are the prices faced by

is just

(which students

can derive as an exercise). It is a very simple form of demand with the key properties that
demand for

rises with income , and slopes down with respect to price

(although all cross-

price effects are zero). A slight re-arrangement of demands shows that expenditure,
fixed fraction of income,

[and

, is a

].

Since only relative prices matter, most general equilibrium models solve for all prices
relative to one “numeraire” good or factor with a fixed price. Instead, M&T anchor the overall
price level by assuming that nominal national income is fixed (
the consumer price

, then all quantities adjust and

unchanged. In their numerical example,

is fixed at

). Thus, if a tax on X raises

must fall so that the total
(which could be billions or

trillions, depending on the size of the economy, in dollars or any other currency). Thus we have
(4)

,

4

is

(5)

.
On the other side of the ledger, income

includes receipts from factor endowments and

from the government’s transfer of all tax revenue back to households as a lump-sum rebate,
, where

Thus,

is the net-of-tax rental price for capital, and

.

is the net-of-

tax wage. 5 For consistency, every price is a price faced by households: they receive net-of-tax
factor prices (
of

and

) and pay gross-of-tax output prices (

means that firms receive

, where

and

). Thus, a tax on output

is the tax as a fraction of the consumers’

gross price. The corporate income tax is modeled as a tax on capital in the corporate sector,
so a firm’s cost of capital is

, where

,

is the tax as a fraction of a household’s net

return. Other taxes could be modeled analogously, but we use just those two for simplicity.
Firms choose inputs

and

to maximize profits subject to their production function,

and the Cobb Douglas forms yield very simple factor demands. Firms in
sales revenue,

, to buy units of capital,

always use

, each of which costs

of net

. In

general,
(6)

,

(7)

, and

,
.
to

These equations hold in equilibrium for any tax rates and parameters. Thus, one can set
find the incidence of just the corporate income tax (
solve for effects of the tax on output,

). Alternatively, we can set

to

. In the latter case, it helps to use the specific numerical

example.
In the initial equilibrium where all tax rates are zero, M&T employ the “unit convention”
by defining a unit of each good or factor as the amount that costs one dollar. Then
, where the superscript “0” indicates the initial no-tax equilibrium.
Equations (4) and (5) state that
Then, in the initial equilibrium with

, so the initial quantities are

.

, (6) and (7) imply

5

For calculating equilibrium prices and quantities, our assumption about the return of revenue is equivalent to the
and
is in the same proportion as consumers.
assumption in M&T that government spending on
5

(8)

,

(9)

,

(10)

,
.

(11)
With

, these equations yield the entire set of initial quantities shown in Table 1.
Table 1
Initial Quantity Allocations

That is, for the Cobb-Douglas model with the assumed utility function and production function
parameters that yield the calculated initial equilibrium outcomes, the total labor endowment must
be 1,440, and the total capital endowment must be 960.
III. SOLUTIONS OF MCLURE AND THIRSK (1975)
The simplified Harberger model in (6) and (7) can be used to find the incidence of the
corporate income tax as general result (without using the particular numerical example). Set
to study

. Expenditure

in this Cobb-Douglas model is a fixed fraction of income,

, so the sum of the two equations in (6) is
.
Rearranging yields
reduces capital income (

, which implies that any corporate income tax
) by precisely the full amount of the tax (

). That is, capital

always bears the full burden of this tax, on the sources side of income. 6 The sum of the two
equations in (7) is

, which is also a constant, so labor bears no

6

This result was proven by Harberger (1962) in his proposition (9) for the Cobb Douglas special case. For intuition,
note that each sector’s gross-of-tax spending on capital is a constant fraction of a fixed income.
6

burden of the corporate income tax (on the sources side). In a moment we show how to calculate
the new higher price of
fraction of income on

and new lower price of

, but if all consumers spend the same

, then this tax has no differential effects on the uses side of incidence.

Using the numerical example, M&T then consider a 30 percent tax on

(

with

). All initial prices are 1.0, and Table 1 provides all quantities in the no-tax equilibrium.
We now need to solve simultaneous equations for a set of ten unknowns: the four new prices (
,

,

,

) and the six new quantities (the variables in the first two columns of Table 1).

This calculation proceeds as follows, using primes to denote new prices and quantities.
Expenditure on X will still be equal to the share 𝛾𝛾 of income,
producing X pay tax of

, so firms

. Equations (6) and (7) hold for any tax rates, so

(12)

,

(13)

,
,

.

The sum of capital incomes in the two equations in (12) is
original capital income of

, compared to

. Thus, capital income has fallen by 216, and owners of

capital bear a fraction of the tax burden on the sources side that is 216/360 = 0.60. Labor income
in (13) falls from 1440 to

, so workers’ fraction of the tax burden is

144/360=0.40. Moreover, those numbers can also be used to solve for the new factor returns.
Since

, and

(in Table 1), we have

fall in the net rate of return). In contrast,

(a 22.5 percent
, so

is 1,296/1,440 = 0.90 (only a 10

percent fall in the wage rate).
Why does capital bear a heavier relative burden from this tax on output? The answer is
that the taxed sector is relatively capital intensive. The production function
that firms in

spend 60 percent of sales revenue to buy capital, while

firms there spend only 20 percent of sales revenue to buy capital. The new tax on
production of

and thus particularly reduces aggregate demand for capital.

7

implies
implies that
shrinks

The new factor returns allow for the calculation of all new factor allocations: 7
,

,

,

.

Notice that the two capital quantities in the first row still add to
quantities in the second row still add to

(Table 1). Since factors are perfectly mobile

between sectors, the 30 percent tax on good
taxed sector

to the untaxed sector

sectors. Because

is capital intensive,

, while the two labor

induces both capital and labor to move from the

until each has a net return that is equalized across
has to fall enough for firms in

to re-employ all

that capital.
IV. EXACT SOLUTIONS FOR OUTPUT, PRICE AND TAX INCIDENCE
All calculations so far have been taken directly from M&T, but we now turn to our
various improvements to the Cobb Douglas teaching tool. First, Harberger (1962) solved only for
factor prices, but the same model could easily have also been used to solve for output prices.
but do not determine

Calculations so far show that
calculate

or

separately. To

, M&T differentiate the production function to obtain the change in output as a

linear function of the changes to inputs. 8 This approximation procedure is appropriate for a small
tax, but not for a large tax. Moreover, approximation is entirely unnecessary, since we can
calculate exact quantities. We know all initial equilibrium quantities in production from Table 1,
so we use

to “solve backwards” for what the

those outcomes, or

parameter must have been to yield

, and similarly,
. Using these parameters and the new factor allocations, we

have

,
.Finally, these solutions for output

7

For subsequent steps, it helps to keep as many digits as possible (as is done when using Excel for each step).

8

Using

and inserting the parameter values and quantities above, M&T get
.
8

enable exact calculation of consumer prices

and
.

In Table 2, Panel A shows all the initial equilibrium prices and quantities (in the column
labeled

), and new equilibrium prices and quantities (in the column labeled

).

Later sections derive the numbers in Panel B and in the entire last column.
Table 2
Summary of Key Variables
(1)
Variable

(2)
Definition

(3)
Value at

(4)
Value at

(5)
Value at

Panel A: Allocations and Prices
𝐾𝐾𝑋𝑋

Capital in production of

720.0

650.323

674.296

Labor in production of

480.0

373.333

369.368

𝐾𝐾𝑌𝑌

Capital in production of

240.0

309.677

312.704

𝐿𝐿𝑌𝑌

Labor in production of

960.0

1,066.67

1,070.63

𝑋𝑋

Output of

1,200.0

1,020.94

1,013.75

𝑌𝑌

Output of

1,200.0

1,373.81

1,380.58

Net return to capital

1.00000

0.77500

0.76750

Net wage rate

1.00000

0.90000

0.89667

Consumer price of

1.00000

1.17538

1.18372

Consumer price of

1.00000

0.87348

0.86920

𝐿𝐿𝑋𝑋

𝑃𝑃𝐾𝐾
𝑃𝑃𝐿𝐿

𝑃𝑃𝑋𝑋
𝑃𝑃𝑌𝑌

Panel B: Exact Measures of Welfare
𝑃𝑃�

Price index over both outputs

2.00000

2.02650

2.02869

Utility

1,200.0

1,184.306

1,183.030

𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸

Excess Burden

0.000

31.387

33.934

Revenue (equal to Rebate)

0.0

360.000

372.000

0.08719

0.09124

𝑈𝑈
𝑅𝑅

𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴

𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀

Average Excess Burden (

)

Marginal Excess Burden (change in
per additional dollar of revenue)

0.21271

The new output prices can be used to calculate burdens on the uses side, but such
calculations are not interesting if all consumers spend their income in the same proportions. To
discuss burdens on the uses side, M&T suppose that laborers spend a relatively large fraction of
9

income on

, while capitalists spend a relatively large fraction on

. Here, we note that

workers and savers are not really different people. Actual households are heterogeneous, each
with its own mix of wages, capital income, and commodity preferences. Therefore, we merely
calculate output prices based on the model above — assuming that demand by identical
households adequately represents aggregate demand by the actual diverse millions of
households. Then we observe that prices can be used to infer burdens on both the sources side
and the uses side for any individual household
endowments (

) or preferences (

that differs from the average in terms of

).

V. EXACT MEASURES OF WELFARE LOSS
We now compute exact welfare measures, using the expenditure function to obtain excess
and

burden. First, the demand functions
utility function (

can be substituted into the

), to obtain the indirect utility function
,

(14)

where

is the “ideal” price index, a function of

and

. Inverting

the indirect utility function to obtain the expenditure function yields
.

(15)

This expression makes clear that

is essentially the price paid per unit of utility (per “util”). 9

With these convenient Cobb Douglas forms, (15) simply indicates that total expenditure is price
times quantity.
The expenditure function shows the income required to reach the utility level
the price

, given

, so it can be used to derive a “money metric” measure of the welfare impact of a

price change. We use the equivalent variation (

), defined as the change in wealth at old prices

that would be equivalent in terms of utility to the price change. In the case with fixed income,
Mas-Colell, Whinston, and Green (1995) show EV can be measured as
(16)

9

The ideal price index is the Lagrange multiplier when minimizing expenditure for a given level of utility.
10

where

is fixed income,

is the old price, and
.

(17)
The

is the new price. In the Cobb Douglas case,

uses old prices to value the change in utility. 10 Since the tax reduces welfare, this

negative, so we use

is

as a positive measure of the tax burden. When this burden on taxpayers

exceeds revenue collected by government, the subtraction of revenue yields “excess burden”
(Auerbach and Hines, 2002). In our case, however, we consider a revenue-neutral policy package
with a distorting tax (

) where all revenue is returned to consumers via lump-sum rebate ( ).

Net revenue is zero, and the net loss to consumers is the excess burden (
(18)

)

.

Interestingly, this exact measure of welfare change is simpler than the approximation. 11
VI. EXACT SOLUTION FOR EXCESS BURDEN
Next, we use the numerical example above to calculate the initial and post-tax level of
utility and price index, for use in equation (18) to obtain excess burden. The price index from
(14) is

, where

equilibrium price index equals

is 0.5, and

. Thus the untaxed

. The two utility levels from (3) are
and
.

Thus, the excess burden of a 30 percent tax on good

is
.

10

Analogously, the Compensating Variation (
) uses new prices to value the change in utility,
.
measure is that welfare effects of different taxes can be compared using the same prices
The advantage of the
(Kay, 1980).
11

For sub-group

that buys new quantities

and

, M&T calculate burden on the uses side as

, an approximation for the change in real income. This Paasche index formula uses new
quantities as weights, whereas the Laspeyres index uses old quantities. M&T note “Both are only approximations to
the true welfare loss, and in fact bracket it” (M&T, p. 10). They also calculate excess burden of the 30 percent tax on
by use of a Harberger (1964) triangle formula,
, which itself is an approximation of the
true welfare cost. M&T calculate it using their approximations for changes in prices and outputs, and they get excess
burden of 26.50 (used below).
11

This measure is almost 20 percent more than the approximation by M&T mentioned above. 12
How big is this welfare loss? Average excess burden

can be defined as the total

welfare loss from the tax divided by the total revenue collected by the government. Alternatively,
it can be interpreted as the welfare gain from replacing the whole distorting tax with a nondistorting lump sum tax. In our example, the tax of 30 percent levied on good

yields 360 of

tax revenue, so the average excess burden per dollar of tax revenue is
(19)

,

which means that consumers on average lose 8.7 cents per dollar collected by government.
As an aside, note that the excess burden of a tax can be negative, especially in a secondbest world with pollution externalities or other pre-existing tax distortions. For example, suppose
the 30 percent tax on
percent tax on

. In this model, a common tax on both commodities is a lump-sum tax, so the

extra 30 percent tax on
tax on

already applies, and the government contemplates an additional 30

adds an excess burden of –31.387 (because it eliminates the

of the

).

VII. MARGINAL EXCESS BURDEN
Policy discussions do not normally consider the addition or elimination of an entire tax
system. More common is debate about whether to increase or decrease a particular tax rate. In
fact, policymakers can take a step towards improving economic efficiency if they reduce an
egregious tax, even with a revenue-neutral increase in a less-distorting tax. For these discussions,
a highly useful measure is the marginal excess burden (

) of a small change in a tax rate,

defined as the change in excess burden per additional dollar of tax revenue. 13
We therefore consider a small increase in the tax on

discussed above, from 30 to 31

percent. Following the same steps shown in previous sections, we obtain a set of new outcomes
for

, with the resulting prices and quantities indicated by a double prime. The last

column of Table 2 above lists all of the key outcomes. By assumption, income is still fixed at
2,400, of which half is spent on good

, so,

. Then, the new revenue is 0.31

12

The M&T approximation is 26.50 (M&T, 1975, footnote 10). The
is
,
, so the “approximation” does not lie between the two “exact” measures of welfare
which is very close to the
change.
13

Mayshar (1990) and Auerbach and Hines (2002) provide many alternative definitions.
12

times 1,200, and the change in revenue is 0.01 times 1,200, which equals 12. The change in
excess burden is the new excess burden minus the previous excess burden
(20)

.

This concept calculates the money metric change in utility from a small increase in the tax rate.
For comparability, it is valued in the same initial dollars as our other measures above. Given the
steps provided in detail above, we leave it as an exercise for the reader to calculate each new
price and quantity in the last column of Table 2. Using those quantities (
utility level is

and

), the new

.

We substitute these values into (20) to obtain the change in excess burden,

(e.g.,

billions of dollars, or trillions of some other currency). Then, the marginal excess burden is this
change in excess burden as a fraction of the change in revenue
(21)

.

The interpretation is that consumers lose an extra 21 cents per marginal dollar collected by the
government. Notice that the marginal excess burden substantially exceeds the average excess
burden (8.7 cents), as it rises more than proportionately with the tax rate. The intuition is based
on the original Harberger (1964) triangle approximation, where the area of the triangle depends
on the square of the tax rate — doubling the tax rate quadruples the excess burden.
VIII. LAFFER CURVE
A plot of revenue against the tax rate is called a Laffer curve, normally drawn as a humpshaped curve where revenue starts at zero, rises with the tax rate up to some revenuemaximizing tax rate, and then falls with further increases in the tax rate. The logic is that
revenue must fall back to zero with a 100 percent tax on income, as nobody would bother to
earn taxable income. Further intuition is that marginal excess burden rises disproportionately
with the tax rate, discouraging any taxed activity — up to the peak of the Laffer curve where
becomes infinite (when further increases in the tax rate yield zero additional
revenue in the denominator).
Using our same example from above, we plot a Laffer Curve for the commodity tax,

.

Our example is similar to one used by Gahvari (1988), where utility is a function of three goods
— (1) a good produced using taxed labor (analogous our taxed good
(analogous to our untaxed good

), (2) untaxed leisure

), and (3) a government-provided public good (which is
13

separable in the utility function). Laffer effects arise because of substitution from the taxed to
the untaxed good, but Gahvari points out that if government keeps the revenue then the income
effect on the untaxed good works in the opposite direction as people with less income may
demand less leisure. In that case, tax rate increases lead to more work effort, and the Laffer
curve never slopes down. If the government does return the revenue, however, then the income
effect is weaker, the substitution effect dominates, and the Laffer curve peaks and then slopes
back down.
Our example does return the revenue, so we should see a hump-shaped Laffer curve.
However, notice that gross-of-tax expenditure
the gross price, so a 1 percent tax raises

is always 1,200, and our tax is a fraction of
, a 2 percent tax raises

, and revenue is a
). In this case, the Laffer

strictly linear function of the tax rate up to 99 percent (where

curve never slopes back down, at least until the tax rate hits 100 percent where revenue
plummets to zero. 14
Figure 1

Real Tax Revenue (in utils)

Laffer Curve, with Real Tax Revenue as a Function of the Tax Rate

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6
Tax Rate

0.8

1

Yet, all those numbers are nominal. Income remains at 2,400, and expenditure on each
good is 1,200, even though the price index rises with the tax rate (see the values of
2). Nominal revenue rises linearly with

14

In our model, a tax

all of the spending on

in Table

, but those extra nominal dollars of rebate to

of 100 percent does not lead to a well-defined equilibrium, because the government takes
, consumers get no

, and utility is zero (
14

).

households cannot buy as much. In this model, the best measure of “real” revenue/rebate is the
amount that households can buy of the composite commodity,
That real revenue is

, plotted in Figure 1 as a function of the tax rate

(measured in “utils”).
. This Laffer curve

indeed has the normal shape. It rises steadily to a tax rate of almost 80 percent, and then falls
steeply toward zero.
IX. CONCLUSION
In a simple model with Cobb-Douglas production and utility functions, we show how to
solve a CGE model on the “back of an envelope.” Using the specific example from M&T (1975),
we demonstrate how to calculate general equilibrium effects of a commodity tax on
distributional incidence, deadweight loss, and marginal excess burden. We also show how CobbDouglas functions allow exact calculations of each price, output, and welfare loss. In this model,
the exact calculation of excess burden is 20 percent more than the triangle approximation of
Harberger (1964). We derive indirect utility, the expenditure function, equivalent variation, an
exact measure of excess burden, and real revenue in a plot of the Laffer curve.

15

REFERENCES
Auerbach, Alan J., and James R. Hines, 2002. “Taxation and Economic Efficiency.” In
Auerbach, Alan J., and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, 1347–
1421. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Bradford, David F., 1978. “Factor Prices May be Constant but Factor Returns are Not.”
Economics Letters 1 (3), 199–203.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2002. “Tax Incidence.” In Auerbach, Alan J., and Martin
Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, 1787–1872. North-Holland Publishing
Company, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Gahvari, Firouz, 1988. “Does the Laffer Curve Ever Slope Down?” National Tax Journal 41 (2),
267–269.
Harberger, Arnold C., 1962. “The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax.” Journal of
Political Economy 70 (3), 215–240.
Harberger, Arnold C., 1964. “The Measurement of Waste.” American Economic Review 54 (3),
58–76.
Kay, John A., 1980. “The Deadweight Loss from a Tax System.” Journal of Public Economics
13 (1), 111–119.
Kimbell, Larry J., and Glenn W. Harrison, 1986. “On the Solution of General Equilibrium
Models.” Economic Modelling 3 (3), 197–212.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael D. Whinston, and Jerry R. Green, 1995. Microeconomic Theory.
Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Mayshar, Joram, 1990. “On Measures of Excess Burden and Their Application.” Journal of
Public Economics 43 (3), 263–289.
McLure, Charles E., and Wayne R. Thirsk, 1975. “A Simplified Exposition of the Harberger
Model, I: Tax Incidence.” National Tax Journal 28 (1), 1–27.
Shoven, John B., and John Whalley, 1992. Applying General Equilibrium. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Zodrow, George R., and John W. Diamond, 2013. “Dynamic Overlapping Generations CGE
Models and the Analysis of Tax Policy: The Diamond-Zodrow Model.” In Dixon, Peter
B., and Dale W. Jorgenson (eds.), Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium
Modeling, 743–813. Elsevier Publishing, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

16

APPENDIX
Section II provides all of the necessary background for first- or second-year graduate
students to solve the exercises below. For students who have not yet seen this paper, a homework
assignment can include that section plus the following six questions. An MSWord.doc that
includes Section II plus the questions below is available online, so that the entire homework
assignment can be modified as desired
(https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/35757123/Homework-Solve-CD-GE-model.docx). After
reading Section II, students can be asked the following questions.
(1) Without the numerical example, use the simple Harberger model’s general
equations (6) and (7) to set
and find the incidence on the sources side of the corporate
income tax (

). How much of the tax burden is borne by labor and how much by capital?

Find

, and the changes in labor income and capital income.

,

(2) Using the numerical example, set
on the sources side of a 30 percent tax on
of-tax return to capital (

and find general equilibrium incidence
. What is the new net-of-tax wage (

) and net-

)? Which factor bears a larger proportional burden, and why?

(3) Solve for the new use of each factor in each sector (

,

,

, and

).

(4) One can substitute those inputs into production functions to find outputs ( , ),
but nothing yet specifies the values of parameters and . We know all initial equilibrium
inputs to production, so first “solve backwards” for what the and parameters must have
been to yield those outcomes

, and

. (Hint:

do not round off any numbers; keep all digits for the next calculation, or else rounding errors
compound at each step.) Using those values, solve for the new outputs and then calculate the
new output prices (
and
).
(5) Insert the demand functions into the direct utility function to solve for indirect
utility (a function of prices and total expenditure). Invert that expression to solve for
expenditure (a function of prices and utility) and then the equivalent variation,
(MasColell, Whinston, and Green, 1995, p.82). Since the revenue from this one distorting tax on
is all returned to households via lump-sum transfer in this “revenue neutral” policy
package, the
measure of welfare loss to households is a measure of the excess burden of
the tax. Into this expression for excess burden (
), insert the numerical solutions for prices,
outputs, and utility. Calculate the
of this 30 percent tax on one output. Then divide
by revenue to calculate the average excess burden (
). What is the meaning of this ratio?
(6) Perform all analogous calculations for a 31 percent tax on . Calculate the
change in excess burden, and the change in revenue. Divide the former by the latter to obtain
the marginal excess burden (
), defined as the change in excess burden per marginal
dollar of government revenue. What is the interpretation of
, compared to
?

17

