NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISASTER RISK AND ASSET RETURNS:
AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
Karen K. Lewis
Edith X. Liu
Working Paper 23065
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23065

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2017

For useful comments and suggestions, we thank Charles Engel, Mick Devereux, an anonymous
referee, and participants at the 2016 International Seminar on Macroeconomics, the International
Conference on Capital Markets at INSEAD, and the Wharton International Finance group
meeting. We are also indebted to Jessica Wachter for helpful conversations, and to Robert Barro
for providing us with the asset return data. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board. Any errors or
omissions are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Karen K. Lewis and Edith X. Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Disaster Risk and Asset Returns: An International Perspective
Karen K. Lewis and Edith X. Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 23065
January 2017
JEL No. F3,F4,G1
ABSTRACT
Recent studies have shown that disaster risk can generate asset return moments similar to those
observed in the U.S. data. However, these studies have ignored the cross-country asset pricing
implications of the disaster risk model. This paper shows that standard U.S.-based disaster risk
model assumptions found in the literature lead to counterfactual international asset pricing
implications. Given consumption pricing moments, disaster risk cannot explain the range of
equity premia and government bill rates nor the high degree of equity return correlation found in
the data. Moreover, the independence of disasters presumed in some studies generates
counterfactually low cross-country correlations in equity markets. Alternatively, if disasters are
all shared, the model generates correlations that are excessively high. We show that common and
idiosyncratic components of disaster risk are needed to explain the pattern in consumption and
equity co-movements.

Karen K. Lewis
Department of Finance, Wharton School
2300 SHDH
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
lewisk@wharton.upenn.edu
Edith X. Liu
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20st & Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20551
edith.x.liu@frb.gov

The risk of disasters has long been proposed as an explanation for a variety of financial
market anomalies. Key among these anomalies is the high equity premium in the face of
relatively smooth consumption. As originally presented by Reitz (1988) and advanced by
Barro (2006, 2009), a low probability of a large decline in output can sufficiently increase the
variability in intertemporal marginal utility to deliver the level of equity premium seen in
U.S. data. In combination with risk of government default, the potential for these disasters
can also explain the level of government bill rates. Moreover, as Wachter (2013) shows, time
varying disaster risk can help explain the volatility of equity returns and government bills.
Since disasters are rare in the U.S. time series, this literature uses international data to
measure both the frequency and size of these events. To obtain these measures, each country
is typically assumed to face the same potential decline in consumption, parameterized from
observed disasters across all countries.1 However, if true, this assumption carries important
implications for the magnitude and co-movements in international asset returns. If all countries face a similar disaster risk, this risk should affect the correlation of asset returns across
countries, as well.
In this paper, we study the international asset pricing moments and co-movements implied by a standard domestic-based disaster risk model. Using consumption and asset price
data for seven OECD countries, we begin by evaluating each country in isolation following
the standard approach in this literature. Within the constant probability of disaster framework as in Barro (2006), we ask whether differences in exposure to disaster risk can explain
1

In a modification of this approach, Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro and Ursua (2013) estimate endogenous
differences in timing, magnitude, and length of disasters while maintaining the assumption that the frequency
and size distribution is time invariant and the same across countries. Similar to our model below, they allow
for correlation in the timing of disasters. However, they use this information to match the U.S. asset pricing
moments alone and do not consider the international asset pricing implications. We discuss their approach
relative to ours below.

1

the cross-section of asset return moments for each individual country. To examine these
implications, we choose model parameters that best fit the asset pricing moments using Simulated Method of Moments. For this purpose, we allow for cross-country deviations in the
size of the disaster, the probability of government default, and the dividend leverage parameter. Despite allowing for these deviations, however, the model cannot match the variation
in the cross-country data. We then incorporate time-varying probabilities of disasters as in
Wachter (2013). Across countries, time-variation in disaster probabilities indeed improves
the fit for asset return volatility and, to a lesser extent, the mean returns.
Given the best fit to individual country asset returns, we evaluate the disaster model’s
ability to match the international correlation of asset returns and consumption growth found
in the data. For example, an empirical finding in the data is that international consumption
correlations are lower than equity return correlations.2 To determine whether the model can
replicate this pattern, we analyze implied correlations under two extreme assumptions about
international disasters found in the literature; that is, independent versus common disaster
events.3 Under the assumption that disaster events occur independently across countries,
equity return correlations either mimic those of consumption correlations when disaster risk
is constant or else are much lower than consumption when disaster risk is time-varying. By
contrast, when disaster events are common, equity return correlations are near one, and are
hence too high.
To address the inconsistencies posed by these two extreme cases, we posit a novel gener2

See, for example, the discussion in Tesar (1995) and Lewis and Liu (2015).
Studies that treat disasters as independent across countries include Barro (2006,2009) and Wachter
(2013). In these papers, the frequency of disasters is calculated as the average number of times that output
or consumption declined below a threshhold across all countries and years. Studies that treat disasters as
common include Gourio, Siemens, and Verdelhan (2013) and Farhi and Gabaix (2016).
3

2

alization of the theoretical framework that incorporates both country-specific and common
world disaster shocks. This generalization allows us to combine the domestic-based disaster risk model with international asset return and consumption correlations in the data
to uncover country-specific versus common world disaster risk. Our evidence shows that
a high degree of common disaster risk is required to explain the pattern that asset return
correlations are greater than consumption growth correlations.
As this description makes clear, our objective in this paper is to highlight the international
implications of existing U.S.-based disaster risk models in the tradition of Reitz (1988) and
Barro (2006). For this purpose, we use a canonical disaster risk model to study its ability
to fit international data moments. Therefore, we purposefully take as given the assumptions
consistent with that literature and do not develop a new equilibrium model.4 In this way, the
results in our paper most directly contribute to understanding any required modifications
and potential limitations of the standard model when facing international data.
Although our analysis provides a unique contribution to understanding the international
dimensions of disaster risk models, a number of other papers have also addressed the impact
of disasters on the macroeconomy and on asset markets. Gabaix (2008, 2012) considers
disaster risk with variable severity of disasters arising from the resilience of an asset’s recover
rate through a “linearity generating” process. Martin (2008) solves for the welfare cost of
business cycles due to disasters, but does not match to asset return data. Backus, Chernov,
and Martin (2011) use U.S. equity index options to examine the implied disaster risk in
consumption. Gourio (2008, 2012) evaluates the impact of disasters in a real business cycle
4
By contrast, in Lewis and Liu (2017), we develop an international equilibrium model that requires a
given asset and goods market structure.

3

model allowing for recoveries after a disaster. Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and Ursua (2013)
also allow for recovery periods after disasters, but then estimate differing probabilities of
entering disasters across countries. However, these papers do not evaluate the international
asset pricing implications of disaster risk.
Two recent papers provide an exception. Gourio, Siemer and Verdelhan (2013) and Farhi
and Gabaix (2016) examine the co-movements of returns and exchange rates with disasters,
but they do so assuming complete markets. By contrast, our goal is to investigate the
international asset market implications of existing U.S.-based empirical disaster risk models
that, in turn, do not require markets to be complete. As such, we view the contribution in
our paper to be complementary, but distinct from all of these papers.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 reviews the general framework used in
the literature as well as the approach used in this paper. Section 2 describes the data and
evaluates the model fit for countries in isolation. Section 3 describes the implications for
correlations in consumption and asset returns across countries. Concluding remarks are in
Section 4.

1

The Canonical Model and Framework

The disaster risk literature is grounded in a theoretical asset pricing tradition beginning
with Lucas (1978), which relates returns to the intertemporal consumption optimization.
Research applying this theory to data has met with mixed success. For example, as Mehra
and Prescott (1986) showed in their seminal work, the risk to U.S. investors implied by
historical consumption data was not sufficient to generate the observed equity premium, a

4

regularity often called the “equity premium puzzle.” Following this observation, Reitz (1988)
suggested that the risk of rare, but severe, disasters could provide a resolution to this puzzle.
The impact of rare disasters has been difficult to quantify, given the infrequency of these
events in U.S. data, however. Therefore, Barro (2006) proposed using data on disasters
across a large sample of countries to identify both the size and frequency of disasters in
the U.S. Subsequent papers such as Barro (2009) and Wachter (2013) have also considered
the implications of these disasters on various asset pricing moments such as the mean and
variance of the equity returns and government bill rates. Moreover, these moments are often
measured in real returns in home country prices, and presented as average asset returns (e.g.,
Barro (2006), Barro and Ursua (2008)).
While the consumption-based asset pricing literature on disaster risk has almost exclusively focused upon the behavior of U.S. data moments, the identifying assumption that
disasters need to be measured with non-U.S. data has clear implications for the asset pricing moments of those countries as well as their cross-country co-movements. In order to
evaluate these implications below, we develop a framework taken from a standard domesticbased model, modified to allow as much latitude for the model to match differing asset and
consumption moments across countries. For this purpose, we incorporate country specific parameters to the framework with time-varying disaster risk developed by Wachter (2013). The
Barro (2009) model with constant probability of disaster is a special case of this framework.
We refer to this general framework as the “canonical model” below.
Since our contribution is to investigate this framework applied to international asset
returns, we necessarily inherit both the limitations and generalities of the standard approach.
Specifically, the most limited interpretation of our investigation would be that, since the
5

framework was developed to target domestic asset pricing moments, our analysis applies only
to a world of multiple closed economies in isolation. Indeed, this narrow interpretation is
consistent with the quantitative analysis in Section 2 that focuses exclusively on the analysis
within each country. However, in Section 3, we show that this interpretation is likely to
be overly restrictive when we examine the co-movements across countries implied by the
canonical domestic-based disaster model. As demonstrated there, the domestic-based model
implies positive co-movement in consumption and asset returns across countries. Therefore,
to highlight the potential relationships within the standard model that may lead to these
international co-movements, we review more general interpretations of the canonical model
at the end of this section in Subsection 1.4.

1.1

Preferences and Consumption

To consider how a standard single-country disaster risk model may fit a cross-section of
individual country asset returns, we modify the model specified in Wachter (2013) and Barro
(2009) to allow all parameters other than preferences to differ by country. For consistency
with this approach, we maintain the assumption from these papers that the analysis for each
country is specified in units of home country consumption.
Following this framework, there is a representative consumer-investor in each country,
indexed by j. These agents have identical preferences over their own aggregate consumption
good defined as Ctj at time t. To allow the model to match real consumption data that is
deflated by home price indices, we assume that each country’s aggregate consumption good
is a composite of individual goods that will in general differ by country. This approach

6

ensures consistency between the theoretical framework and the data.
In particular, we assume as in Barro (2009) that preferences are recursive over time.5
We also follow Wachter (2013) by considering the continuous time version formulated by
Duffie and Epstein (1992) for the case of unitary intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption. This special case implies tractable, exact form solutions to our asset pricing moments below.6 Thus, under these assumptions, utility at time t for representative
consumer j, defined by Vtj , is given by:

Vtj

∞

Z

U (Csj , Vsj )ds

= Et

(1)

t

where
U (Ctj , Vtj )

= β(1 −

γ)Vtj



log Ctj


1
j
log((1 − γ)Vt )
−
1−γ

(2)

and where β > 0 is the rate of time preference and γ > 0 is the coefficient of relative
risk aversion. Furthermore, the consumption good Csj in each country j is a composite of
multiple heterogeneous non-durable goods each with separate prices, thereby allowing the
price index to differ across countries as in the data. This approach follows a long literature in
international finance that treats consumption in each country as an aggregate of individual
goods.7 Moreover, to insure a well-defined price index per country while providing the most
5

These preferences use the form of the utility function specified in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil
(1990). Barro (2009) argues that these preferences are needed to avoid the counterfactual implication that
high price-dividend ratios predict high excess returns.
6
This assumption allows us to adapt the closed-form solutions from Wachter (2013) to individual country asset returns, in the case where disaster intensity are time-varying. Nevertheless, when the disaster
probability is constant, we could in principle allow the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to differ from
one.
7
For early examples see Adler and Dumas (1983), Cole and Obstfeld (1991), and Backus, Kehoe, and
Kydland (1994). Colacito and Croce (2011) provides a more recent example.

7

general framework, we assume only that aggregate consumption Csj is isoelastic with respect
to its individual goods components without specifying a particular form for the aggregation.8
Thus, although the basic form of the utility function over aggregate consumption is the same
across countries, preferences over individual goods may differ. Specifying consumption in
this way provides consistency with the empirical literature that treats aggregate consumption
in units that are the inverse of the price index in each country.9 Note that this assumption
implies that the value of consumption for country j in units of another country consumption
will differ by a real exchange rate. We discuss the implications of variations in the real
exchange rate in Subsection 1.4 as well as our quantitative analysis below.
The representative agent in each country j then chooses the sequence of Csj to maximize
utility subject to a lifetime budget constraint of income, Ytj = Y j (δ t ), where δ t is a vector
of state variables in the economy. In general, income is the flow of the resources available
to a given country so that δ t reflects all of the variables influencing those resources. In
a full international macroeconomic model, these variables would include variables affecting
both domestic production and any net ownership of foreign production through foreign asset
positions. Below we follow the asset pricing literature in taking this process as given by
production side decisions in the economy and then focusing upon the asset pricing decisions
conditional on income. Therefore, this income process may be considered exogenous for
much of the analysis, although in Subsection 1.4 we discuss more general interpretations.
8

Adler and Dumas (1983) demonstrate that when the consumption aggregator is homothetic with respect
to individual goods components, then a well-defined price index holds per country, even in the absence of
purchasing power parity.
9
Technically, as described in Adler and Dumas (1983) we require the consumption aggregator to preserve
the property that utility is homogeneous of degree one in the individual consumption components. This
property holds for specific aggregators such as those in Colacito and Croce (2011) or Verdelhan (2010), for
example. However, the condition also holds for more general aggregators as well.

8

Given this income process, then, the lifetime present value of these resources is the
i
hR
∞ πsj j
j
representative consumer’s wealth; that is, a variable given by: Wt ≡ Et t πj Ys ds where
t

πsj is the state price density. This variable is defined as: πtj ≡ e[

Rt

j
j
0 UV (Cs ,Vs )ds

] U (C j , V j ),
C
t
t

where Ux denotes the partial derivative with respect to x. Thus, the state price density
relates the value of resources to the intertemporal marginal utility of consumption. Hence,
this variable must be determined in equilibrium, as described below in Subsection 1.2.
The representative agent then chooses consumption to maximize utility given in equations
(1) and (2) subject to the constraint that:

Z
Et
t

∞


πsj j
j
j Cs ds 5 Wt
πt

(3)

This optimization implies a value function that gives the maximum utility as a function of
the state variables, such as wealth, which we describe in more detail below.10 Since the
utility function in equation (2) is strictly increasing in aggregate consumption, the wealth
constraint in equation (3) will hold with equality along any optimal path, implying an
equilibrium relationship we use below.
The consumption that arises from this optimization naturally inherits a functional dependence on at least some of the variables that affect income. Defining this subset of variables as
e
δ t ). While a full macroeconomic model
δ t , then we could rewrite consumption as: Ctj = C j (e
would detail how the income process relates to consumption, much of the empirical asset prichR
i
∞ j
ing literature directly uses the fact noted above that in equilibrium Wtj = Et t ππsj Csj ds .
t

As such, the behavior of consumption identified by the data is sufficient to determine the
10

In discrete time, the value function would be determined using a Bellman equation. In this continuous
time setting, the same is done using the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation as detailed in Appendix A.1.

9

behavior of wealth.
The common feature in the disaster risk literature is that consumption is affected by
infrequent but large declines in income. For example, as argued in Barro (2006), this impact
on consumption can be generated by significant downturns in the macroeconomy as occurred
during the Great Depression, by natural events such as earthquakes, or may be the result of
wars such as the World Wars. It may also arise through large declines in productivity that
affect business cycles, as articulated in Gourio (2008, 2012).
Overall, although the specific ways in which disasters affect consumption will depend
upon the nature of the macroeconomy, its impact will be observed in the data. For this
reason, much of the focus in the disaster risk asset pricing literature has been to analyze the
consumption data directly and then use the implications to uncover the effects on wealth
through the constraint in equation (3). We therefore follow this approach below by using
the framework from Wachter (2013) that includes the possibility of disasters. However,
we augment this process to allow the parameters to differ across countries in order to fit
potential variations. Specifically, using the notation above and including the potential effects
of disasters, the consumption process to be related to the data below is:

j
j
dCtj = µCt−
dt + σ j Ct−
dBtj + (eω

j Zj
t

j
− 1)Ct−
dNtj , ∀ = 1, ..., J

(4)

where Ct− denotes lims↑t Cs and Ct is lims↓t Cs , dBtj is a standard Brownian motion that
affects consumption in normal times, dNtj is a Poisson process that is positive when disaster
events occur, and Ztj is a variable that determines the size of the decline in consumption
conditional on a disaster occurring.
10

We follow Barro (2006, 2009) and Wachter (2013) in identifying periods when disasters
occur as years in which there were declines in income or consumption below a threshold.
That is, the response of consumption to these disasters is reflected in a proportional drop in
level by the amount ω j Zt , where Zt is a random variable that reflects the size of the drop
and ω j allows for the impact of this decline to differ across countries. To capture the effect
of disasters, Zt < 0 and ω j > 0 so that realizations of dNtj reduce consumption growth. In
our quantitative application below, we parameterize the distribution of Zt with the empirical
distribution of disasters using the long sample of international data from Barro and Ursua
(2008).11 This distribution is treated as time-invariant so we drop the time subscript in the
remainder of the paper.
To consider time-variations in disasters, Ntj has an intensity parameter, λjt , given by:

dλjt

j

=κ λ−

λjt



dt +

σλj

q

j
λjt dBλ,t

(5)

j
where dBλ,t
is also a standard Brownian motion. Following Wacther (2013), all country-

specific processes,



j
dBtj , dBλ,t
, dNtj

are uncorrelated with each other at a given time t

within a given country j.
Since these shocks originate from income processes for each country, they are likely to
be correlated across countries if, for instance, there is trade in goods or assets. Therefore,
in Section 3 we consider this possibility and allow for the correlations between countries,
j
i
Corr(dBti , dBtj ), Corr(dNti , Ntj ), and Corr(dBλ,t
, dBλ,t
), to be non-zero while maintaining

the independence within countries as in the standard model. As a result, these variables are
11

This approach has been used in a number of papers including Barro (2009), Nakamura et al (2013), and
Wachter (2013).

11

not in general independent across countries, even though we continue to identify them with
a country-specific superscript.
The consumption process in equations (4) and (5) include country-specific parameters
that allow the framework to fit data across countries below. For instance, although the standard model implicitly assumes ω j = 1, we incorporate this parameter to allow for differing
effects across countries. Clearly, a country with higher ω will experience a larger impact of
disasters on consumption. In addition, consumption volatility in ”normal times” without
disasters, σ j , and the time-varying intensity parameters, κj and σλj , may be country-specific.
Below we also consider country differences in asset return parameters measuring leverage
and government bond default rate to be detailed later.
While our specification of consumption processes in equations (4) and (5) allows some
parameters to be country-specific, others are treated as common. In particular, country mean
growth rates, µ, are set to be equal across countries for plausibility since our quantitative
analysis will focus upon developed economies. We also assume that the long run mean of
the disaster probability λ is common across countries in the absence of power to distinguish
this parameter across countries.12

1.2

First-Order Condition for Intertemporal Optimization

In order to solve for implied returns using observed consumption data, we follow the literature by conditioning our analysis on the first-order condition of intertemporal utility
maximization given the wealth constraint. As with other first-order conditions, it simply
12

For this reason, we also treat the other parameters in the time varying intensity process, κ and σλ as
common in most of the quantitative analysis.

12

provides a relationship that optimizes an objective of one agent in the economy and may
not reflect the equilibrium in the presence of multiple agents. Therefore, we condition our
analysis on a further identifying assumption from the standard disaster risk literature: the
domestic investor’s first-order condition prices the domestic equity returns and government
bill rates. This condition would clearly be satisfied if financial markets were completely segmented since only domestic investors would have access to their own assets. However, this
identification also holds in more general contexts as we discuss at the end of this section in
Subsection 1.4.
To solve for the return on an asset that would be required by the representative investor
from country j, we must derive the first-order condition that relates wealth to that asset.13
For this purpose, we define the value function for the country j investor in terms of the state
variables of wealth and the disaster probability as H(W j , λj ). As noted earlier, analyzing
wealth in the data is simplified since in equilibrium the budget constraint in equation (3)
holds with equality; i.e., Wtj = Et

R∞
t

πsj j
C ds.
πtj s

Thus, wealth can be viewed as the value of an

asset that would theoretically pay a dividend mimicking realizations from the consumption
process in perpetuity, an asset often called the “consumption asset.” Given the equilibrium
association between consumption and wealth, valuation of financial securities in representative agent frameworks often depends upon the return on this asset.14 Indeed, for recursive
preferences, Epstein and Zin (1991) and Duffie and Epstein (1992) show that each asset must
satisfy a first-order condition involving its own return and the return on an asset that is a
claim on future realizations of consumption.
13

This approach is equivalent to the process in discrete time using the value function from the Bellman
equation, thereby yielding the Euler equation.
14
The usefulness of the equilibrium relationship between wealth and consumption is highlighted in Campbell (1993), for example.

13

Recognizing this relationship, we can then determine two important building blocks for
valuing equity and the government bill rate used in our empirical analysis for each country j:
its instantaneous risk-free rate, and the associated state-price density. We only summarize
their solutions here, providing more discussion in Appendix (A.2) for the risk-free rate and
in Appendix (A.3) for the state-price density. Details are in Wachter (2013), Appendix A.I
and A.II.
Determining the first building block, the risk-free rate for each investor, requires solving
for the value of this asset at the equilibrium level of portfolio holdings. This rate can be
determined by taking the derivative of the value function H(W j , λj ) with respect to the choice
of the risky consumption asset at the equilibrium level implied by the wealth constraint in
equation (3). Following these steps implies that the value of a risk-free rate to an investor
in country j is:
h
i
j
j
rtj = β + µ − γ(σ j )2 + λjt E e−γω Z (eω Z − 1)

(6)

where the expectation is taken over the time invariant distribution of Z.
From the perspective of investors in country j, the only source of variation in the country
j risk-free rate arises from time variation in the disaster probability, λjt , as shown in equation
(6). Moreover, if there were no disaster risk, this rate would simply be constant at: rtj = rj =
β + µ − γ(σ j )2 . The finding that the risk-free rate is constant when consumption growth
is i.i.d. is well-known.15 By contrast, time variation in the disaster probability induces
volatility in the risk free rate. Moreover, since eω

jZ

< 1, a higher probability of disasters,

λjt , implies a greater risk that a disaster event will reduce consumption. In turn, this greater
15

See for example, Obstfeld (1994), Campbell and Cochrane (1999), and Lewis (2000) among others.

14

risk induces more demand for precautionary savings, thereby reducing the implied country
j risk-free rate.16
Note also that since wealth of investor j is measured in consumption units of country j,
this return would only be risk-free to residents of country j. In particular, since consumption
in country i is measured in different consumption units, the value of consumption in country
j
eti,j ≡ Qi,j
j from the perspective of country i could be written in county i units as: C
t Cs where

Qi,j
t is the real exchange rate that values a unit of country j in country i consumption. Thus,
the risk-free asset to country j’s investors would be risky from the perspective of country i’s
j
investors, because it would be valued at Qi,j
t rt . Moreover, since we follow the literature in

expressing all asset returns in domestic country good units below, the same real exchange
rate variations will affect all relative valuations of these returns across countries.
The second key building block for valuing assets from the perspective of country j’s representative investor is the intertemporal marginal utility of consumption measured through
the state price density, πtj . Solving for this process requires using the solution for the value
function H(W j , λj ) and the envelope condition that HW = UC (C, V ) along the optimal path.
Using the functional form for these expressions together with Ito’s Lemma implies that the
state price density for country j follows:

dπtj
j
j
j
j
j = µπ,t dt − γσ dBt + b σλ
πt−

q

j
λjt dBλ,t
+ (e−γω

jZ
t

− 1)dNtj ,

(7)

where bj is a positive constant that depends upon parameters of the time-varying disas16

As noted previously, the shocks to equilibrium consumption inherit shocks from the macroeconomy.
Thus, variations in the probability of disaster arise from news in the economy that alter the perceived
likelihood of disasters.

15

ter process, κ and σλ ; the expected size of the disaster for country j, ω j Z; and preference
parameters, β and γ.17 As noted earlier, this process is specified in units of domestic consumption, Ctj . Therefore, the state price density will in general differ across countries, unless
j
they are identical once converted into a common good so that πtj = Qi,j
t πt . We discuss this

implication in Subsection 1.4 below.
Since the state-price density impacts the valuation of all risky assets in the economy,
equation (7) is useful for building intuition about several asset pricing relationships we find
in our quantitative analysis below. First, note that the state price in equation (7) evolves
with innovations to the exogenous variables in an intuitive way. In particular, πtj decreases
in “good times”; that is, with increases in the Brownian on normal times consumption dBtj
according to risk aversion, γ. By contrast, the state price increases in “bad times”; that is,
j
with innovations to the Brownian on disaster probabilities, dBλ,t
, according to the current
q
level of the disaster probability λjt and the expected size of the disaster implied through

the parameter bj . Finally, since Zt < 0, disaster events generated by dNtj increase the state
price. Note that, in the absence of time-varying probabilities, the instantaneous variance of
the state-price density during normal times would be driven by the variation in normal times
consumption alone. Therefore, if disaster probabilities were constant (i.e, σλ = 0), then the
instantaneous volatility of the state-price in normal times would simply be γσ j , as in the
standard iid Guassian model.
17

j

Specifically, b =



κ+β
2
σλ

 r
2
j
Eν (e(1−γ)ω Z
κ+β
−
−2
σ2
σ2
λ

−1)

, as described in Appendix A.1. In practice, the

λ

square-root imposes a restriction on the relationship between the expected size of disaster and the variation
of the disaster probabilities, as described in Wachter (2013).

16

1.3

Relating Asset Prices to Observed Data

Given these building blocks, we now relate the theoretical framework to returns observed
in the data. Note that the framework simply asks how a representative investor-consumer
would value claims to any specific stream of future income, which potentially applies to
a large number of assets. Moreover, because wealth is identified by the present value of
consumption, the framework does not have anything to say about which assets actually
comprise the portfolio held by the representative investors. Since our objective is to evaluate
the standard disaster risk literature, therefore, we consider only the two assets typically
related to the data in that literature: government bill rates and equity returns.18 With two
assets per country, this approach implies that we only focus upon 2J asset returns, where J
is the number of countries.19 In this section, we describe the solution of these two returns,
relegating details to Appendix A.4 and Appendix A.5 for the government bill rate and the
equity return, respectively.

1.3.1

Government Bill Rates

We begin by considering the government bill rates. Following Barro (2006), the return of
government securities is presumed to be subject to partial default during disaster periods.
This presumption is based upon the observation that crises are often associated with a decline
18
As noted earlier, these are the two assets studied in the tradition of Barro (2006,2009) and Wachter
(2013). However, other papers such as Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011) and Farhi, et al (2016) analyze
options. Since option analysis would require significant restructuring of the canonical framework in this
paper, we leave this analysis to future research.
19
Note, however, that since the countries have different consumption units, there will be different valuations of these returns across countries unless state price densities are equal once converted into common
consumption units. Thus, in principle, we could evaluate the required returns from the perspective
of each
P
of the J representative agents. That is, if there N j assets in country j, we could obtain J N j different
j

asset returns implied by the first-order conditions.

17

in the value of government securities, either through partial default or inflation. Following
this literature, we define the probability of this government default for country j as q j . Then,
consider an asset that pays out government debt that is risk-free during normal times but
is subject to default with probability q j during disaster periods. In this case, a domestic
investor would evaluate the asset as a combination of the risk-free rate in equation (6) and
an asset that may default during disasters. Using a no-arbitrage condition for these payouts,
the instantaneous required return on the j government bill rate, as measured in units of
country j consumption can be shown to be:

h
i
j
j
rtb,j = rtj + λjt q j E (e−γω Z − 1)(1 − eω Z )

(8)

This solution for the government bill rate illustrates several features. First, the premium on
government bills is clearly increasing in probability of default, q j . Moreover, the volatility
depends upon the variation in the probability of disasters, λjt . Note that in the absence
of time-varying disasters, the government bill rate, like the risk-free rate, is constant so
that its variance is zero. Furthermore, a higher probability of default increases the required
compensation by investors to hold government bills as indicated by the second term on the
right-hand side of equation (8). Finally, as noted earlier, the solution for this government
bill rate is measured in units of domestic consumption, corresponding to its treatment in the
data below.

18

1.3.2

Equity Prices

Equity is the second asset typically studied in the disaster risk literature. Defining Dtj as
dividends paid by country j equity and Ftj as the price of the claim to income from all future
dividends using the state price of country j investors, then this equity price can be written:

Ftj

∞

Z
= Et
t


πsj j
Ds ds .
πtj

(9)

With this relationship, we can evaluate the behavior of the stock price over time given a
process for dividends.
The specific assumptions about how those dividends are identified in the data varies
across studies. The most direct approach to discipline the dividend process is to use dividend
data itself (e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004), Lewis and Liu (2015)). Arguably, this approach
gives the best picture of the behavior of the dividend process. However, unlike asset return
data, reliable data do not exist for dividends across countries over a long history. For that
reason, a typical approach in the disaster risk literature is to treat dividends as a process
that mimics a more volatile version of consumption. Therefore, in this paper, we follow
Wachter (2013) in assuming that the dividend process can be calculated using a process that
mimics consumption multiplied by an exponential factor (e.g., Abel (1999), Wachter (2013),
Gourio, Siemer and Verdelhan (2013)). That is, dividends Dtj for country j are related to the
consumption process according to: Dtj = Ctj

 φj

where φj > 1 is the ”leverage” parameter.20

Using this relationship along with the consumption process in equation (4), Ito’s Lemma
20

By contrast, some studies assume dividends mimic consumption itself (e.g., Mehra and Prescott (1985),
Obstfeld (1994)) with no leverage parameter.

19

implies that the process of dividends for equity from country j is given by:

j
j
dDtj = µjD Dt−
dt + φj σ j Dt−
dBtj + (eφ

j ωj Z

j
− 1)Dt−
dNtj ,

(10)

where µjD = φj µ+ 21 φj (φj − 1) (σ j )2 . Combining this process for dividends with the evolution
of the state price density in equation (7), the diffusion for the stock price in equation (9)
can be written as21 :

dFtj
j
j
j j
j
j = µF,t dt + φ σ dBt + g σλ
Ft−

q

j
λjt dBλ,t
+ (eφ

j ωj Z

− 1)dNtj ,

(11)

where µjF,t is the instantaneous mean and g j < 0.22 .
The evolution of the stock price follows the essential features of the state price density
in equation (7). In particular, the stock price increases with innovations in the Brownian on
normal times consumption, dBtj , now augmented by the leverage parameter, φj . Moreover,
the stock price decreases with innovations to the Brownian driving innovations to the probj
ability of disasters, dBλ,t
, as well as disasters themselves. Also, note that in the absence of

time-varying disaster probabilities, the stock price volatility in normal times would simply
be that of the levered volatility of normal times consumption, φj σ j . As with all the other
asset returns, the stock price evolution is in domestic consumption units. Overall, these relationships can then be used to generate the asset pricing moments in the model to compare
21

Wachter (2013) in Appendix A.III derives the stock returns including the dividend payment, the solution
we use to match to the equity returns. Here we provide the equity price alone for illustrative purposes only.
22
Specifically, g j = Gj0 (λjt )/Gj (λjt ) where Gj is the price-dividend ratio for the equity of country j. This
price-dividend ratio also depends upon the state price diffusion in equation (7). Ensuring that the solution
of G is not imaginary restricts the relationship between not just Z and the parameters of the time-varying
densities as before, but also the leverage parameter φj .

20

to their counterparts in the data.

1.4

Generality and Limitations of Canonical Framework

In order to consider the international implications of the literature on consumption-based
asset pricing with disaster risk, we have modified the standard domestic-based model to
allow for differences in the consumption and asset return data across countries.23 Given
the domestic economy focus of this literature, a narrow interpretation would be that the
framework cannot do more than represent a world of multiple isolated markets with exogenously specified consumption. However, the literature on consumption-based asset pricing
has demonstrated over the past few decades that this interpretation may be unduly restrictive. A more generous interpretation would be that the model reflects a world in which
consumption is an endogenous outcome of a larger production process, potentially generated
by international trade in goods and financial assets. In order to consider this possibility,
then, we next review these alternative, more general interpretations of the literature as well
as the limitations imposed by its basic identifying assumptions.

1.4.1

Exogenous versus Endogenous Consumption

The framework above is conditioned on a particular consumption process as given by equation (4) and therefore a narrow interpretation would presume that consumption is exogenous.
There are other interpretations, however. Barro (2009) describes how a similar process for
consumption obtains when output is an endowment process. Furthermore, other papers
23

In particular, removing all the j superscripts and setting ω j = 1 reduces all the equations above to the
Wachter (2013) model when the disaster probability λ is time-varying and to a continuous time version of
the Barro (2009) model when it is constant.

21

have studied a richer production side of the analysis. For example, Gourio (2012) develops a
production-based model with capital and labor that endogenously generates a consumption
process with disaster shocks. Similarly, Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan (2013) analyze a production economy in a two-country model with open financial markets, implying a consumption process with infrequent, but large declines. The international setting then imposes an
additional world resource constraint to the framework above. That is, for each time period,
world consumption equals world income; that is,

P

j

j
Qi,j
t Ct =

P

j

j
Qi,j
t Yt , for t ∈ {0, ..., ∞}.

Overall, a key feature common to disaster risk models is that income to the economy
experiences large declines that, in turn, dramatically reduces consumption. Moreover, since
observed consumption is the outcome of decisions made by individuals operating in the
true economy, it reflects the optimal process given the constraints faced by agents.24 The
approach has also been used to examine risk-sharing in Cochrane (1991a), Lewis (1996), and
Lewis and Liu (2015).

1.4.2

Complete versus Incomplete Asset Markets

The domestic-based model above uses the first-order condition of domestic investors to price
domestic assets, without specifying whether foreign investors also hold these assets. Implicitly, then much of the domestic-based asset pricing literature assumes that domestic agents
are the marginal investors who determine the price of domestic assets. To see why, consider
24

Treating consumption as measured in the data as an endogenous outcome also has a long tradition in
macro-finance, dating to Lucas (1978,1982).On the connection between consumption and asset pricing data,
see Hansen and Singleton (1983), Cochrane (1991a), Campbell (1993), Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and
Bansal and Yaron (2004), among others. Kocherlakota (1996) provides a very useful review of the behavior
of consumption and asset prices required to generate asset returns. In some cases, fuller production-based
models are separately specified to demonstrate how an observed consumption process can be generated. For
example, Kaltenbrunner and Lochstoer (2010) show how a persistent autoregressive component to consumption can arise endogenously even though the technological process in production is only subject to i.i.d.
shocks.

22

again the canonical model above. In this setting, the source of income to the domestic investor, Ytj , affects the state price density, πtj , that is used in turn to value the two domestic
assets measured in home country consumption: equity and government bills. As noted earlier, a narrow interpretation that clearly delivers this result is that each country is completely
segmented in its financial market.25 More generally, however, the analysis is also consistent
with at least two other interpretations: either markets are complete or they are incomplete
in a particular way described below.
The first alternative interpretation is that markets could be complete. In this case, the
countries would share the same state price density as measured in the same consumption
units. Therefore, if purchasing power parity does not hold complete markets would require

j
j
i
i
that Qi,j
t = πt /πt or if it does hold πt = πt , for all i, j. Given our goal of analyzing the
standard model and allowing for the most general treatment in our analysis below, we do not
impose these restrictions a priori but instead allow the data to reflect any such relationship.
A second alternative interpretation is that markets are incomplete in a way such that the
domestic investors are the marginal investors that price domestic assets in the given data
sample. This interpretation is based upon the idea that the pricing impact of some investors
in the market may not be apparent during periods when those investors are inframarginal.
This notion is consistent with some studies of incomplete markets. For example, Telmer
(1993) describes a model in which agents can only trade a risk-free bond, implying multiple
equilibria over time. In this equilibrium, one agent will often be at a corner solution.26
25

Note that countries need not be segmented in goods markets for the asset return equations to hold,
however. If countries are engaged in international trade, then income processes, Ytj , will in general be
correlated across countries, correspondingly implying that consumption processes, Ctj , will be correlated
internationally as we find in Section 3.
26
When markets are incomplete, the Euler equation holds for each agent but is not unique in aggregate.
See Telmer (1993), Bakshi, Cerrato, and Crosby (2015) and Lustig and Verdelhan (2016), for example.

23

Further, Heaton and Lucas (1996) consider domestic economies in which agents only have
access to a risk-free bond but markets are incomplete while Baxter and Crucini (1995)
consider a similar financial market in the international setting. Although the implications
of these studies are specific to their market structure, they raise the possibility that the
first-order condition of some investors may be more important in pricing in any particular
period.
Overall, then, the standard disaster risk model that conditions on the domestic household’s valuation of domestic assets may be interpreted consistently with the international
data in three ways. Financial markets are either (a) completely segmented; (b) completely
integrated; or (c) incomplete in a manner such that the domestic representative household
is the marginal investor during the data sample.

1.4.3

Purchasing Power Parity versus Differing Goods Prices Across Countries

The consumption-based asset pricing literature typically converts asset returns and consumption into real growth rates using the domestic price index. This approach has also
been maintained in the disaster risk literature beginning with Reitz (1988) as well as the
more recent literature starting with Barro (2006) and calculated in international data by
Barro and Ursua (2008). Clearly, this practice implicitly converts these data and their moments into domestic consumption units that differ by country. For this reason, the aggregate
consumption indices in the utility function (1) as well as the state price densities for each
country and their corresponding equity prices and government bill rates are all specified in
home consumption units in the framework above.
Therefore, we measure these returns in a manner that is consistent with consumption
24

in each country and do not take a stand on whether the prices are equal across countries
or not. Again, this treatment admits a range of possibilities from the empirical analysis.
If purchasing power parity holds, then current real payouts will be valued equivalently by
investors across countries. However, if purchasing power parity does not hold, investors
will view foreign payouts differently because of variation in the real exchange rate. That
j
is, dividends of equity from country j from the perspective of country i would be: Qij
t Dt .

Intuitively, it would be like the value in real U.S. terms of a dividend paid in real German
consumption units. We follow this treatment so that our structural framework will match
the empirical analysis in the literature that converts all units into domestic real units.

2

Single Country Implications of Disaster Risk

Above we described how to modify a standard disaster risk model to allow for potential
cross-country differences. In this section, we consider the implications of this framework for
non-U.S. countries, focusing on the data of each country individually as in the U.S.-based
approach. In Section 3, we will examine their cross-country implications.

2.1

Data by Country

Following much of the disaster risk literature, we base our empirical analysis on the long
time series sample of consumption and asset return moments across countries reported in
Barro and Ursua (2008). For the 21 OECD countries in the sample, this data set provides
consumption beginning in the range of 1800 to 1913, depending upon the country. These
data are constructed by deflating with their respective country consumer price indices. Since

25

consumer prices are known to differ across countries due to Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
deviations, the measured consumption identified with Ctj will presumably not be in the same
units of goods across countries. However, individual country consumption are in the same
units as their own asset returns payouts as developed in Section 1.
Available asset return data generally begin later than consumption, precluding a long
history analysis of all 21 countries in the Barro-Ursua (2008) set. For this reason, we focus
upon seven countries with asset pricing data that begin relatively early: Australia, Canada,
France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Among these countries, the United Kingdom’s stock return data starts the earliest in 1791, while Canada
begins the latest in 1934. In all cases, the bond return data are available either earlier or at
the same time as the stock return data.
Table 1 Panel A reports the means and standard deviations for the equity return, the
government bill rate, and consumption for these seven countries.27 As the table shows, the
mean consumption growth rates of the countries are similar across countries, ranging between
1.47% and 2.48%. By contrast, the asset pricing estimates vary widely across countries. For
example, Australia has the highest mean stock return at 10.27% while the lowest is France at
5.43%. Also, the standard deviations of equities are relatively similar for Australia, Canada,
France, the U.K., and the U.S., but are higher for Germany and Japan at around 30%. A
similar pattern may be seen in the standard deviation of the bill rates, as those estimates
exhibit substantially higher volatility in Germany and Japan. A wide range of mean bill
rates is also apparent, and those levels are even negative for Germany and France. In our
27

For Canada, the bill rate is unavailable from Barro and Ursua (2008). We therefore use the bond rate
for this country.

26

quantitative analysis below, we refer to moments calculated over this full sample of data as
“Unconditional,” following Wachter (2013).28
One reason for the range of moments may be that disasters affect countries heterogeneously in the sample. As such, it may be informative to condition the moments on years
when disasters are absent. Therefore, following Wachter (2013), we also examine post war
data as a subset of our full sample, representing a data sample that excludes large disasters.
We refer to these moments as “Conditional.”
Again using the Barro and Ursua (2008) data, we recompute consumption growth and
asset pricing moments for the period after 1947. Table 1, Panel B shows the range of annual
data moments across the seven countries for this postwar sample. The range of mean equity
returns is smaller, but the range of standard deviations across countries remain large. Not
surprisingly, the standard deviations of consumption growth and government bill rates are
uniformly lower in the postwar period without disasters than in the full sample.

2.2

Matching the moments: Constant Disaster Probability

Given the solutions for the asset pricing returns and the consumption processes in Section
1, we now ask how well the model can fit each individual country’s consumption and asset
return data. For this purpose, we use Simulated Method of Moments. We describe results
from this analysis next, relegating details of the simulation to Appendix C.
We begin by considering the constant disaster risk model assuming the baseline parameters from Barro (2006). In particular, these parameters are a relative risk aversion of γ = 4, a
28

Given that Germany and France have negative average bill rates over the sample, we constrain their
targeted bill rates at the lower bound of zero for all analysis below based upon this period.

27

rate of time preference of β = 0.03, a “normal times” consumption growth rate of µ = 0.025,
and a probability of disaster event of λjt = λ = 1.7% for all countries j, where the latter is
calculated as the proportion of years when GDP dropped by 15% or greater. We also assume
that the distribution of the sizes of consumption declines due to disasters, Z, is given by the
historical sample in Barro and Ursua (2008).
Table 2 reports measures of the model fit for both the Unconditional Model Moments
including disasters, targeting the data moments in Table 1 Panel A, and the Conditional
Model Moments during “normal times,” targeting the post-war data in Table 1 Panel B.
For each version, we use Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) to provide the best fit of
our model parameters for each country’s data moments. In order to fit these parameters,
we target the following seven data moments for each of the countries: (a) the consumption growth standard deviation, (b) the mean equity premium, (c) the standard deviation
of the equity return, (d) the Sharpe ratio, (e) the mean government bill rate, and (f) the
standard deviation of the government bill rate. Using these target moments, we estimate
the following model parameters: (a) the probability of government bond default, q j ; (b)
the dividend-consumption leverage parameters, φj ; (c) the proportion of disaster state consumption decline, ω j , relative to the standard model; and (d) the volatility of consumption
in normal times, σ j . We calibrate the mean consumption growth rate µ to be equal to the
average mean growth rate across countries.
Table 2, Panel A reports the parameter estimates targeting the moments over the full
”Unconditional” Barro-Ursua sample, including years when disasters were observed. Despite
the range of data moments across countries, the estimates for the Unconditional Model
Moments provide a relatively tight range of country-specific parameters. Indeed, for most
28

of the parameters, the estimates correspond to those found in the literature for the U.S.
For example, the probability of government default is in the range given by q = [0.42, 0.45],
close to the assumption of q = 0.4 in Barro (2006). Moreover, the fitted “normal times”
consumption volatility, σ, estimates are around 2.3% and therefore near standard estimates.
The range of the estimate for the leverage parameter φ are between 2.6 and 2.8, near the
Abel (1999) assumption of 3. Overall, these estimates are all relatively in line with values
required to fit asset pricing moments in the U.S., even though the target data moments
are for non-U.S. countries that often have quite different values. By contrast, the range of
estimates of ω are all lower than one, ω j = [0.84, 0.88], indicating that the consumption loss
in the event of a disaster is somewhat lower than that assumed in the standard U.S.-targeted
model.
This tight range of fitted parameters creates difficulties in matching the wide range of
asset pricing moments, however. As Table 2, Panel A reports, the annualized asset pricing
moments from the model are much closer across countries than their data counterparts in
Table 1, Panel A. For example, in the model, the mean and standard deviation of government
bill rates are all relatively uniform and do not differ across countries by more than 0.5%.
In the data, by contrast, the means vary by almost 4% and the standard deviation by over
10%. Similar discrepancies can be found in the equity returns. Even the more modest range
of the consumption volatilities across countries cannot be generated by the model.
The last row of Table 2 Panel A emphasizes the poor fit by reporting the sum of squared
difference (”Sum of Sq Difference”) between targeted data moments and the average modelderived moments across parameter estimates. As the numbers indicate, the model fits particularly poorly for Australia and Japan.
29

A potential problem with these results is that, depending upon the occurrence and severity of disasters, the data estimates may not accurately report the population data moments.
For this reason, Panel B of Table 2 reports the results of an alternative SMM analysis targeting the model under “normal” times excluding disasters, given by the postwar data moments
in Table 1, Panel B. As before, to get an aggregate measure of how the model fits across all
the data moments, we report the Sum of Squared Difference.
Despite the differences in the samples, the fitted parameters targeted to the Conditional
data moments provide a qualitatively similar pattern as before and, once again, are similar
to the estimates found for the U.S. There are some differences, however. The values for
the probability of government default q are now somewhat higher, between 0.432 and 0.521.
Furthermore, the leverage parameter φ estimates range between 2.731 and 3.005, and thus
are all close to 3. By contrast, the implied loss in consumption, captured by ω, is lower than
standard disaster studies of the U.S. that assume ω = 1. These estimates are very similar
across countries at about 81% to 87% of the size generated by the distribution from the
Barro data.
Given the similarities in parameters across countries, the model again shows little variation in implied moments across countries. The government bill rates are mostly between
3% - 4%. Moreover, as noted earlier, during normal times, the model implies that the bill
rate is constant so that the bill rate volatility is zero. The equity premium and the volatility
of equity returns are fairly uniform around 5% and 6.5%, respectively. Thus, the model
cannot explain the range of equity premia from 6.35% to 11.90% reported in Table 1, Panel
B. Furthermore, in most cases, the model-implied volatility of equity is much lower than the
15% to 33% found in the data. The only notable exception is Japan which, given its large
30

consumption growth volatility, generates a lower bill rate, a higher equity premium, and a
higher equity standard deviation.

2.3

The Size of Disasters With Constant Disaster Probabilities

In light of these difficulties with matching moments for individual countries, we next study
how variations in key parameters affect the implied asset prices. For this purpose, we simulate
the model based upon varying levels of, alternatively, ω, φ, and q. These results are shown
in Table 3.
The table begins by reporting the effects of a range of values of the severity of disasters
through ω. In particular, the numbers in the first three columns labeled “Baseline” show how
asset pricing moments vary when the proportionate size of the disaster ω to the standard
model ranges from ω = 0.8 to 1, holding constant the other parameters. For example, as ω
increases towards one, the government bill return declines. As noted in Section 1, a more
severe disaster increases savings, thereby reducing the risk-free rate. As a consequence, the
government bond rate declines with higher ω as well, although this effect is muted by the
increased default risk premium. In the absence of time variation in disaster probability,
higher ω has a large affect on the mean risk-free rate but not the volatility of the risk-free
rate. For consumption growth, by contrast, the increase in ω has a larger effect on volatility
than on the mean.
Under the next three columns labeled “High φ”, Table 3 shows the effects of a higher
leverage parameter. Here we assume the leverage parameter φ to be 3.0 rather than 2.8,
and then re-examine the results from varying ω. Comparing the results to the first three

31

columns of Table 3 shows that a higher leverage ratio increases the equity premium. It also
increases the standard deviation of the market return, albeit much more modestly. On the
other hand, comparing the model moments in the ”Baseline” model to the ”High φ” model
shows that these effects from higher leverage become muted when there is less sensitivity to
disaster risk; that is, when ω is lower. For example, comparing the Mean Equity Premium,
the higher leverage ratio increases the equity premium 24 bps from 7.88% to 8.12% when
ω is one, but only 17 bps when ω is 0.8. The government bond rate is unaffected by any
changes since, as noted earlier, it is independent of the equity dividend leverage parameter
φ.
The last three columns of Table 3 labeled “Low q” report the implications for the model
moments when the probability of government bond default conditional on a disaster q declines
to 25% rather than the 40% given in the Baseline Model. Comparing these results to those
in the first three columns makes clear that a decrease in the probability of government
default decreases the government bill rate. The intuition is clear. A lower probability of loss
reduces the implied default risk premium as shown in equation (8). Moreover, this lower
government bill rate correspondingly increases the equity premium. Reducing the likelihood
of the default loss in disasters also reduces the volatility of the government bill rate.
Table 3 also reports the model-implied moments for each set of parameter values. For the
Conditional Model Moments computed during normal times alone, the increase in leverage
ratio, φ, again produces a noticeable increase on the mean equity premium, and a slight
increase on the equity return volatility. Similarly, the increase in q decreases the return and
volatility of the government bill rate. Finally, given the low volatility of the equity return
for the conditional moments, the model suggests implausibly large conditional Sharpe ratios
32

that range between 1.11 and 1.46, for the cases when ω is one.
In summary, the model with constant probability of disaster fails to explain the volatility
of asset returns. The volatility of equity returns are significantly lower than in the data, while
the volatility of government bills during periods without crises is counterfactually zero. In
the next section, therefore, we evaluate the effects of incorporating time-varying disaster risk
on the cross-country variation in asset pricing moments.

2.4

Matching the moments: Time-Varying Disaster Intensity

We now allow for time variation in the probability of disasters following Wachter (2013) and
ask whether the model can generate better fitting cross-country differences in asset returns.
The time-varying disaster intensity process in equation (5) introduces two new parameters:
the volatility of the probability, σλ , and its mean reversion, κ. We therefore began by
conducting SMM to target these two new parameters in addition to the four parameters
formerly fitted. However, including these two new parameters generally meant that the SMM
optimization would not converge because σλ and κ tended to exceed conditions required for
the distribution of λ to be well-defined, even when we restricted these parameters to be the
same across countries.29 For this reason, in the results reported below, we instead constrain
some of the parameters and conduct SMM to obtain the best fit to the data for the other
parameters.
We take as a base case for the time-varying disaster probability model the parameters
The intensity process in equation (5) has a stationary Gamma distribution only for 12 σλ2 < κλ. Thus, for
given assumptions about the mean of disaster probabilities, λ, the volatility of probabilities, σλ , cannot be
too high and the degree of mean reversion, κ, cannot be too low. Otherwise, the distribution of probabilities
becomes degenerate.
29

33

from Wachter (2013). In particular, we assume for time preference that β = 0.12, for risk
aversion that γ = 3, and for the average probability of disaster that λ = 3.55%.30 Given these
assumptions, we then analyze the model in two ways. First, we maintain the same disaster
risk parameters (κ, σλ ) as in Wachter (2013), and use SMM to fit, respectively, countryspecific government default, consumption volatility, leverage ratio, and size of disaster as in:
{q, σ, φ, ω}. This case is most comparable to the constant disaster probability model results
in Section 2.1. Second, we hold fixed those same parameters, and fit κ and σλ to match data
moments. For parsimony, we report in the text only the analysis targeting the Unconditional
data moments, although the results targeting Conditional data moments are qualitatively
similar.
Panel A of Table 4 shows the results when we choose the leverage parameter φ, probability
of government default q, the volatility of normal times consumption σ, and the proportional
impact of disasters ω, to match the target data moments, while fixing the volatility of disaster intensity σλ and its persistence parameter κ. In particular, normal times consumption
volatility is calibrated to the standard deviation of Post-War consumption growth in the
data as before. As the table shows, there is now a wider range of parameters. For example,
Australia has a lower leverage parameter and probability of government default than the
other countries. The Sum of Squared Difference is substantially lower across all countries
compared to those in the constant probability model for Unconditional Moments in Table
2, Panel A. Furthermore, the differences in parameters now generate a wider range in asset
return moments across countries. Indeed, the mean of government bill rates becomes too
low for Australia. The model also generates equity volatility closer to the data.
30

This probability is based on treating disasters as a decline in consumption of 10% or more.

34

Table 4, Panel B reports the estimates based upon reversing this process. Specifically,
we now fix the probability of government default q, the leverage parameter φ, and the size
of disasters ω, to those in Wachter (2013), and instead use SMM to fit parameters in the
distribution process for the intensity λt to best match the targeted Unconditional Model
moments. As the table shows, the parameters vary in a narrow range. The degree of mean
reversion κ is essentially unchanged across countries, while σλ varies only between 0.066 to
0.087. In practice, this narrow range is dictated by the condition that the distribution of λ be
stationary. But the resulting implications for the government bill rates and equity premium
are again that asset pricing moments cannot vary much across countries. This finding is
highlighted by the larger Sum of Squared Difference in Panel B relative to Panel A.
Overall, therefore, the best fit is the model with time-varying probabilities of disasters
in Table 2, Panel A, allowing for differences across countries in government default recovery
rates, consumption volatility, equity leverage, and effects of disaster shocks.

2.5

The Size of Disasters With Varying Disaster Probabilities

As the above results show, the means of asset returns are similar to those of the U.S. market,
although there is a higher variation in standard deviations of returns. Therefore, we now
ask how differences in the impact of disasters can affect the moments.
The results are given in Table 5. For the base case model, reported in column 1, we
first report the implications for Unconditional and Conditional Model Moments when ω is
constrained to be 1, as in Wachter (2013). By contrast, the second and third columns report
the results when ω = 0.85 and ω = 0.95, respectively.31 As the results show, reducing ω from
31

We also considered the cases when ω > 1, but these violated the condition that is required to give a

35

1 to 0.85 increases the bill rate since the disaster has less of an impact. It correspondingly
reduces the size of the unconditional equity premium from 7.6% to 4.6%. At the same time,
the unconditional equity volatility also decreases as the impact on consumption is lessened,
declining from 20% to 16.6%.
In the following three columns, labeled “High φ”, we consider the impact from increasing
the leverage parameter φ to 3. The results are quite similar for the bill rate and volatility.
However, the unconditional equity premium and volatility are higher as a direct implication
of the increased leverage. Moreover, the range of potential sizes of declines is narrower since
the model generates imaginary solutions for ω = 0.85.
Finally, the last three columns, labeled “Low q”, report the same analysis as the base
case, but now setting the probability of government default conditional on a disaster at
q = 0.25, down from 0.40. The lower risk of default increases desired precautionary savings
at the benchmark disaster size, ω = 1, so that the unconditional mean bill rate is an implausibly low value of 0.6%. As the size of disaster declines to ω = 0.95 and ω = 0.85, the
precautionary motive is offset somewhat and the bill rate increases while the equity premium
correspondingly shrinks.
Similar patterns hold for the Conditional Model Moments. In general, the precautionary
motive for holding bonds decreases with lower ω and q so that implied government bill rates
increase. Generally, the equity premium moves inversely with these relationships.
Overall, the time-varying model does provide an improved match for the volatility of
asset returns. This improvement, coupled with the fact that there is less variability across
non-imaginary solution of b in the state price density given in Equation (7). In other words, the restriction

2
Eν (e(1−γ)ωZt −1)
that κ+β
>2
was violated. See footnote 29.
σ2
σ2
λ

λ

36

countries in the asset return variances, allows the model, even within a narrow range of
parameters, to fit these moments better.

3

International Correlation Implications of Disaster Risk

The analysis in Section 2 above examined in isolation the country effects of the canonical
disaster risk framework. In this section, we begin to examine the international implications
of this framework. To do so, we ask how well the model can generate the international
co-movements of asset returns and consumption that are observed in the data. In particular,
a common empirical finding is that the correlations of consumption are lower than the
correlations of equity returns (see Tesar (1995) and Lewis and Liu (2015)).
In the canonical disaster framework considered here, these moments are also affected by
real exchange rate variations since consumption and asset returns are measured using a price
index specific to each country. To see this relationship, recall that the value of consumption in
j
country j in units of country i is Ctij ≡ Qi,j
t Ct . Then the correlation of consumption growth

measured in home consumption units as in the Barro and Ursua (2008) data set will include
the effects of the correlation of the real exchange rates when viewed from the perspective
of a common numeraire. That is, the correlation of consumption between country i and

 i ij i,j 
 i
dC d(C /Q )
dC dC j
country j measured in country i price indices is: Corr C it , C jt = Corr C it C ijt /Qi,jt ,
t

t

t

t

t

and similarly for asset returns. Clearly, these correlations differ from the perspective of a
given home representative agent depending upon the real exchange rate. Therefore, in this
section, we also demonstrate that the standard correlation patterns between consumption
and asset returns hold in the data when measured in this way.

37

In order to consider these international co-movements in the model, we must discipline
the international correlation for each of the random variables, dB, dBλ , and dN. The data
counterpart for the first of these variables is straightforward since during ”normal times,”
Corr(dBti , dBtj ) is equal to the correlation of consumption growth between the two countries.
Therefore, we calibrate this number to the data correlation in the Conditional data sample.
By contrast, there are insufficient observations of disasters to identify the correlation of the
disaster events and their probabilities in the data. For this reason, we turn to the assumptions
in the literature.
There are typically two extreme assumptions in the literature about the co-occurence of
disasters across countries: (a) they are independent; or (b) they are common. As an example
of a study using the first assumption, the Barro (2006) model calculates the frequency of
disaster events as independent across countries. Moreover, the realization of the event itself
in the form of the Poisson jump Ntj only affects one country. Thus, there are no feedback
effects from disasters in foreign countries that would affect the home country disaster process.
Therefore, we start our analysis of disasters with this assumption in Section 3.1. As an
example of a study using the second assumption, Gouirio, Siemer and Verdelhan (2011)
assume that disasters are common across countries. In Section 3.2 below, we examine the
model under this assumption.
We show that neither of these two assumptions of disasters can explain the data patterns.
Therefore, in Section 3.4, we introduce a new hybrid version, finding that both common and
country-specific disasters are required for the canonical model to match the correlation of
asset returns and consumption across countries.32
32

Since the objective of the paper is to examine the implications of the standard disaster risk model, we

38

3.1

International Co-movements Assuming Independent Disasters

To examine international co-movements, we begin by considering the pattern of consumption
co-movements implied by equation (4), repeated here for convenience:

dCtj
j
j
ω j Zt
− 1)dNtj , ∀ = 1, ..., J.
j = µdt + σ dBt + (e
Ct−

If indeed, the Poisson process generating the disaster is independent across countries, then
clearly the instantaneous consumption correlations are just given by the correlation of the
normal times Brownians, as observed in the data:

Corr

dCti dCtj
, j
i
Ct−
Ct−

!
= Corr(dBti , dBtj ) ≡ ρij .

(12)

Similarly, asset price correlations are also only affected by the correlation of Brownians,
implying that there are no effects on the correlation across countries due to disaster risk.
To see why, consider the state price processes across countries from equation (7) under
j
the assumptions that the dNtj realizations and the Brownians on their intensities dBλ,t
are

independent across countries. In this case, the correlation of the state price processes are
 i j
dπ dπ
also the correlation of normal times consumption; that is, Corr πit , πjt = ρij . The state
t

t

price processes are only correlated across countries due to their normal times consumption
correlations since agents view the impact of disasters on consumption as uncorrelated. As
simply generate the model correlation without taking a stand on the source of that correlation. This approach
leaves open the question of how much international market integration is implied by the effects of disaster
risk on asset return comovements. More generally, a large literature has studied the degree of financial
market integration in international markets. See, for example, Dumas and Solnik (1995), Pukthuanthong
and Roll (2009), Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad, and Siegel (2011), and Carrieri, Chaieb, and Errunza (2013),
among others. In Lewis and Liu (2015,2017), we focus upon the potential degree of integration in a long run
risk model and disaster risk model, respectively.

39

a result, the instantaneous correlation in stock prices across countries using the process for
equities in equation (11) and the assumptions of independent disasters is also:

Corr

dFti dFtj
, j
i
Ft−
Ft−

!
= ρij .

(13)

Furthermore, the independence of disasters implies that the government bill rates will be
independent. Simple inspection of the government bill rate in equation (8) makes clear why.
As noted earlier, these rates only vary due to the changes in the probability of disasters,
according to λjt . When λjt and λit are uncorrelated for all i, j, then government bill rates
will be as well. Therefore, the instantaneous correlation of government bill rates under
independent disasters is:
Corr

drtb,i drtb,j
,
rtb,i rtb,j

!
= 0.

(14)

Note also that if disasters are independent, the correlation of consumption and asset
pricing moments will be the same whether using a full sample including disasters or a subsample excluding those disasters.

3.2

International Co-movements Assuming Common Disasters

By contrast to the assumption of independence, most of the disasters identified in the data
by Barro (2006) and Barro and Ursua (2008) occur at roughly the same time for the OECD
countries. For example, during the periods of the Great Depression and the World Wars,
most of the countries were in disaster states, whether measured by declines in GDP of at
least 15% as measured by Barro (2006), or by declines of consumption of at least 10% as

40

classified by Wachter (2013). Nakamura, Steinsson, Barro, and Ursua (2013) also estimate
a world disaster event during these periods.
Thus, an alternative assumption may be that all countries share the same disaster risk
process so that dNtj = dNtw , ∀j where dNtw is a Poisson world disaster event shock that has
an intensity λw
t . In this case, consumption for country j follows:
dCtj
j
j
ωj Z
− 1)dNtw , ∀ = 1, ..., J
j = µdt + σ dBt + (e
Ct−

(15)

where dNtw is a Poisson jump process and the intensity process follows:


 w
p
w
w
dλw
λ
−
λ
λw
=
κ
dt
+
σ
λ
t dBλ,t .
t
t

(16)

To highlight the effects of the common disaster risk, we assume that the mean reversion
parameter, κ, and the volatility of the probability, σλ , are the same as defined earlier, and are
equal across countries. However, the impact of the disaster may affect country consumption
growth rates differently through the size of ω j . Note that even if ω j = ω, ∀j so that all
growth rates decline by the same proportion during a disaster, the impact on levels is unique
to each country since consumption goods units potentially differ across countries due to real
exchange rate effects.
If the disaster event is common, the correlation of consumption and asset returns will
also depend upon the correlation of the disaster components. To see why, consider the effect
on consumption correlations from these common disasters assuming for simplicity that the
w

intensity on the world disaster shock is constant so that λw
t = λ . Defining the size of the

41

decline in the consumption growth during disasters as K j ≡ (eω

jZ

− 1) and using moment

properties of Poisson processes, the correlation of consumption across countries is given by:

Corr

dCti dCtj
, j
i
Ct−
Ct−

!

σ i σ j ρij + K i K j λw
q
2
2 w
i
i
(σ ) + (K ) λ
((σ j )2 + (K j )2 λw

=q

(17)

Or, in the case where the effect of disasters is the same so that ω i = ω j ∀j, and K j = K i = K,
the instantaneous correlation is:

Corr

dCti dCtj
, j
i
Ct−
Ct−

!

σ i σ j ρij + (K)2 λw
q
2
i
2
w
(σ ) + K λ
((σ j )2 + K 2 λw

=q

(18)

Using the relevant parameter values, it can be shown that the correlation of consumption
growth in equation (18) is greater than the correlation of normal times consumption, ρij .
Thus, in this case of shared disaster risk, consumption is more correlated.
Now consider the effects on asset prices. The correlation in the state prices in equation (7)
will include a common disaster shock, dNtw , thereby increasing the correlation in state prices.
In particular, since disaster risk is shared, both by a common occurrence of the disaster event,
w
dNtw , and by common changes in its probability, dBλ,t
, then intertemporal marginal utility

increases at the same time across countries. As a result, equity prices will share this same
higher correlation due to the common disaster shock. To see this relationship, consider the
w
stock price process in equation (11) under constant disaster risk so that dBλ,t
= 0. Then the

stock price evolution becomes:

dFtj
j
j
j j
φj ω j Z
− 1)dNtw ,
j = µF,t dt + φ σ dBt + (e
Ft−
42

As this equation shows, when disaster intensities are constant, instantaneous variations in
equity returns are generated exclusively through the Brownian on ”normal times” consumption, dBt , and the disaster event shock, dNtw , as in consumption. However, these effects
on equity prices are magnified relative to consumption growth by the leverage parameter φ.
Thus, the correlations in equity prices are the same as those of consumption in equation (17)
except that now K j ≡ (eφ

j ωj Z

− 1) and σ j are replaced by σ j φj .

When disaster intensities are time-varying, the correlation of asset prices can be higher
than consumption, however. Rewriting the stock price in equation (11) to include the common disaster event and common time-varying probabilities, the process becomes:

p
dFtj
j
j
w
φj ω j Z
j j
λw
− 1)dNtw .
t dBλ,t + (e
j = µF,t dt + φ σ dBt + gσλ
Ft−

In this case, stock price changes have a higher correlation due to the perfect correlation in
w
dBλ,t
; that is, through innovations to the probability of a common world disaster.

We next evaluate the quantitative implications for both common and independent disasters on the correlations across countries.

3.3

Matching the Moments: Correlations

In order to understand the degree of co-movement between returns, we focus upon two
countries, the U.S. and the U.K. Table 6 reports under ”Data Correlation” the cross-country
correlations of consumption growth, equity returns and government bill rates for these two
countries using the Barro and Ursua (2008) data. In the rows labeled, ”Unconditional,”
the table gives the correlations calculated over the entire history of common consumption
43

and asset return data from 1870 onwards, while the rows labeled ”Conditional” provide the
same statistics calculated in the post-War data. Both the Unconditional and Conditional
correlations show the pattern typically found in the literature that consumption correlations
are lower than asset return correlations.
Table 6 also gives these same correlations calculated from the model simulations assuming the Wachter (2013) parameter values for two identical countries with correlation in
normal times consumption give by the post-War data correlation between the U.S. and the
U.K. These simulations are conducted for two cases. Panel A reports the correlations of
consumption, equity returns, and government bills under the assumption that the disaster
probability is constant and that λjt = λt = λ = 3.5% for j = 1, 2. The table reports both the
“Unconditional” correlations over all realizations as well as the “Conditional” correlations
excluding the disaster events. The second column gives the results when the effects upon
consumption due to disasters are assumed to be uncorrelated across countries as in equation
(12). As described above, the correlation of equity during normal times, consistent with the
“Conditional” results, is determined by normal times consumption. Over the whole sample
including disasters reported in the Unconditional results, however, consumption and equity
return correlations are driven down to implausibly low numbers by independent realizations
of dNtj .
Alternatively, the last column reports the results assuming a common world disaster as in
equation (15). Since countries are affected by a common world disaster, the disasters across
countries are not only perfectly correlated, but also have the same magnitude of realizations
of Z. Once again, the consumption and equity return correlations are similar during normal
times, as the “Conditional” results show. However, now the periods of disasters are shared
44

across countries, both for the timing and size of disasters. As a result, the periods of disasters generate a strong common component during those periods, driving the consumption
correlations very high. Indeed, the correlation of consumption is higher than that of equity
returns, inconsistent with the data.
Panel B of Table 6 provides the correlation when the probability of disasters is time
varying as in equation (17). In this case, an important component of the correlation of equity
returns is determined by the co-movement of time-variation in disaster probabilities, λt .
The column labeled ”No Disaster Correlation” shows that when these disaster probabilities
are uncorrelated, even the normal times Conditional correlations in equities are lower than
consumption at 0.056. As in the static probability case, the independence of disasters renders
the Unconditional correlations in both consumption and equity to be implausibly low at
about 5%. Also, as described in the previous subsection, the correlation of the bill rates is
driven entirely by the correlation in the disaster probabilities. Thus, when the probabilities
of disasters are independent across countries, the correlation of bill rates becomes zero.
By contrast, when disaster events occur at the same time across countries, the correlations
in asset returns are much higher. For this case, reported in the last column of Table 6 Panel
B, equity return correlations at 0.946 are significantly higher than those of consumption.
Moreover, this high correlation is maintained in the full sample at 0.958. At the same time,
both conditional and unconditional government bill rates carry a correlation of one, since
they are driven by the same common disaster probability.
In summary, the investigation highlights problems with both versions of assumptions on
disaster risk. When disasters are independent, correlations of asset returns are too low,
indeed lower than consumption correlations. On the other hand, when disasters are shared,
45

asset return correlations are too high and near one.

3.4

Country and World Disasters

As the results above demonstrate, standard assumptions about disaster risk across countries
imply counterfactual implications for the normal times correlation in equity returns. In the
absence of time-varying disaster intensities, the variation in equity returns is too low and
the equity return correlation is driven entirely by the correlation in consumption. In the
presence of time-variation in disaster intensities, however, the equity return correlation is
too high if the disaster events are common and too low if disaster events are independent.
This observation suggests that a more plausible assumption is that some disasters are
shared while others are country-specific. To allow for this possibility, we specify the disaster
event in the consumption process as a mixture of two Poisson jump processes. Moreover,
note that there are two potential dimensions in which disaster risk can be correlated: the
disaster event, Nt , and the size of consumption decline conditional on disaster, Z. To focus
upon the role of disaster events, we assume that disasters are only correlated through the
Poisson process that guides the timing of the disaster, and allow the size of disasters Z j to
be independent for each country j.33 Then the consumption process in this case is:

dCtj
j
j
ωj Z j
− 1)(dNtj + dNtw )
j = µdt + σ dBt + (e
Ct−

(19)

where Ntj has disaster intensity λjt and Ntw has disaster intensity λw
t . In other words, the
33

Note that the assumption is only made to connect with the data on the prior section. In principle, we
could consider the case where the world disaster is big and the country-specific disaster is smaller, or vice
versa.

46

probability of a disaster in each country can be generated by a world disaster shock, dNtw ,
or a country-specific shock, dNtj . In turn, each of these shocks are driven by their own
time-varying probability processes as in equations (5) and (16).
As such, the correlation of consumption is a mixture of the independent and common
jump processes. For example, in the special case when the probability of disasters is constant
i
w
so that λit + λw
t = λ + λ , ∀t, the consumption correlation is:

Corr

where K j ≡ (eω

j Zj

dCti dCtj
, j
i
Ct−
Ct−

!

σ i σ j ρij + K i K j λw
q
(σ i )2 + (K i )2 λw ((σ j )2 + (K j )2 λw

=q

(20)

− 1) as before. However, note that the probability of world disasters

λw must now be lower since the total probability of a disaster is given by the sum of the
probabilities, λit + λw
t . In order to match the data, we therefore impose the condition that
w
i
ei
the means of the two intensity processes equals that of the data; or τ i λ + (1 − τ i ) λ = λ

ei is the weighted mean of the joint Poisson process and 0 < τ i < 1 is the share of
where λ
disaster risk of country i that is due to country-specific disasters.
In this case, the consumption correlations will be lower than in the case of common world
disasters due to the presence of uncorrelated country-specific disasters, thereby lowering λw .
The realizations of these common and country-specific disaster events therefore affect equity
correlations as well. The probability of a disaster for country i given that country j is in a
disaster will lie between the extreme cases of 0 and 1.
Identifying the share of country-specific versus world disaster probabilities poses a difficulty with empirically evaluating the differing disaster risks across countries. Since there are
not enough disaster events in a given country, there are insufficient observations to detect
47

common versus country-specific disaster events. However, Lewis and Liu (2015) propose an
identification approach that is useful in this context. Given the pattern of consumption correlation such as in equation (20) along with the implied correlation patterns of asset returns
in the model, we can recover the relevant patterns for identification such as λi , λw . Using
the framework above, we can vary the share of country-specific disaster risk through τ i to
match the observed correlation patterns.
Table 7 demonstrates the relationship implied by varying τ i between 0 and 1 for the Static
Disaster case in Panel A and the Time-Varying Disaster case in Panel B. To be consistent
with our prior analysis, we set λ̃i = 3.55%. We continue to maintain the assumption that
the variance of the probability of country-specific and world disasters are the same, as for
the case of the U.S. and U.K. example. As the weight on the world disaster increases, the
correlation of asset returns increases. For example, for the Time-Varying case under normal
times (signified by the Conditional rows), the correlation of equity returns increases from
0.055 when disasters are uncorrelated to 0.946 when they are perfectly correlated. A similar
pattern holds for the bill rate.
The table results suggest combinations of world and country-specific disasters that may
match the pattern of correlations given that consumption correlations are equal to their data
counterparts by construction. Using again the example of the Conditional period TimeVarying Disaster case, when τ = 0.6, the correlation of equity returns is 0.59 while that of
bill returns in 0.61, both close to their data counterparts of 0.58 and 0.63, respectively. The
fit to the full sample period reported as the Unconditional results are not as tight, in part
because of the low data correlation of 0.12 over the full period since 1870. This tendency
may reflect an increase in consumption correlations over time as the world has become more
48

integrated. Overall, the evidence suggests a higher degree of world disaster risk than country
disaster risk is needed to explain the degree of co-movement between asset returns.

4

Concluding Remarks

A growing literature examines the impact of disaster risk on the macroeconomy and asset
returns. Indeed, the relevance of this risk has become more evident since the recent financial
crises. A standard approach in this literature is to use international data to make inferences
about the frequency and size of these disasters. Nevertheless, the focus of these studies has
largely targeted U.S. consumption and asset return behavior.
In this paper, we began to ask what this literature means from an international perspective. For this purpose, we evaluated international asset returns through the lens of a
canonical disaster risk model as articulated in Barro (2006, 2009) and allowing for timevarying disasters as in Wachter (2013). Our analysis led to three main findings. First, while
the disaster risk model does well in explaining U.S. asset returns, it is less successful in
matching the range of asset return behavior observed internationally. Second, the degree to
which the model can explain international asset return co-movements hinges largely on the
importance of a common disaster risk across countries. Specifically, if the frequency and size
of disasters is independent across countries, the correlation of asset returns is implausibly
low. By contrast, if all disasters are common, these correlations are near one and, hence,
unrealistically large. Third, these findings suggest that international correlations of asset
returns and consumption can provide an identification of the importance of world versus
country-specific disasters. Calibrating the model to the correlations between the U.S. and

49

the U.K. implies that 60% of the disaster risk is common between the two countries. Overall,
this paper shows that the international dimensions of standard disaster risk models carry
important implications for their saliency.

50

REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew, 1999, “Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 43, 3-33.
Adler, Michael; Dumas, Bernard, 1983, “International Portfolio Choice and Corporation
Finance: A Synthesis,” Journal of Finance, 38.3, 925-984.
Backus, David; Chernov, Mikhail; Martin, Ian, 2011, ”Disasters Implied by Equity Index
Options,” Journal of Finance, 66: 6, 1969-2012.
Backus, David K.; Kehoe, Patrick J.; Kydland, Finn E., 1994, ”Dynamics of the Trade
Balance and the Terms of Trade: The J-curve?” American Economic Review, 84:1, 84-103.
Bakshi, Gurdip; Cerrato, Mario; Crosby, John, 2015, ”Risk Sharing in International
Economies and Market Incompleteness,” University of Maryland Working Paper, December.
Bansal, Ravi; Yaron, Amir. 2004 ”Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59.4, 1481-1509.
Barro, Robert J., 2006, “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 823-866.
Barro, Robert J., 2009, “Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs,” American
Economic Review, 99, 243-264.
Barro, Robert J.; Ursua, Jose F., 2008, “Macroeconomic Crises Since 1870,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 255-350.
Baxter, Marianne; Crucini, Mario J. 1995, “Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of
Foreign Trade.” International Economic Review, November, Vol. 36(4), 821-854.
51

Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell R; Lundblad, Christian T; Siegel, Stephan, 2011,
“What Segments Equity Markets?” Review of Financial Studies, 24.12, 3841-3890.
Campbell, John Y. 1993, ”Intertemporal Asset Pricing without Consumption Data,”
American Economic Review, 83.3: 487-512.
Campbell, John Y.; Cochrane, John H. 1999, ”By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107.2,
205-251.
Carrieri, F.; Chaieb, I.; Errunza, V. 2013, “Do Implicit Barriers Matter for Globalization?” Review of Financial Studies, 26:7, 1694-1739
Cochrane, John H., 1991, ”A simple test of consumption insurance,” The Journal of
Political Economy, 99(5), pp. 957-976 ”
Colacito, Riccardo; Croce, Mariano M.; 2011, ”Risks for the Long Run and the Real
Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), pp. 153-181
Cole, Harold L.; Obstfeld, Maurice, 1991, ”Commodity Trade and International Risk
Sharing: How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 28,
3-24.
Duffie, Darrell, 2010. Dynamic asset pricing theory. Princeton University Press.
Duffie, Darrell; Larry G. Epstein, 1992, “Asset pricing with stochastic differential utility”,
Review of Financial Studies 5, 411–436.
Duffie, Darrell, and Costis Skiadas, 1994, “Continuous-time asset pricing: A utility gradient approach,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 23, 107–132.
52

Dumas, Bernard; Solnik, Bruno, 1995, “The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk,”
Journal of Finance, 50:2, 445-79.
Epstein, Larry; Zin, Stanley, 1989, “Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior
of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework,” Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Epstein, Larry; Zin, Stanley; 1991, “Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior
of consumption and asset returns: An empirical analysis,” Journal of Political Economy
99(2), 263-286.
Farhi, Emmanuel; Gabaix, Xavier, 2016, ”Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1-52.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2008, “Variable Rare Disasters: A Tractable Theory of Ten Puzzles in
Macro-Finance,” American Economic Review 98, 64-67.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten
Puzzles in Macro-Finance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.
Gourio, Francois, 2008, “Disasters and recoveries,” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings, 98, 68–73.
Gourio, Francois, 2012, “Disaster Risk and Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 102, 2734-2766.
Gourio, François; Siemer, Michael; Verdelhan, Adrien, 2013, ”International Risk Cycles,”
Journal of International Economics, 89:2, 471–484.
Hansen, Lars P.; Singleton, Kenneth J., 1983, “Stochastic consumption, risk aversion,
and the temporal behavior of asset returns,” The Journal of Political Economy, pp. 249-265.
53

Heaton, John; Lucas, Deborah J., 1996, ”Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets
on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing,” The Journal of Political Economy, 104 (3), pp. 443-487.
Kaltenbrunner, Geog; Lochstoer, Lars. 2010, “Long-Run Risk through Consumption
Smoothing,” Review of Financial Studies 23, pp. 3141 - 3189.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. 1996, ”The Equity Premium: It’s Still a Puzzle,” Journal of
Economic Literature 34.1, pp.42-71.
Lewis, Karen K. 1996, ”What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk Sharing?” Journal of Political Economy 104.2, 267-297.
Lewis, Karen K. 2000, ”Why Do Stocks and Consumption Imply Such Different Gains
from International Risk Sharing?” Journal of International Economics 52.1: 1-35.
Lewis, Karen K.; Liu, Edith X., 2015, “Evaluating International Consumption Risk Sharing Gains: An Asset Return View,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 84 - 98.
Lewis, Karen K.; Liu, Edith X., 2016, “Disaster Risk and International Asset Markets,”
In Progress.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978, ”Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46.6:
1429-1445.
Lucas, Robert E, Jr. 1982, ”Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country
World,” Journal of Monetary Economics,10.3: 335-359.
Lustig, Hanno; Verdelhan, Adrien, 2016, ”Does Incomplete Spanning in International
Financial Markets Help to Explain Exchange Rates?” Stanford University Working paper,
March.
54

Martin, Ian W., 2008, “Disasters and the welfare cost of uncertainty,” The American
Economic Review, 98(2), 74 - 78.
Mehra, Rajnish; Prescott, Edward, 1985, “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle”, Journal of
Monetary Economics, 15, 145-161.
Nakamura, Emi; Steinsson, Jon; Barro, Robert; Ursua, Jose, 2013, “Crises and Recoveries in an Empirical Model of Consumption Disasters,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 5.3, 35-74.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1994. “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” The American Economic Review, 84(5), pp.1310-1329.
Pukthuanthong, Kuntara; Roll, Richard, 2009, “Global Market Integration: An Alternative Measure and Its Application,” Journal of Financial Economics 94,2, 214-232.
Reitz, Thomas A. 1988, “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, 117-131.
Tesar, Linda L., 1995, “Evaluating the gains from international risksharing,” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 42, 95-143.
Telmer, Christopher, 1993, ”Asset Pricing Puzzles and Incomplete Markets,” Journal of
Finance, 48(5), pp. 1803-1832.
Verdelhan, Adrien, 2010, ”A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium,” Journal of Finance, Journal of Finance, 65:1, 123-145.
Weil, Philippe, 1990, “Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105, 29–42.
55

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013. “Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate
Stock Market Volatility?” The Journal of Finance, 68(3), pp.987-1035.

56

Table 1: Data Moments (Annual %)
Panel A: Unconditional (Full Sample)
AUS CAN FRA
Mean Cons Growth
1.54
1.92
1.62
Std Dev Cons Growth
5.06
4.74
6.74
Mean Equity Premium
9.01
3.89
6.04
Mean Equity Return
10.27
7.81
5.43
Std Dev Equity Return 16.16 17.54 20.78
Sharpe Ratio
0.56
0.22
0.29
Mean Govt Bill
1.26
3.92
-0.61
Std Dev Govt Bill
5.66
11.99
9.96
Panel B: Conditional (Post-War Sample)
AUS CAN FRA
Mean Cons Growth
Std Dev Cons Growth
Mean Equity Premium
Mean Equity Return
Std Dev Equity Return
Sharpe Ratio
Mean Govt Bill
Std Dev Govt Bill
†

2.45
3.19
8.49
9.04
20.09
0.42
0.55
5.14

2.22
2.24
6.35
7.82
15.82
0.40
1.46
3.81

Data from Barro and Ursua (2008)

57

3.34
3.70
8.15
7.31
25.42
0.32
-0.84
9.86

GER

JPN

UK

US

1.89
5.70
9.11
7.58
29.76
0.31
-1.53
17.88

2.48
6.89
8.85
9.28
30.17
0.29
0.43
14.75

1.47
2.83
4.62
6.41
17.65
0.26
1.79
6.24

1.85
3.60
6.28
8.27
18.66
0.34
1.99
4.82

GER

JPN

UK

US

3.56
3.36
10.63
10.74
33.66
0.32
0.11
12.05

5.47
6.19
11.90
9.32
33.73
0.35
-2.57
15.67

2.38
2.21
7.77
8.88
22.51
0.35
1.11
3.67

2.40
2.07
8.16
8.86
17.44
0.47
0.70
3.19

Table 2: Constant Disaster Model Fit - SMM
Panel A: Target Unconditional Data Moments
AUS CAN FRA GER
Fitted Parameters
q
0.421 0.442 0.431 0.429
φ
2.664 2.795 2.630 2.805
ω
0.884 0.840 0.854 0.843
σ (in %)
2.17
2.26
2.28
2.31
Unconditional Model Moments (Annual %)
Std Dev Cons Growth
2.12
2.34
2.31
2.43
Mean Equity Premium
5.36
4.74
4.85
4.80
Std Dev Equity Return 9.95
10.22
9.94
10.67
Sharpe Ratio
0.54
0.46
0.49
0.45
Mean Govt Bill
2.86
3.31
3.18
3.20
Std Dev Govt Bill
2.35
2.29
2.11
2.42
Mean Sq Diff

0.286

0.052

0.079

Panel B: Target Conditional Data Moments
AUS CAN FRA
Fitted Parameters
q
0.488 0.521 0.462
φ
2.945 3.005 2.768
ω
0.839 0.817 0.843
σ (in %)
3.19
2.24
3.85
Conditional Model Moments (Annual %)
Std Dev Cons Growth
3.19
2.25
3.85
Mean Equity Premium
6.26
5.12
6.61
Std Dev Equity Return 10.32
7.37
11.73
Sharpe Ratio
0.61
0.70
0.57
Mean Govt Bill
3.44
3.90
3.17
Std Dev Govt Bill
0.0
0.0
0.0
Mean Sq Diff
†

0.050

0.099

0.093

JPN

UK

US

0.447
2.755
0.844
2.29

0.445
2.749
0.843
2.26

0.436
2.741
0.846
2.24

2.17
4.68
10.36
0.45
3.30
2.22

2.23
4.76
10.19
0.47
3.30
2.08

2.34
4.73
10.18
0.46
3.24
2.27

0.093

0.286

0.067

0.105

GER

JPN

UK

US

0.457
2.840
0.841
3.57

0.432
2.731
0.873
6.25

0.502
2.865
0.814
2.45

0.497
2.969
0.808
2.37

3.60
6.48
11.29
0.59
3.24
0.0

6.25
9.97
19.29
0.52
1.96
0.0

2.44
5.03
7.63
0.67
3.84
0.0

2.35
5.07
7.61
0.67
3.88
0.0

0.141

0.076

0.128

0.053

For the constant disaster risk model, we follow Barro (2006) in calibrating disaster frequency
(λ̄ = 1.7%), and follow Panel C of Table 5 of Wachter (WP 2009) in calibrating consumption
growth parameter (µ = 2.52%), preference parameters (β = 0.012, γ = 3), and average disaster
risk probability or intensity (λ̄ = 3.55%).

58

Table 3: Constant Disaster - Varying ω
ω
Parameters

1.0

0.9

0.8

Baseline
q
0.4
0.4
0.4
φ
2.8
2.8
2.8
σ (in %)
2.00
2.00
2.00
Unconditional Model Moments (Annual %)
Mean Cons Growth
1.86
1.92
Std Dev Cons Growth
5.99
5.46
Mean Equity Premium
7.88
5.56
Std Dev Equity Return 10.74 10.27
Sharpe Ratio
0.60
0.27
Mean Govt Bill
1.44
2.78
Std Dev Govt Bill
2.77
2.81
Conditional Model Moments (Annual
Mean Cons Growth
Std Dev Cons Growth
Mean Equity Premium
Std Dev Equity Return
Sharpe Ratio
Mean Govt Bill
Std Dev Govt Bill
†

2.50
2.00
8.79
6.19
1.15
1.66
0.0

2.50
2.00
6.40
6.13
0.55
3.00
0.0

1.0

0.4
3.0
2.00

0.9

0.8

1.0

High φ
0.4
0.4
3.0
3.0
2.00
2.00

0.25
2.8
2.00

0.9

0.8

Low q
0.25 0.25
2.8
2.8
2.00
2.00

1.99
4.94
3.91
9.79
0.02
3.69
2.83
%)

1.86
5.99
8.12
11.27
0.59
1.44
2.77

1.92
5.46
5.76
10.79
0.28
2.78
2.81

1.99
4.94
4.08
10.31
0.04
3.69
2.83

1.86
5.99
8.73
10.74
0.76
0.59
2.07

1.92
5.46
6.17
10.27
0.39
2.18
2.10

1.99
4.94
4.34
9.79
0.11
3.26
2.12

2.50
2.00
4.67
6.08
0.13
3.91
0.0

2.50
2.00
9.07
6.65
1.11
1.66
0.0

2.50
2.00
6.64
6.58
0.55
3.00
0.0

2.50
2.00
4.87
6.53
0.15
3.91
0.0

2.50
2.00
9.73
6.19
1.46
0.72
0.0

2.50
2.00
7.09
6.13
0.78
2.30
0.0

2.50
2.00
5.19
6.08
0.30
3.39
0.0

For the constant disaster risk model, we follow Barro (2006) in calibrating disaster frequency (λ̄ = 1.7%), and follow
Panel C of Table 5 of Wachter (WP 2009) in calibrating consumption growth parameter (µ = 2.52%), preference
parameters (β = 0.012, γ = 3), and average disaster risk probability or intensity (λ̄ = 3.55%).

59

Table 4: Time Varying Disaster Model Fit - SMM
Panel A: Identical Disaster Parameters
AUS CAN FRA
Fitted Parameters
q
0.208 0.597 0.597
φ
2.011 2.874 2.960
ω
0.977 0.863 0.845
σ (in %)
3.73
1.60
1.61
Identical Parameters
κ
0.08
0.08
0.08
σλ
0.067 0.067 0.067
Unconditional Model Moments (Annual %)
Std Dev Cons Growth
7.41
6.59
6.51
Mean Equity Premium
7.41
7.52
7.71
Std Dev Equity Return 16.87 22.21 22.93
Sharpe Ratio
0.44
0.35
0.35
Mean Govt Bill
0.09
1.62
1.63
Std Dev Govt Bill
3.53
4.12
4.08

GER

JPN

UK

US

0.588
3.490
0.823
1.98

0.592
3.493
0.824
2.12

0.598
2.722
0.874
1.58

0.598
2.585
0.889
1.56

0.08
0.067

0.08
0.067

0.08
0.067

0.08
0.067

6.66
9.20
28.69
0.33
1.55
4.1

6.75
9.26
28.86
0.33
1.55
4.1

6.51
7.18
20.93
0.36
1.63
4.08

6.55
6.84
19.74
0.36
1.63
4.13

Mean Sq Diff
0.015 0.028 0.008 0.020
Panel B: Country Specific Disaster Parameters
AUS CAN FRA GER
Fitted Parameters
κ
0.200 0.200 0.199 0.199
σλ
0.066 0.078 0.079 0.079
Identical Parameters
q
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
φ
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.6
ω
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
σ (in %)
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
Unconditional Model Moments (Annual %)
Std Dev Cons Growth
6.45
6.6
6.57
6.64
Mean Equity Premium
4.66
4.79
4.85
4.78
Std Dev Equity Return 12.20 12.78 12.90 12.99
Sharpe Ratio
0.42
0.41
0.41
0.40
Mean Govt Bill
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.95
Std Dev Govt Bill
3.34
3.51
3.49
3.54

0.013

0.013

0.002

JPN

UK

US

0.199
0.085

0.198
0.087

0.199
0.085

0.4
2.6
1.0
2.00

0.4
2.6
1.0
2.00

0.4
2.6
1.0
2.00

6.67
4.91
13.29
0.40
0.92
3.59

6.61
4.95
13.40
0.40
0.96
3.59

6.69
4.93
13.25
0.41
0.98
3.55

0.055

0.024

0.009

Mean Sq Diff
†

0.022

0.047

0.025

0.060

For the time-varying disaster risk model, we follow Wachter (2013) for “Identical Parameters”,
mean consumption growth parameter (µ = 2.52%), preference parameters (β = 0.012, γ = 3),
and average disaster risk probability or intensity (λ̄ = 3.55%).

60

Table 5: Time Varying Disaster - Varying ω
ω
Parameters

1.0

0.95

0.85

1.0

0.95

High φ
Baseline
q
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4
3.0
3.0
φ
2.6
2.6
2.6
κ
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
σλ
0.067 0.067 0.067 0.067 0.067
σ (in %)
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
Panel A: Unconditional Moments (Annual %)
Mean Cons Growth
1.63
1.68
1.76
1.63
1.68
Std Dev Cons Growth
6.36
6.07
5.50
6.36
6.07
Mean Equity Premium
7.62
6.34
4.61
8.56
7.18
Std Dev Equity Return 19.95 18.79 16.62 23.39 22.36
Sharpe Ratio
0.39
0.35
0.29
0.37
0.33
Mean Govt Bill
1.01
1.33
1.86
1.01
1.33
3.79
3.55
Std Dev Govt Bill
3.79
3.55
3.11
Panel B: Conditional Moments (Annual %)
Mean Cons Growth
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.52
Std Dev Cons Growth
1.99
1.99
1.99
1.99
1.99
Mean Equity Premium
8.87
7.55
5.73
9.97
8.55
Std Dev Equity Return 17.73 16.57 14.41 21.19 20.20
Sharpe Ratio
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.49
Mean Govt Bill
1.38
1.69
2.18
1.38
1.69
2.00
1.74
Std Dev Govt Bill
2.00
1.74
1.32
†

0.85

1.0

0.95

0.85

0.4
3.0
0.08
0.067
2.00

0.25
2.6
0.08
0.067
2.00

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

1.63
6.36
8.07
19.95
0.41
0.56
3.55

1.68
6.07
6.73
18.79
0.36
0.95
3.26

1.76
5.50
4.88
16.62
0.30
1.59
2.76

N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

2.52
1.99
9.43
17.73
0.49
0.82
2.48

2.52
1.99
8.03
16.57
0.49
1.20
2.16

2.52
1.99
6.10
14.41
0.49
1.81
1.64

Low q
0.25 0.25
2.6
2.6
0.08
0.08
0.067 0.067
2.00
2.00

We also follow Wachter (2013) for additional parameters: consumption growth (µ = 2.52%), and preference parameters (β = 0.012, γ = 3).

61

Table 6: Model Implied Correlation
Panel A: Static Disaster
Data
Correlation

No Disaster
Correlation

Perfect Disaster
Correlation

0.119
0.473
0.564

0.034
0.117
0.000

0.951
0.873
1.0

0.496
0.576
0.628
Disaster
Data
Correlation

0.495
0.495
N/A

0.495
0.495
N/A

No Disaster
Correlation

Perfect Disaster
Correlation

Unconditional:
Corr Cons Growth
Corr Equity Return
Corr Bill Rate

0.119
0.473
0.564

0.046
0.045
0.000

0.950
0.958
1.000

Conditional:
Corr Cons Growth
Corr Equity Return
Corr Bill Rate

0.496
0.576
0.628

0.490
0.056
0.000

0.489
0.946
1.000

Unconditional:
Corr Cons Growth
Corr Equity Return
Corr Bill Rate
Conditional:
Corr Cons Growth
Corr Equity Return
Corr Bill Rate
Panel B: Time Varying

62

Table 7: Model Implied Correlation - Varying World and Individual Country Disaster
Panel A: Static Disaster
Data
Unconditional:
Corr Cons Growth
0.119
Corr Equity Return 0.473
Corr Bill Rate
0.564

τ = 0.0

τ = 0.2

τ = 0.4

τ = 0.6

τ = 0.8

τ = 1.0

0.048
0.122
0.000

0.144
0.242
0.053

0.270
0.367
0.114

0.373
0.495
0.200

0.491
0.634
0.279

0.614
0.766
0.304

0.494
0.493
N/A

0.494
0.493
N/A

0.495
0.494
N/A

0.495
0.494
N/A

0.494
0.494
N/A

τ = 0.2

τ = 0.4

τ = 0.6

τ = 0.8

τ = 1.0

0.169
0.236
0.117

0.281
0.396
0.230

0.387
0.565
0.357

0.482
0.722
0.434

0.613
0.920
0.561

0.495
0.257
0.225

0.494
0.416
0.416

0.492
0.586
0.612

0.495
0.748
0.793

0.494
0.946
1.000

Conditional:
Corr Cons Growth
0.496
0.495
Corr Equity Return 0.576
0.494
Corr Bill Rate
0.628
N/A
Panel B: Time Varying Disaster
Data τ = 0.0
Unconditional:
Corr Cons Growth
0.119
0.042
Corr Equity Return 0.473
0.037
Corr Bill Rate
0.564
0.002
Conditional:
Corr Cons Growth
Corr Equity Return
Corr Bill Rate

0.496
0.576
0.628

0.492
0.055
0.007

63

A

Appendix: Asset Return Solutions

In the text, we use solutions for asset returns for each country that follow from straightforward extensions of the analysis in Wachter (2013) Appendix A. While we summarize these
solutions here, interested readers may wish to consult Wachter (2013) for detailed derivations.

A.1

The Value Function

The asset returns are determined through the intertemporal first order condition maximizing
consumption and portfolio allocations given income. Since wealth is related to equilibrium
consumption through the budget constraint in equation (3), these returns depend upon their
riskiness relative to a claim on realizations of consumption in all future periods (Epstein
and Zin (1989,1991), Duffie and Epstein (1992)) and a risk-free rate. Using this relationship
allows us to solve for the value function and, as described in below, the state price density
and risk-free rate as we describe below. Given these solutions, the price of any other asset can
then be determined through standard arbitrage arguments as described in Wachter (2013).
Defining the price of a claim on Ctj for the representative agent in country j as Stj and
assuming that the consumption process has the form given in equation (4), the price of this
claim follows34 :
j
j
dStj = µSt−
dt + σ j St−
dBtj + (eω

jZ
t

j
− 1)St−
dNtj

(21)

Next, defining αtj as the fraction of wealth Wtj that the representative agent allocates to this
risky asset, the price-dividend ratio for country j as `j ≡ (Stj /Ctj ) and (1 − αtj ) fraction of
34

Since the purpose of this appendix is to consider possible differences across countries, we signify differences across countries with j superscripts. Note, however, that we do not impose any assumption about the
degree of integration or comovement in assets in these derivations. We return to these issues in Appendix B
below.

64

their wealth to the risk free asset, then the wealth process for country j follows:

dWtj = Wtj αtj dStj + Wtj (1 − αtj )rtj dt − Ctj dt
j
= (αtj Wt−
(µ − rtj + `j

−1

(22)

j j
j
j
) + Wt−
rt − Ctj )dt + αtj Wt−
σ j dBtj + αtj Wt−
(eω

jZ
t

− 1)dNtj

Thus, αtj is investor j’s portfolio share in the consumption asset while (1 − αtj ) is investor
j’s portfolio share in a country j risk-free asset. Note that in this formulation of wealth,

the price-dividend ratio for this consumption claim `j = Ctj /Wtj is a constant because the
intertemporal elasticity of consumption is one (see Weil (1990)).
Defining the value function as H(Wtj , λjt ), the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation relates
the instantaneous expected change in the value function plus flow utility to zero at the
optimum, similar to the role of the Bellman equation in discrete time. Given the wealth
process in equation (22), the risky asset process in equations (21), the felicity function in
equation (2), and solving for this HJB as a direct application of Ito’s lemma with jumps (see
Duffie(2010)) implies that this equation is:

sup {HW (αtj Wtj (µ − rtj + (ltj )−1 ) + Wtj rtj − Ctj ) + Hλ κ(λ − λjt ) + 12 HW W (αtj Wtj σ j )2

αjt ,Ccj

+ 21 Hλλ σλ2 λjt

(23)
+

λjt Eν [H(Wt (1

+

j
αtj (eω Z

−

1)), λjt )

−

H(Wtj , λjt )]

+

f (Ctj , J)}

=0

where Hi and Hiq are the first and second derivatives of H with respect to i and to i and
q, respectively, and Eν is the expectation taken over the time invariant distribution ν of Z.
Solving this equation for the value function H(Wtj , λjt ) then provides the utility from lifetime
consumption as a function of state variables Wtj and λjt . In equilibrium, Wtj is given by the

65

consumption asset so that, αtj = 1. Using this fact along with the consumption process in
equation (4), we solve for this value function by guess-and-verify following the conjecture
form in Wachter (2013) :

H(Wtj , λjt )

=I

j

(λjt )1−γ

1−γ
Wtj
.
1−γ

(24)

Using this form of the value function and the envelope condition that HW = UC (C, V ), it
follows that: `j = ` = β −1 . Thus, with identical preferences, all countries have the same
wealth-consumption ratio, even though they are potentially priced in completely segmented
financial markets with different consumption units. Further conjecturing the explicit form
for the proportionality term in the value function as

j +bj λj
t

I j (λjt ) = ea

(25)

and following the same steps as Wachter (2013), it can be shown that for the benchmark
case considered in the text when σλj = σλ ; κj = κ, ∀j = 1, ...J:



j

b =

2


Eν e(1−γ)ωj Zt − 1
−2
σλ2

(26)



1
κλ
j 2
µ − γ(σ ) + (1 − γ) log(β) + bj .
2
β

(27)

κ+β
σλ2

1−γ
a =
β
j

s


−

κ+β
σλ2

Note that the effects on the value function from time-variation in the disaster intensities,
λt , as captured by bj in equation (26) only differ across countries according to how much
consumption declines when a disaster occurs, as measured by ω j . However, the constant

66

effect as captured by aj in equation (27) also varies by countries according to the volatility
of normal times consumption, σ j , reflecting cross-country heterogeneity across countries from
the standard certainty equivalent consumption measure.

A.2

Risk Free Rate

Substituting the solutions for bj and aj in equations (26) and (27) into equation (25) and
the result into equation (24) gives the explicit solution for the value function. Further
substituting this value function solution into the HJB equation (23) and taking the derivative
with respect to αtj implies the following first order condition:

(µ − rtj + `−1 ) − γαtj (σ j )2 + λjt Ev [(1 + αtj (eω

jZ

− 1))−γ (eω

jZ

− 1)] = 0.

(28)

Using the facts noted earlier that `−1 = β and that in equilibrium αtj = 1 and rearranging
equation (28) to solve for rtj verifies the risk-free rate equation (6) given in the paper repeated
here:
h
i
j
j
rtj = β + µ − γ(σ j )2 + λjt E e−γω Z (eω Z − 1)

A.3

The State Price Density

The state price density measures the agent’s value of holding risky assets according to the
intertemporal marginal utility of consumption. Following Duffie and Skiadas (1994), this
state price is:
πtj

Z
= exp

t

UV (Csj , Vsj )ds

0

67



UC (Csj , Vsj ).

(29)

Using the solution for the value function in equations (24) and (25), the envelope condition
that HW = fC (C, V ) implies that the marginal untility of consumption is:

UC (Ctj , Vtj ) = β γ (Ctj )−γ I j (λjt ).

Applying Ito’s Lemma to the state price equation (29) and using the solutions for the terms
in the value function in equations (26), and (27), this form for marginal utility gives the
solution for the state price in equation (7) of the text rewritten here:

dπtj
j
j
j
j
j = µπ,t dt − γσ dBt + b σλ
πt−
where µjπ,t = −rtj − λjt E(e−γω

A.4

jZ

t

q

j
λjt dBλ,t
+ (e−γω

jZ

t

− 1)dNtj

(30)

− 1).

Government Bill Rate

Modifying Wachter (2013) to be country-specific, the price of government debt is:

dLjt
b,j
ω j ZL,t
− 1)dNtj
j = rt dt + (e
Lt−

(31)

where ZL,t = Zt with probability q j ; ZL,t = 0 with probability (1−q j ). Using the relationship
between the state-price density in equation (30) and the price of government debt in equation
(31), the drift term rtb,j can be solved as:

rtb,j

=

rtj

+

λjt q j E

h
i
−γω j Z
ωj Z
(e
− 1)(1 − e ) ,

68

obtaining equation (8) in the text.

A.5

Equity Price

The price of equity is the value of a perpetual claim on dividends, defined as Dt . Then
letting Ftj denote a claim on the dividends in country j, this price has the form given by
equation (9) in the text given here:

Ftj

Z
= Et (

∞

Dsj

t

πsj
ds)
πtj

Following Abel (1999) as well as Wachter (2013) and Gouirio, Siemer and Verdelhan (2013),
among others, we identify these dividends in the data as a levered claim on consumption,
Dtj = Ctj

φ j

, where φj is the leverage parameter. Using Ito’s Lemma, the dividend process

is:
dDtj = φj (µ +

1 j 2 j
j
j
j
j
j
σ (φ − 1))Dt−
dt + σ j φj Dt−
dBtj + [(eω Z )φ − 1)]Dt−
dNtj .
2

Using this relationship and applying Ito’s Lemma to the equity price equation (9) verifies
the equity price diffusion given in equation (11) in the text repeated here:

dFtj
j
j
j j
j
j = µF,t dt + φ σ dBt + g σλ
Ft−
0

q

j
λjt dBλ,t
+ (eφ

j ωj Z

− 1)dNtj .

0

where g j = Gj0 (λjt )/Gj (λjt ) where Gj (λjt ) is the price-dividend ratio for the equity of country
j.
We use this price process in combination with the dividend payout process to generate
equity returns in the quantitative analysis. Calculating these returns requires valuing the
69

dividend payout strips at each future date as described in Wachter (2013), Appendix A.III.

B

Appendix: International Correlations

This appendix describes the cross-country correlations solutions reported in Section 3 in
the text given various assumptions about disaster events. The consumption processes in
equation (4) are repeated here:

j
j
dCtj = µCt−
dt + σ j Ct−
dBtj + (eω

jZ
t

j
− 1)Ct−
dNtj , ∀ = 1, ..., J

where Ntj is a Poisson process with time-varying intensity parameter, λjt , given by equation
(5) as:
q

j
dλjt = κ λ − λjt dt + σλ λjt dBλ,t
Similarly, the stock prices are in equation (11) and the risk-free rate is in equation (6).
Independent Country Poisson Processes: When dNtj are independent Poisson proj
cesses and dBλ,t
are uncorrelated across countries, then inspection of equations (4) and

(11) demonstrates that international correlations of consumption and equity prices only

 i

 i
dCt dCtj
dFt dFtj
arise through the ”normal times” Brownians. Thus, Corr C i , C j = Corr F i , F j =
t−

t−

t−

t−

Corr(dBti , dBtj ) ≡ ρij . Moreover, since risk-free rates given in equation (6) only vary due
j
, and these are independent across countries, then
to the Brownian on the intensity, dBλ,t


Corr rti , rtj = 0.
Common World Poisson Process: When disasters are driven by a common world
Poisson process, the dNtj are replaced by a common world process dNtw with its own in70

tensity process, dλw
t . In this case, the correlation between the disaster components across
countries is one. Also, since the variance of a Poisson process is equal to its intensity,


i
j
i
j
Corr (eω Z − 1)dNtw , (eω Z − 1)dNtw = (eω Z − 1)(eω Z − 1)λw
t Since the normal times
w
Brownians dBtj and the disaster risk components, dNtw and dBλ,t
, are all independent of

each other, the correlation of consumption becomes:

Corr

dCti
,
i
Ct−

dCtj
j
Ct−

!

i

=q

j

σ i σ j ρij + (eω Z − 1)(eω Z − 1)λw
q
2
iZ
i
ω
2
w
(σ ) + (e
− 1) λ
(σ j )2 + (eωj Z − 1)2 λw

when the intensity process is constant over time, thus verifying equation (17). Following
similar steps, the correlation in stock price changes with constant intensity is:

Corr

dFti dFtj
, j
i
Ft−
Ft−

!

i

i

j

j

φi φj σ i σ j ρij + (eφ ω Z − 1)(eφ ω Z − 1)λw
q
=q
.
(φi σ i )2 + (eφi ωi Z − 1)2 λw (φj σ j )2 + (eφj ωj Z − 1)2 λw

Mixed Independent and Common World Poisson Processes: When disasters are
driven by both processes, the consumption process is as in equation (19) in the text:

dCtj
j
j
ωj Z
− 1)(dNtj + dNtw )
j = µdt + σ dBt + (e
Ct−
Again, the country disasters dNtj are independent and therefore add no correlation to international consumption. However, the world disaster is perfectly correlated as above. Therefore
following the same steps as for the Common World Poisson Process implies the solution in
equation (19).

71

C

Simulations

Using the closed-form asset return solutions outlined in Appendices A and B, this section
describes the simulation methods used to compute model moments, estimate individual
country model parameters using Simulated Method of Moments, and compute asset return
and consumption growth comovements.

C.1

Model-Implied Moments

To compute model moments, we first simulate a long time series (50,000 years) of shocks to
consumption growth (dBt ), shocks to disaster intensity (dBλ,t ), and consumption declines in
disaster (Zt ). In the time varying case, we compute the time series of λt using equation (5),
the shock to the disaster intensity (dBλ,t ), and parameters (κ, σλ ). Then with the generated
series of disaster probabilities, λt , we simulate the Poisson process (dNt ), which determines
whether there is a disaster in each period, and combine it with Zt , which is the change to
consumption growth in the event of a disaster, to form a disaster series. Finally, we combine
the disaster series with simulated direct consumption growth shocks (dBt ) to compute the
consumption process described in equation (4) over 50,000 years. Then applying the above
closed-form solutions with a given preference parameters, we compute the model implied
asset returns and model moments.

C.2

Single Country Simulated Method of Moments

In Section 2, we use Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) to find the parameters that
best match the data moments of consumption and asset return moments for each country.

72

As noted in Section 2, we find the best fit for four parameters: the probability of government bond default, q j ; the dividend-consumption leverage parameters, φj ; the proportion of
disaster state consumption decline, ω j ; and the volatility of normal times consumption, σ j .
All of these parameter fits are further conditioned on the mean consumption growth rate
parameter µ that is set equal to the average mean growth rate across countries. Using SMM,
we find the best fitting parameters of the model to target seven data moments: (a) the mean
government bill rate, (b) the standard deviation of the government bill rate, (c) the mean
equity premium, (d) the standard deviation of the equity return, (e) the Sharpe ratio, and
(f) the consumption growth standard deviation.
For this purpose, we simulate the model to obtain the seven data moments and iterate on
values of q j , σ j , φj , and ω j until the sum of squared difference between the data and model
moments are minimized. Specifically, we begin with an initial guess for the parameters (q j ,
σ j , φj , and ω j ) anchored by the parameters values in Wachter (2013). Then drawing a long
time series of shocks (dBt , dBλ,t , Zt ), we simulate the consumption process described in
equation (4) over 50,000 years. For the parameters not being estimated, such as preference
parameters (β, γ) and mean consumption growth (µ), we use values advocated by Barro
(2006) for the constant disaster risk case and Wachter (2013) for the time varying disaster
risk case. Given these shocks and parameters, we compute model-implied moments described
above. This set of model moments is then compared to the data to arrive at a Sum of Squared
Difference. To find the set of parameters that achieve the lowest sum of squared difference,
this process is repeated over a ranges of parameters, with each iteration computing the model
implied moments using the same set of shocks but different parameter values.35
35

In general, less than 100 iterations are need to find the combination of parameter values that minimize

73

Although our long history run of 50, 000 Brownians and Poisson draws should provide a
fairly accurate measure of the distribution of the parameters, we take the simulation a step
further in order to ensure stability of the estimates. For this purpose, we repeat the entire
procedure described above multiple times (50 times for the time-invariant case, 25 times for
the time-varying case). Tables 2 and 4 report the average of the parameter estimates across
these simulation runs. We find that our estimates are little changed after multiple runs,
suggesting that the estimates are indeed stable.

C.3

International Country Correlation

In Section 3, we report implied model consumption and asset return correlations with various
assumptions about the comovement in disasters across countries. In order to make sure our
results are not driven by asymmetries across countries, we consider two identical countries
with parameters calibrated as in Wachter (2013) with µ = 0.025, σ = 0.02, q = 0.4, κ = 0.08,
σλ = 0.067. All cases treat the ”normal times” consumption as a common drift µ and
standard deviation σ as before. However, in this case, the cross-country correlation of the
”normal times” consumption Brownians ρ12 are measured from the correlation between the
U.S. and the U.K. in the post-War period without disasters as given in Tables 6 and 7 in
the ”Data” column.
In Table 6, we further calculate the disaster events in two polar ways. The ”No Disaster
Correlation” case generates the simulated disaster effects by drawing two independent Poisson processes {dNt1 , dNt2 } and, moreover, two individual draws of the size of the disasters,
the sum of squared difference. However, this depends somewhat on the range on each parameter. Given
model boundary condition constraints, we typically bound our parameter estimates to be ω ∈ [0.7, 1.0],
φ ∈ [1.5, 3.5], q ∈ [0.2, 0.6].

74

Ztj .36 Furthermore, for the ”Time Varying Disaster” case reported in Panel B, the intensities
 1
2
processes as independent zero
, dBλ,t
of disasters, λit , are generated from draws of the dBλ,t
normal variables and hence these intensities are uncorrelated. Table 6 also reports the opposite case as ”Perfect Disaster Correlation.” In this case, a common world Poisson process
dNtw is generated with a common disaster effect Ztw .
Table 7 reports correlations of simulated data from a hybrid case with both independent
and common disasters. Generating the disaster effects for this case follows the same steps as
above, but generates the Poisson process as dNtj + dNtw where the mean of the probability
w
i
ei where λ
ei = 3.55%, the frequency of disaster
of this joint Poisson is τ i λ + (1 − τ i ) λ = λ

imposed before.37 Since we use a single draw to generate the Poisson processes, we further
assume that the size of the disaster Z is the same whether it originates from the world
disaster through dNtw , or originates from the individual country through dNtj . As before,
the distribution of the intensity processes are the same.

36

Barro (2006) and Wachter (2013) assume the disaster process is uniform. Therefore, we checked our
simulations based upon the Poisson process by comparing to the Uniform distribution case, finding similar
results. We base our simulations on the Poisson assumption to ensure that our cross-country correlations
accurately correspond with the model.
37
We approximate this process in our simulation as a single Poisson process calculated as a mixture of
two Poisson processes. This process in turn is used to generate asset returns as described in Appendix A
as a mixture of Poissons in place of the given Poisson jump process dN . As this approximation imposes
restrictions on the joint process of returns, we intend to relax these restrictions in future work.

75

