                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WAGE STRUCTURES AND LABOR TURNOVER
                              IN THE U.S. AND IN JAPAN




                                   Jacob Mincer

                                  Yoshlo Higuchi




                              Working Paper No. 2306




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1987




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation and the Spencer
Foundation. Seminal ideas of M. Kuratani and H.W. Tan stimulated our research.
We are grateful to Tom Melito and to Gus Baker for their excellent research
assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2306
                                                   July 1987



            Wage Structures and Labor Turnover in the U.S. and in Japan




                                     ABSTRACT


      The starting point of this study is the proposition that
 intensive formation of human capital on the job is the basic
proximate reason for the strong degree of worker attachment to the
firm in Japan. The greater emphasis on training and retraining,
much of it specific to the firm, results also in steeper wage
trajectories, due to growth of skills in the firm.
      We explore this insight more thoroughly by a detailed use of
micro—data for the two countries: We measure wage profiles and
turnover in age groups, and we test the inverse relation between
the two on industry sectors within each of the countries.
      Using productivity growth indexes for industries in the U.S.
and in Japan we test the hypothesis that rapid technical change
which induces greater and continuous training, is responsible for
steeper profiles, hence indirectly for lesser turnover. The
hypothesis is confirmed on the sectoral level in both countries.
      Finally, we try to standardize for the cultural background of
workers, by observing a sample of Japanese plants in the U.S. which
employ American workers, and use Japanese labor policies in
recruitment and training. We find that the steeper tenure—wage
slopes and lower turnover place this sample closer to Japan than to
the U.S.




  Jacob Mincer
                                                 Yoshio Higuchi
  Economics Department                           Professor of Economics
  International Affairs Building                 Keio University
  Columbia University                            Tokyo JAPAN
  New York, NY 10027
                                                                                                         1
                    WAGE STRUCTURES AND LABOR TURNOVER
                                 IN THE U.S. AND IN .IAPAj

 1. Introduction

         The relation between labor mobility, or turnover, and the structure of wages, especially
 by age, seniority and skill level, is a subject of research in theU.S. and a topic of lively interest
 in the analyses of Japanese labor markets. Inparticular, theories of human capital investment in
 worker skills and in hiring and screening have been used to explain tenure and experience
                                                                                                wage
 profiles and to link them to turnover patterns across workers. This linkage, which we shall refer
 to as the duality hypothesis,1 has been invoked by several researchers2 to explain the very low
 Japanese turnover rate, often portrayed as a product of the "lifetime employment system."
Although hard estimates are not readily available, it is well known that laborpolicies of Japanese
firms involve a strong emphasis on recruitment forjobs, and training plus retraining of workers.
The greater volume and greater firm specificity of such human capital investments in Japan than
in the U.S. is claimed to be the central, proximatereason for the large differences in the degree of
attachment to the firm in the two countries.
        Our research is guided by the same hypothesis: Put briefly, larger investments in workers
on the job result in steeper tenure-wage profiles and, given a degree of specificity in each unit of
human capital, turnover is smaller the steeper the profile, This is a testable proposition in
contexts other than the U.S.-Japan comparison, and we report on such tests by industry sectors
within the two countries.
        Of course, observed dualities of this sort need not arise from specific human capital
alone. Wage-tenure profiles may be steepened, independently of skill formation, to deter
shirking,3 or to deter worker quit in order to amortize fixed costs of employment, such as
recruitment and training costs. If training costs are important and recruitment efforts are related to
training needs,4 the fixed costs and specific capital hypotheses overlap, and may be treated as
one.
        To the extent that the reputation of Japanese workers for loyalty and discipline can be
ascribed to their cultural background in upbringing and in historical tradition, steeper wage
profiles in Japan are not likely to reflect greater needs to deter shirking. Moreover, contrary to the
monitoring model5 in which steep profiles substitute for greater supervision, there isa great deal
of supervision in Japan, but it is largely a matter of guidance andtraining. As Koike (1984)
describes it: A young recruit who joins a work group, following a period of (orientation)
training, "is usually backed up by the sub-foreman for a period of several months. Even after that
he is instructed and attended by a senior worker who occupies the next position in the rotation
                                                                                                     2

sequence." Indeed, Koike remarks, "the foreman in Japanese labor markets is much more
involved than his Western counterpart in a worker's career."
       It may, of course, be argued that the cultural traits of Japanese workers which obviate the
need to deter shirking are sufficient to explain low turnover behavior or the so-called "life-time
employment system." Although it may well be a facilitating condition, cultural background has
long historical roots, but very low turnover in the labor market appears to be a modern day
phenomenon in Japan. Although the evidence is incomplete, there are indications that major
declines in turnover accompanied the onset of rapid economic growth in Japan in the early
 1950's.6 Fig. 1 shows that in manufacturing the turnover rate is significantlylower in the recent
decades than in the interwar period.
        We think that the timing is not coincidental. We also think that the nature of training
processes and of policies in Japanese firms, which makes the specific human capital hypothesis
particularly useful, derives in part from the context of rapid economic growth. There is evidence
in U.S. data that rapid productivity growth promotes training and retraining, by increasing its
profitability.7 In addition, the special emphasis on training for job flexibility and rotation in
 Japanese firms8 strongly suggest a policy geared to the progressive introduction and absorption
 of technological improvements. To the extent that the adaptations vary across firms, greater
 specificities are generated in human capital investments on the job.
         This study is an attempt to deepen our understanding of the Japaneselabor market, by
 comparing it with the U.S. labor market. We takethe differences in on-the-job skill formation of
 workers as the central source of differences in wage profiles and in turnover behavior, while
 placing the skill formation and related labor policies in the context of economic growth and
 technological change.
           In section (2) we use micro-data for both countries, not previously employed for this
 purpose, to contrast the two national labor markets, as well as to test the wage growth-turnover
 duality at the sectoral (industry) level within the countries. In section (3) we trace inter-country
 differences in labor policies to differences in rates of economic growth or technical change. We
  utilize information on productivity growth by industrial sectors to assesseffects on training and
  on shapes of wage profiles. We also explore corollary evidence on the effects of rapid economic
  growth on depreciation (obsolescence) of human capital and on mandatory retirement age. In
  section (4) we compare the wage-turnover relation in a sampleof Japanese firms employing
  American workers in the U.S. with the relation in comparable American firms, and in the general
  Japanese and U.S. labor markets. This comparison is expected to reveal the effects of differential
  labor policies, net of differences in cultural backgrounds of workers which are often emphasized
  in discussions of Japanese labor markets. Section (5) contains a summary and concluding
  remarks.
                       Fijure       1 Historical Changes_in Monthly_Separation Rates
                                    in th Manufacturing Industry (Japan and the U.S.)


U)

4J7
0
                               Japan (I)                                         U.S.A.




     z
                                                                                    Japan.(II)
     I

         —               -      -             -        -
              I                         S -       I             -         I               -
     0
             1?2         2          30        3            40       4-   ct'      $j-            L)   O   J   (Year)
         Sources             Japan(I) Statistcs------—-----—-—----————----——----______
                                                  on Labor Movement History in Jauan, vol.10,
                                       Chuo Koron  Sya.
                                   (IS) Monthly Labor Survey., Japanese
                             the U.S. Monthly Labor Review, BL.S.           Ministry of Labor.

         Notes     :                          :
                             Japan(I)    The average monthly separation rates of workers in the
                                         plants with- 50 workers or more (the figure in 1923 is
                                         the average from May through December)
                                   (Ii): The averaç' monthly separation rates of
                                                                                          workers
                                         in the esttblishments with 30 workers or regular
                                                                                   more
                             the U.S. : The average                                     (manufacturing)          -

                                                     monthly separation rates of workers in. all
                                                      establishments           (manufacturing)
                                                                                                   3



2. The human capital duality hypothesis and themicro-evidence

       That greater volumes of job training imply steeper wage profiles, on the job, and over
longer work experience is a theorem in human capital analysis. A similar theorem predicts a
negative effect of job training on turnover, on the plausible assumption that larger volumes of
training contain also more firm-specific training, even if the latter is not a fixed part of the
former.
      Until recently, the absence of empirical measures of job training has made much of the
human capital analysis of wage structures (Mincer, 1974) and of its effects on mobility (Mincer
and Jovanovic, 1981) largely indirect. What was testable was the relation between wage growth
and labor mobility, both of which are, according tothe theory, affected by job training. More
recently useful measures of job training have become available in U.S. micro-data sets, such as
 the Current Population Survey (1983), recent panels of the National Longitudinal Samples. and
 the Panel Studies of Income Dynamk Direct evidence on the effects of training on wage growth
 has appeared in the research literature. Brown (1983), Parsons (1986), Tan (1987), and Mincer
  (1984) all show evidence of the wage growth effect in the cross-section and over time.9 In
 particular, Brown and Mincer (separately) showed that when the tenure profile of wages was
 decomposed into 3 segments in the PSID data, wages grew slowly before the training period,
 rapidly during the training period, and levelled off after it. Training periods were defmed as
 months and years during which training occurred. An additional year with training raised wage
 growth in tl' rirm by 4-5% over the year, in cross-sections and over time.
         The effects of training on mobility are explored in Mincer (1984) using the PSID data
 panel of working men: An additional year with training reduces the separation rate of workers by
  over 1%, while it lengthens the completed duration of tenure in the firm in which training is
  received by less than a year at younger ages and by more than a year at older ages. These effects
  hold for workers with the same education, experience, marital status, union status, and health.
  The same study shows that more educated and married men tend to receive more training,10
  which also helps to explain why turnover is lower for more educated and married workers.
          We proceed to estimate wage functions in U.S. and in Japanese national sample micro-
                                                        profiles for otherwise similar workers in the
  data, in order to derive experience and tenure-wage
                                                                                          then
  two countries and in (over 20) industrial sectors in each country. Mobility behavior is
  estimated on the same data using the same independent variables for standardization. Tests of the
  duality hypothesis--that turnover is inversely related to tenure-wage growth--are then performed
   at the sectoral levels.
                                                                                                      4
 1a' Wage Functions in Japanese and U. S. Micro-data.

         Our data is drawn from the 1979 Japanese
                                                      Employment Structure Survey (ESS) and jj
 U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) for the
                                                         period 19768111. The Japanese sample
 consists of male employees from 15 years of age through 55. The
 E   is made of about 330 thousand households. A sample of 21,140
                                                                 sample surveyed in the 1979
                                                                    male employees (about 10
 percent of the total) was selected at random. Because E does not provide direct information
 about the hourly wage rate, we substitute the ratio
 Annual earning from main job
 Annual working hours in main job
 for it.12 The U.S. (PSID) sample Consists of over 7,000 observations on white males, heads of
household (ages 1860),13 who were employed during each survey. The real wage rate in the
main job was deflated by the 1979-based CPI. Marital status (M), union membership (U), and
the dummy of job changes (C) are entered as independent variables in addition to education,
experience, and tenure. In the U.S. equation, year dummies are added to eliminate aggregate
wage changes over time. Due to lack of exact information about years of schooling in ESS, 9
years is selected if the person is a junior high school graduate, 12 years if a senior high school
graduate, and 16 years if a college graduate or beyond. Total work experience is calculated for
both countries as the employee's age minus his years of school completed minus 6 (the
elementary school entrance age).
        The estimated wage function is of the form:


(1)lnw=a0+cz1 E+a2E2+a3X+a4X2+aST+T2÷a7Z

Here, the human capital variables are E-years of schooling, X-years of work experience, and T-
years of tenure in the firm. As these are expressed in time units, wages are expressed in
logarithms, and the coefficients measure rates of increases in wages with E, X, and T
respectively. 14
        Table Al shows means and standard deviations of variables for
                                                                           Japan and the U.S.
Average current tenure in the employing firm is 3.5 years longer in Japan, and theaverage annual
separation rate is over 3 times greater in the U.S. Other differences are small.Wage functions are
shown in Table A2 for all, younger workers (up to age 30) and older workers (over 30) for the
U.S. and Japan.
        The coefficients in Table A2 show the usual signs in all groups, except for differing signs
of the quadratic on education in the U.S. (positive) and Japan (negative).15 As described in
equations (A), where tenure is not included, wages grow with experience over twice as rapidly in
                                                                                                    5

Japan than in the U.S. But when tenure is added, the experience coefficients are reduced in both
countries, but more drastically in Japan. This indicates that the growth of wages with experience
are in large part due to growth of wages with tenure,especially in Japan. The inference is that
larger volumes of human capital, largely of afirm specific nature, are accumulated in Japan.
         Other important differences emerge in the complete equations (C), where age groups are
compared: Growth of wages with tenure is similar in both countries in the younger age group;
 the big difference--and steeper slope in Japan--is evident in the older (>30) age group. Put
 another way, there is little if any decline in wage growth in the firm as age advances in Japan,
 compared to a large decline in the U.S. The human capital interpretation is that on-the-job
 training processes are much more continuous, more evenly distributed over working age in
Japan.
        The summary Table (1) below shows the partial derivates of (log) wages with respect to
 education, experience, and tenure based on wage equations in Tables A2. These were calculated
 at common (average) levels of the independent variables, and show the much steeper tenure-
 wage trajectories in Japan compared to the U.S. in the national micro-data samples.

                                          Table 1
                    Growth of Wages with Education. Experience and Tenure

                                            All Age Group

                                     Japan          U.S.           U.S.
                                      (C)            (C)             (D)
 Equation Type
                     12 years       17.05%           6.45           6.94
 Schooling
                     17 years         0.65           0.95           0.63
  Experience
  Tenure             9 years          4.19           1.22           1.01

                                         Young Age Group

                     12 years        15.63           5.78          6.27
  Schooling
                     6 years           2.25          1.94           1.91
  Experience
  Tenure             3 years           3.72          3.91          3.18

                                             Old Age Group

                      12 years        17.70           6.48           6.94
  Schooling
                      23 years         0.66           0.50           0.32
  Experience
   Tenure             12 years         4.07           1.13           0.91
                                                                                                       6


 Note on the interpretation of the coefficients in the wage functions.


        The human capital interpretation of the coefficients in the wage functions requires a little
more elaboration: In principle (Mincer, 1974), the coefficients of experience, and oftenure reflect
(multiplicatively) rates of return to the respective investments, volumes of them (measuredas
ratios to labor costs, or time-equivalents of training costs), and therate of decline of such
investments over time. It is sufficient, for our purpose in this note to look at the linear
coefficients: Thus, the linear coefficient of experience X in (A) of Table A2 equals rx Kox,
where rx is the rate of return to post-school investments, including general and specific job
investments, indexed by the initial investment ratio K0 , assumed to decline linearly over
experience. Similarly, the coefficient of tenure (T) in Table 2 equals rr K0T with corresponding
interpretation for specific investments in the firm, given that X is in the equation.
        Since the rate of return to schooling (Ta) measured as        is over twice as high in Japan

than in the U.S. (in Table 1), and the same is true of coefficients of X and ofT, it may be true
that volumes of job training (measured by K0 for totaltraining, and by K0T for specific
training) are similar in both countries, but that the rate of return on it is over twice as high in
Japan.
        Even in this case the implication for turnover of the over twice steeper tenure-wage
profile in Japan would still be the same, since returns (to workers and employers) from a unit of
investment would be increasing more rapidly in Japan, providing a greater deterrent to turnover.
Judging, however, by fragmentary evidence on the comparative prevalence16 andon ratios of job
training (and recruitment) costs to labor costs in Japanese and American firms (see section4), an
emphasis on differences in both magnitudes and efficiency of job training is probablycorrect.

(b' Turnover Functions


       We proceed to estimate turnover functions in Table A3, corresponding to the wage
functions in Table A2.
        One purpose in estimating turnover functions is to compare turnover rates in the U.S. and
Japan for similar workers, by adjusting for worker characteristics specified in the turnover
equations. Another is to observe, in the light of the specific capital hypothesis, differences or
similarities in the effects of education, experience, and tenure on turnover. Forexample, a
stronger positive relation between schooling and job training, which is partly specific, should
lead to a stronger negative relation between education and turnover. Of particular interest is the
                                                                                                       7

relation between tenure in the firm and turnover: The more specific training heaccumulates in the
firm, the longer the worker is likely to stay with the firm. The largerthe volume of training and
the more it is bunched in early tenure the bigger the decline in the separation as tenure lengthens.
Moreover, the less intensive the screening of workers before hiring, the more important is job
matching after hire, hence the bigger the separation rate in early tenure. Consequently, the decline
in separations with tenure    is steeper, the less prior screening, the larger the volume of
training, and the shorter the period of training in the firm, given the volume.
        Also, a decline in turnover (s) should be observed as age (experience, X) advances since

    dS_as dT as
(2)—+<
because      <0, as already suggested, while        >0 (it would be zero, if turnover were

instantaneous) and , the effect of "pure aging" (given tenure), is also likely to be negative, as
costs of moving increase with age, apart from specific capital reasons.If "pure aging" is
unimportant, as seems to be the case, the main reason for a negative age effect
     <0, is the negative tenure effect,    <0.
        Table A3 utilizes U.S. data in the PSID for the period, 1976-81, as in the wage equation.
 But, because the data on firm tenure in the previous job is not available in the 1979 ESS, the
 Japanese sample is drawn from the 1982 ESS. The samples are male employees of the same age
 group as in the wage equation including part-time and temporary workers in both countries. In
 this paper we defme labor mobility by whether the worker changes firms during the past year.
 We exclude exits from and entries into the labor market. Consequently, job separation is
 synonymous with job change in our data.
        The table shows regressions of turnover rates for each country and for age groups.The
 dependent variable in each equation is denoted as unityif the employee changed firm during the
 past year, and zero if the employee stayed within the same firm. Independent variables such as
 experience, tenure, and industry are defined on the information in the previous years of the
  survey period. The negative effectof schooling on separations is observable in both countries.
  This is due to a positive correlation between schooling and training, a relation consistent with the
  theory of investment in human capital over the life-cycle, orwith complementarity between the
  two. The relation is a bit weaker in the U.S., but it gets stronger at higher levels of schooling.
  The experience effect, where tenure is not included, is negative and convex (i.e., it decelerates),
  with a steeper decline in the U.S. data. This is induced by the patternof tenure coefficients as
  seen in equations (B), according to the decomposition of shown above. The larger negative
                                                                                                       8
 coefficients on X (without tenure) are due to the larger coefficients on T (given X). It is
 surprising, at first glance, to fmd that the decline of separations with tenure is slower in Japan
 than in the U.S. However, the more intensive recruitment
                                                              and pre-hiring screening effort in
 Japan (see section 4) means that separations are reduced in the
                                                                   immediate post-hiring period, and
 the spreading out of training activities overlonger periods of tenure implies that the decline of
 separations with tenure is rather slow. Indirect evidence on the spreading Out of training (and
 retraining) activities in Japan was noted in the wage profiles of Table A2: Tenure wage profiles
 continued to grow for senior workers in Japan, while theirslopes decline much more in the
 U.S., hence the difference in the steepness of wage growth between the countries was much
 more pronounced among older workers. It is also possible that the flatterJapanese tenure-
 separation profile is, in part, due to an often asserted greater homogeneity of Japanese workers.
 The same heterogeneity bias17 would also apply to the tenure-wage profile, biasing it downward
 for Japan. Apparently, the bias is of little consequence in the inter-countly comparison, as the
 Japanese wage-profile is so much steeper, not flatter.
        In order to estimate differences in separation rates among workers with similar
 characteristics, we standardize by education, experience, and marital status of common (average)
 levels of these variables. The results are shown in summary Table (2):




                                            Table 2
                        Adjusted and Unadjusted Mean Turnover Rates (%)

                                                             Jppan
                      Adj            Unadj            Adj            Unadj             At X
All                   13.9            16.6            3.3             4.9
                      28.4
                                                                                       X=17
Young                                28.1             8.1             8.6              X=6
Older                 10.1            10.0            2.5             3.5              X=23
Source: Table A3, col (A).
Education is 12 years for all three groups.


It appears that the over threefold higher U.S. turnover rate shown in the unadjusted data (Table
1), is true for similar workers as well.

(c) Sectoral Evidence on Wage Growth - Turnover Dualities.


        While the steeper tenure-wage profile and lower turnover in Japan than in the U.S. is
consistent with the human capital induced duality, one such comparison does not by itself
represent compelling evidence. It is plausible that industrial sectors within the countries also
                                                                                                   9

differ in skill acquisition processes of their workers, given differences in production functions. If
so, dualities could be tested across such sectors in both countries. We proceed to do this by
including industry dummies (for 24 industry sectors in Japan and 17 in the U.S.) in the micro-
data regressions previously shown without them in Tables A2 and A3. In the wage equations we
added an interaction variable IND x T, where T is the individual tenure variable. Its coefficient c,
measures differential slopes of the tenure-wage profiles by industry. The estimated parameters
are shown in Table A4. The aj coefficients measuring wage-tenure slopes appear to differ
significantly across industries in both countries. In the separation equation the coefficient of
added industry dummies INTl)1 measures differential turnover by industry i ofworkers with the
same education, experience, marital status (and union membership in the U.S.). The j
coefficients also shown in Table A4 are less significant (using 10% levels), especially in the
young age groups in the U.S. and in the older age groups in Japan. The upper panel of Table 3
shows the correlations between a1 and in each country by age groups:


                                              Table 3
                    Effects of Industry Tenure-Wage Slopes on Separation Rates

                     (A) Correlations between Industry Coefficients in Table A4

                       U.S.                             Japan
                  (17 industries)                  (24 industries)

                        347*                          -.280
 Young                -.070                           •377*
 Older                .348*                           ÷.138
 *
     Significant at 20% level.



                  (B) Regression Coefficients of Industry Tenure-Wage Slopes (ail
             and of Industry Wage Levels (ci,) in U.S. Separation Equations. 1976- 19811

  Variables                       All          Age 30            Age> 30       All Non-Union
  ai                     -2.26 -1.50        -.48 -1.04          -2.92 -2.89       -2.03
                          (2.9)     (1.9)   (.9)      (1.8)     (3.8) (3.7)       (2.3)

                                    -.23              -.22            -.13         -.20
                                    (4.6)             (2.3)           (2.8)        (2.8)

  1Excludes agriculture and Construction which are highly seasonal.
  Shown in Table A5.
                                                                                                    10



       The U.S. correlation coefficient has a negative value in every age group as predicted by
the duality hypothesis. The coefficients in the old-agegroup and the all-age group are statistically
significant at the 20 percent level. In the young-age group, where industries with significant
coefficients are few, the correlation coefficient is not significant. In contrast, the Japaneses
correlation coefficients are positive but insignificant in the old-age group.18 In the young age
group the coefficient has a significant negative value.
        These results confirm the duality hypothesis, but the procedure of correlating regression
coefficients tends to produce statistically weak (biased toward zero) correlations.
        A better procedure is to introduce the industry tenure-wage slopes (aj) into the separation
equation, previously shown in Table A3. We are able to do this in the U.S. data, and the results
are shown in Table 3, U.S. panel B. To the extent that industry wage levels also differ and
reflect barriers to mobility, such as unionization, we introduce both industry dummies (cx2) and
tenure-wage slopes (a1) in the equation. Both are negative and significant in the total sample and
in both age groups. The tenure-wage slope effects on turnover are much stronger in the older age
group (suggesting greater finn specificity of accumulated skills than in the younger). Also, in
contrast to the level effect (coefficient of cz2) the tenure wage slope effect (coefficient of c) is
stronger in the non-union sector than in the total sample.
        Since tenure-wage slopes are more likely to reflect training in the non-union sector, we
can use the coefficient (-2.03) in the last column of Table 3, to estimate the extent to which
differences in tenure-wage slopes account for the differences in turnover rates between the U.S.
and Japan. According to our Table 1, tenure-wage growth per year is 1.2% in the U.S. and
4.2% in Japan, at average (9 years) tenure levels, for otherwise similar workers. Thus an
increase of 3.0% in the wage slopes should reduce the separation rate by -2.03 x 3.0 =-6.1%.
This would bring down the standardized U.S. rate from 13.9% to 7.8%, cutting the U.S.-Japan
differential in turnover rates by close to 60% of the gap.

3. Economic Growth. Human Capital. and Wages.


         Why do labor policies of Japaneses firms emphasize human capital investments which
result in low turnover rates, or conversely, what explains the greater efforts of Japanese firms to
strengthen worker attachment?
        Although Japan was already an industrial power with a relatively educated labor force
early in this century, the industrial relations system which produces low turnover became
especially prominent in the post World War II era. The successful effort to rebuild industrial
                                                                                                        11

plant, to catch up with Western technology and to continue improvements yielded a very rapid
rate of economic growth, initially capitalizing on the boom created by the Korean War in the early
50's. The evolution of labor policies in the firms may be viewed as a response to and in
anticipation of rapid technological change. Introduction of new technologies requires
complementary, growing and changing worker skills on the job, as well as a strong basic
educational system which promotes continued learning skills. Technology is not quite a public
good19, and its use is uncertain at any point. The result is considerable variation among firms in
the technologies they create and adapt, particularly in industries where technology is advancing
rapidly. Hence the emphasis on skill upgrading and remolding on the job,with strong elements
of specificity.
        Whether or not firm specificities are inherent in technological change, in its face firms
must make choices: Should the present workers be retrained and reassigned to new or modified
tasks, or should new workers be hired and trained while the old employees arelaid off? If
training is general, that is fully transferable, the firm is indifferent between hiring a new trainee
and retraining and reassigning an old worker. It may prefer hiring new workers if new
technology is already embodied in skills outside the firm, or if newer vintages of education are
helpful.2° But, to the extent that training is specific (including that which is conditioned by the
new technology), the firm will offer retraining and or continuous flexible training with rotation.
        The resulting strong attachment of workers to firms and the avoidance of layoffs are
mutually profitable for workers and employees, according to the theoryof specific human
 capital. Training for flexibility and job rotation are of particular importance in facilitating long-
 term attachments in the face of changing technology. What is more, the perception of job securit'
 eliminates worker resistance to technological change and encourages innovative contributions on
 their part.21
         If these arguments are correct, the steeper wage growth in the firm and the resulting
 lower turnover in Japan compared to the U.S. can be attributed, at least in part, tothe differential
 rates of economic growth in the two countries in the post-war decades. To test this proposition
 we analyze several links between rates of productivity growth and behavior in the labor market.
        Recent research in the U.S. (Lillard and Tan, 1986) reveals that job training is increased
 in industries which experience more rapid long-term productivity growth. It also shows that in-
 house training is encouraged while outside vocational training as well as prior on-the-job training
 in other firms is de-emphasized in such industries.22 If these fmdings apply to differences across
 countries which differ in rates of economic (productivity) growth, the steeper tenure-wage
 profiles in Japan and lower turnover would follow as a consequence.
                                                                                                     12

 (a) Sectoral Evidence on Effects of Productivity Growth


        Using indexes of total factor productivity growth constructed by Conrad and Jorgenson
 (1985) for about 30 U.S. and Japanese industries, we are able to test the predicted effects by
 industry sector in each country.23 Table A6 shows these indexes for both countries.As we have
 more information in U.S. data, we can analyze them more comprehensively, both in substance
 and in form. Thus, we first inquire into evidence ofgreater demand for education and training in
sectors with greater productivity growth underlying the greater use of human capital in such
industries. Panel A of Table 4 shows the effect of
                                                     long-term productivity growth on the incidence
of training, by education level. It is positive without the interaction, as well, according to Lillard
and Tan (1986). Panel B shows the positive effects of productivity growth--both long and short-
term--on the profitability (returns) to education and training. This we see in the positive
coefficients of interactions of productivity growth indexes with education (PG x E) and with
training (PG x RQT) when they were included in the 1976-1981 PSIDwage equations. The
results indicate that the demand for education and for training increases as productivity grows, a
fact of great importance for the understanding of the long-term growth of human capital in
growing economies, and of its very rapid growth in recentJapanese history.




                                             Table 4
                      Effects of Productivity Growth in U.S Industries on:

                        LA) The Incidence of Training by Education Level
Education                   <12               12            13-15             16
Coefficient                                                                                    17+
ofPGxE                       1.92            .41             2.88             3.56            5.32
       All coefficients significant at 1% level.
       Source: Lillard and Tan (1986).
                                                                                                13



              ) Returns to Education and Training
                        1960-1979            1970-1979
PG x E                    .082
                          (8.0)
PGxE                                             .061
                                                 (4.0)
PGxRQJF                   .164
                          (10.1)
PGxRQT                                           .100
                                                 (4.0)


t - values in parentheses
PG = Productivity growth over the periods
RQT = Training on the job, in years.
 Source: PSID males, 1976-1981.




        The first column uses longer-term productivity growth (P0) measured by the 1960 to
 1979 increases in the indexes, the second--shorter term--over the 1970 to 1979 period.
        RQT is the measure of (years or months) of training received in the current job, reported
 in 1976 and 1978 in the PSID.
        We now proceed to test the effects of differential sectoral productivity growth on tenure-
 wage slopes in each country. Table 5A shows results for Japan, obtained by regressing industry
 tenure-wage slopes24 on indices of industry productivity growth.


                                                     Table 5A
                                        Coefficients of Productivity Growth
                                    in Industry Tenure-wage Slopes Regression

                                               Japan (23 industries)1

                   All (15-55)                 Yo""r (liS-30)                    Older (l-55
                                                         ----                         -     .0598
 P0(60-79) .0112           ----     273     .0153                .0230    .0197
                                    (2.6)    (2.6)                (1.5)    (1.9)             (2.3)
                (2.9)
                          .0174     -.031                                          .0248    -.092
 PG (70-79)                                                                         (1.0)   (1.7)
                           (1.9)    (1.5)                (2.1)    (.6)

                .286       .147     .359     .240        .167     .251    .243      .048     .248
  R2

  1See Table A6.
                                                                                                    14


                                             Table SB
              Coefficients of Interaction of Productivity Growth (in 15 industries)1
                              with Tenure in U.S. Wa2e Functions

                        All (1x-6rn             Young (lX.              Older (31-6rn
P0(60-79)        .0139     ----     .008     .040    ---     .093    .015 ----     .-001
                 (4.3)              (1.1) (2.7)              (3.0)   (3.8)         (.2)
PG (70-79)       ----      .006     .010     ----    -.003   -.083   ----   .005    .023
                           (1.5)    (1.2)            (.2)    (2.0)          (1.1)   (2.6)



t-values in parentheses
1See Table A6.



       Although the results are not very strong, they do show that the more rapid long-term
productivity growth in the sector the steeper is the tenure-wage profile. This is true foryounger
and older workers, with a somewhat larger effect on wage slopes of older workers. Where the
shorter-mn productivity growth indices are included in the regressions, they are negative and not
significant. Apparently the wage structures induced by economic growth are fairly durable in the
short run. Adjustments, which may be expected when economic fortunes change, take time.
        We are able to implement the same test in U.S. data with a statistically more efficient
procedure. In Table SB we interact productivity rDwth indices with tenure in the wage equation.
,4&. 1                                /,..                           'v        c.I/i
                                                 Table 6A
                                  Regressions of Industry Turnover Rates
                                     on Industry Productivity Growth

                                            Japan (23 industries)1

__________
           (1.0)
                All (15-55
PG (60-79) -.009 ----
                                    Young_(15-30)
                         -.0 14 -.06 1
                         (.6) (3.0)
                                                    - Oliier (1-55)
                                              -.035 +.007 ----
                                              (.7) (.9)
                                                                  -.011
                                                                  (.6)
P0(70-79)  ----    -.016 .010 ----     -.131 -.062 ----    +.020 +.043
                   (.8) (.2)           (3.0) (.5)          (1.3) (1.1)
R2________ .048 .033               .050     .301    .296     .311 .040      .008    .092
1See Table A6.
                                                                                                    15


       As in Japan, the effects of long term productivity growth (1960-79) in theU.S. is to
steepen the tenure wage slopes. Here the effects appear to be stronger among the young,
suggesting a lesser, if any, degree of obsolescence in the process of productivity growth in the
U.S. Perhaps this is plausible at the frontier of Western technology towhich Japan was catching
up during that period. Also, shorter term (1970-79) effects were not significant, and mixed when
included with long-term indices in the equations.
         If the steepness of the tenure-wage slopes is increased by productivity growth, an
 (indirect) effect of productivity growth on turnover should also be visible. This is verified in
Tables 6A for Japan and 6B for the U.S.
       In Table 6A, coefficients of industry dummies in the Japanese turnover equation are
regressed on long and short-run productivity growth indexes.



                                             Table 6B
                              Effects of Sectoral Productivity Growth
                                        on Separation Rates
                                        U.S. (15 industries'

                        All (18-60)           Young (18-30)           Older (31-60)
 PG (60-79)     -.111         -.248       -.146        -.372         -.080      -.130
                (4.2)         (4.2)       (2.9)        (3.6)         (2.6)       (2.2)
                 ----         .197         ----             .358       ----      .083
 PG (70-79)
                              (2.4)                         (2.5)                (1.0)


 1See Table A6.


        Although negative signs prevail, they are significant only for the younger group, where
 turnover is more pronounced. For the older groups, the effect is even positive, contrary to
 expectation. We return to this anomaly in the next section.
        In the U.S. data we can perform the same test more efficiently by including the
  productivity indexes directly in the turnover equation.
                                                                                                    16


                                             Table 7
                                      Observed and Predicted
                                       Tenure-Wage Slope

                                                      Japan        Differences
Mean value of (PG x Ten)             .625             2.500        .1875
Observed Tenure-Wage Slope           .011             .042          .031
Predicted (a)                        .011             .037          .026
           (b)                                        .032



        The results shown in Table 6B are clear: Long term productivity growth reduces
turnover, in both age groups indirectly via the effects on training and on corresponding tenure-
wage growth. A comparison of Tables 5B and 6B shows clearly the symmetric (or duality)
effects of productivity growth on wage slopes and on turnover. The long-run PG positive effects
on wage slopes are bigger for the younger group, and so are the negative effectson turnover.
The shorter run PG. when included, has negative effects on the wage slopes of young (in 5B)
and positive effects on turnover (in 6B). At any rate, the shorter-run effectsattenuate the long run
effects. It appears that, in the short run adjustments to more rapidproductivity growth involve
substituting more educated for less educated workers without reduction in turnover. In thelonger
run, in-house training and reduced turnover dominate.
        Returning to Table 5 we can ask the question posed at the outset of this section: To what
extent does the more rapid economic growth in Japan account for thesteeper wage profiles
there?
        According to the U.S. data (Table 5B) the effect of adding a unit of long-term growth
(measured by the interaction variable (PG x Tenure) is to add 1.4% to the tenure-wage slope.
The mean value of (PG x Tenure) in the U.S. was .625. Since Japanese productivity growth was
4 times as rapid over the period, the corresponding mean value for Japan was 2.500. The
predicted difference in tenure-wage growth was therefore (2.500-.625) x 1.4 =2.62%, using the
U.S. Table, or 2.06% using the Japanese Table. As the summary Table 7 indicates, the
differences in productivity growth account for 70% to 80% of the differences in tenure-wage
slopes in the two economies.
       We do not carry out a similar calculation for each age group separately, because the
effects of productivity growth on wage profiles are much larger for young than for older workers
in the U.S. (Table 5A) but no smaller for the latter in Japan (5B). This observation, calls for a
closer look at the labor market consequences of obsolescence which accompanies rapid changes
in technology.
                                                                                                     17


(b) Obsolescence. Life-time Distribution of Training, and Early Retirement

      One effect of rapid changes in technology is an increased depreciation of physical and of
human capital, due to obsolescence. In effect, the pay off period of investments in human capital
is shortened. Hence less is invested at any given time, but investments (training) are repeated
over the working life.25 Since the investments do notdecline much over the working life,wage
profiles do not decelerate much. To the extent that training is specific, and it is plausible that such
specificity is accentuated by firms' adaptations to technology, the lack of deceleration is
pronounced in tenure-wage profiles. We saw evidence of this lack of deceleration in Japanese
data, contrasted with significant declines in tenure-wage slopes atolder ages in the U.S. We also
saw, in part (a) of this section, that effects of productivity growth on steepness of wage profiles
was no smaller for older than for younger workers in Japan, but much smaller in the U.S.
Apparently, the overall much weaker growth rate in the U.S. did not involve obsolescence, or
potential obsolescence as much as in Japan.
        Despite the greater potential obsolescence, total volumes of training areincreased in
conditions of rapid productivity growth as was indicated in part (a), presumably because of the
 greater profitability (indicated by positive coefficients PG xRQT in Table 4) of the up-to-date
 training. We should note, of course, that obsolescence of human capital does not necessarily
 imply obsolescence of workers. By gradual adjustments in continuous training, with emphasis
 on flexibility and job rotation, potential obsolescence is overcome without changing much of the
 work force in the firm.
          However, workers who interrupt their work experience for a long period, are much more
 handicapped when returning to work in a regime of rapid technical change than in one where
 changes are milder. One way to gauge the difference in rates of potential obsolescence of worker
 skills in Japan compared to the U.S. is to observe the rate of decline in wage rates of persons
 who drop out of the labor force for a prolonged period. Such estimates areavailable for the U.S.
  (Mincer & Polachek 1974 and 1978), Sweden (Gustafsson, 1977) and for Japan (Higuchi,
  1987), for married women who withdraw from the labor force (usually for child-bearing and
  child-rearing purposes). While such interruptions are now much less frequent in the U.S., they
  were still pronounced in the late sixties period covered by Mincer and Polachek in the U.S., and
  by Gustafsson in Sweden.
        The estimates of depreciation "through non-use" are provided by the co-efficient & in the
  wage function of the following form:

          ln w= a0 + a1E + a2 X+ a3T +31)
                                                                                                         18

 Here X measures actual work experience in the labor market, T- the most recent
                                                                                      job tenure, and
 D the length of interruptions of work activity, all in years. The "depreciation" coefficient
                                                                                              on D is
 in part due to "forgetting" or erosion of skills used in the market prior to interruption.
                                                                                            But, even
 without "forgetting," skills become obsolete ifthey are rapidly modified in the market place when
 technology changes rapidly. This obsolescence effect ought to have been greater in Japan than in
 the U.S. Indeed, estimates of the depreciation coefficient (ö) in married women's
                                                                                       wage functions
 shown in Table 8 are clearly larger in Japanese data than in U.S. or Sweden.
         Note also, that the estimated depreciation rates tend to increase with level of education.
 This would be expected if retraining on the job is complementary with education and with
 technical change--a hypothesis consistent with our findings in this study.
        The estimates are not quite comparable in terms of procedures, time periods, and data
 sources. Nevertheless, they represent a strong suggestion thatobsolescence is an important
 additional component to "forgetting" in Japan, augmenting the depreciation of skills which are
 not used over several years (the length of interruption periods are similar in the two sets of data).
        Another implication of rapid technological change which necessitates continuing training
and retraining of workers, is an adverse effect on continuing employment of older workers. This
could happen if it is more difficult, that is more costly, to retrain older workers, while at the
                                                                                                  same
time, the low turnover rates throughout prime
                                                 ages result in a disproportionate number of such
workers in sectors with rapid technical change.
                                                  Early mandatory retirement from the job--though
not from the labor force, and not necessarily from the firm--is
                                                                   a solution apparently practiced in
Japan.
        A weak test of this hypothesis is performed inTable 9. Here we relate the incidence (in %
of firms) with mandatory retirement (Y1) and, alternatively, the average age of uniform
mandatory retirement (Y2), in 9 industrial sectors (aggregated from the larger numbers used
before), to long-term productivity growth by sector (X1) and to tenure-wage slopes for the (31-
55) age groups by sector (X2). The X's are used alternatively; they cannot be used
                                                                                   jointly, since
they are strongly correlated on this highly aggregative level, as we would expect.
                                                                                                     19

                                             Table 8
                               Depreciation Rates in Wage Functions
                                     of Married Women (%'

                        A              Educ: 9fl              12-15           16+      Period
                                                              -4.44           -5.35   Late 1970's
Japan                  35-39
                       30-34
                                         -3.99
                                         -135                 - cq            -3.05

                       30-44                -.20              -1.30           -2.30   Late 1960's
U.S. (a)
        (b             n-44              -1.1 &               -lAO            -4.30
Sweden (c)                                   -.16             -2.75           -1.57   Early 1970's

(a) All married workers
(b) Married women with children
(c) Women with interrupted careers




                                                    Table 9

             Productivity Growth (Xi), Wage-Slopes (Xand Early Retirement1üiX
                                   Japan. 9 Industrial Sectors


                                   Xj                                 -1.39
                  X1                 17.7
                                     (1.5)                            (2.5)

                  X2                590.17                           -26.17
                                     (4.6)                            (2.4)

 1 Data source: 1980 Survey on Employment Management, the Japanese Ministry of Labor.
 Y1=the incidence (in % of firms) with mandatory retirement.
 Y2=the average age of uniform mandatory retirement.

        As the results show, sectors with more rapid productivity growth (Xi) tend to have
 mandatory retirement rules, and an earlier retirement age. The same is true of sectors with steeper
 tenure-wage profiles in the (3 1-55) age group (X2). Of course, these are very much the same
  sectors.
          Since the average retirement age is only a little over 55 in the rapidly growing sectors, a
  significant proportion of workers below 55 are induced (by severance pay and other benefits) to
  change their jobs earlier. This is the reason that for the previously observed apparent anomaly,
                                                                                                      20
namely that turnover rates appeared to be larger for older Japanese workers in sectors with higher
productivity growth (Table 6A) and with steeper wage slopes (Table 3A).

4. Another Control: A look at Japanese Plants Operating in the U.S.

        In this section we summarize our findings on recruitment, job training, and wage
structures in a sample of 83 Japanese plants operating in the U.S. (JPUS). Details of sampling
data and of analysis are described in Higuchi (1987A)
        A popular view of Japanese industrial relations stresses discipline and company loyalty as
a cultural characteristic of Japanese workers which is reflected in low turnover. Thesteep tenure-
wage profile is ascribed to company policies of increasing wages with seniority as a reward for
loyalty and for disciplined effort. Our comparison of Japanese and U.S. labor marketsyields
fmdings that are consistent with the economic analysis of human capital investmentson the job,
especially under conditions of differential rates of technical change, without attentionto cultural
conditioning. Nevertheless, the cultural background of workers is not irrelevant. The system of
economic incentives that we described may be more effectively implemented, when favorable
attitudes are engendered by the culture. A better perspective on the relativeimportance of the
cultural background is to observe effects of Japanese labor policies in the U.S.environment. For
this purpose we studied the behavior of American workers employed in JPUS plants. We
examine (1) whether there are differences in modes of recruitment and jobtraining between the
JPUS and American plants, and (2) if so, how these differences influenced individual wage
growth and job separation rates.
       In our interviews we found that most of the JPUS plants apply, with some modifications,
similar technology and production systems to those in theirparent plants. Both Japanese and
American managers in these plants stress the importance of job training. Orientation and job
training are used not merely to enhance a given skill but also to acquire job flexibility for rotation
purposes and to maintain good conditions of machinery without relying on outside experts.
        According to Table 10, the proportion of workers who received training in thepast year
(1985) was about twice as high in JPUS than in comparable American plants. Thisproportion
was also about twice as high as the new hire rate in the JPUS plants, but the proportion
                                                                                        receiving
training in the American plants was less then the new hire rate. This means that JPUS plants
provide not only training for new employees but also continuing training and retraining for the
existing work force, Training costs per worker were over two times higher in the JPUS plants,
and over four times higher for new employees. Given the strong emphasis on training and its
specificity it is not surprising that JPUS firms make strong efforts to recruit more adaptable and
stable workers. Indeed, the recruitment costs are twice as high in the JPUS than in American
                                                                                                    21
firms. And the positive correlation between training and recruitment costs is clearly observable in
Japanese industries as well.
        These findings, it should be noted, refer to production workers, not managers. As such
they are not small: $1,756 of recruitment and training costs per year of a new employee in JPUS,
compared to $626 in American firms. Still, these are underestimates: opportunity costs of job
training (foregone productivity) escape the accounting. Similarly, recruitment costsdo not
include compensation for recruiters' and interviewers' time.
       Wage rates are similar in JPUS and American plants, although average tenure is less in
JPUS which are newer (the oldest plant dates back to 1963). Total,labor costs per American
worker are about $2,500 (or 10%) higher in JPUS. Over $1,000 of the difference is due to
higher training and recruitment costs, and another $1,000 to higher fringes (unspecified),the rest
is accounted for by (rather small) periodic bonus payments.
        Table 11 shows the rates of growth of wages with schooling, experience, and tenure for
JPUS, comparable American industries, and for U.S. and Japan in the aggregate. The estimates
are based on wage functions of the form we used before. Tenure wage growth in JPUS is over
 twice as steep (3.3%) than in comparable American firms (1.4%), but lower than in Japan
 (4.2%). Prior experience has little or no effect on wages (for workers over 30, who were hired
 from other firms) in JPUS, in contrast to American firms. While prior experience is de-
 emphasized in JPUS, selectivity at upper education levels is apparent among whitecollar
 workers and managers. This shows up in the schooling coefficient of the wage equation which is
 far higher for workers over 30 years of age in JPUS plants than in American firms: Since prior
 work experience is less valuable in the JPUS plants whose technology and labor utilization differ
 from those in U.S. plants, quality and education may have been used as a substitute in hiring
 older workers for higher level positions.
        Table 12 presents a comparison of turnover rates. As expected, all the rates are lower in
 Japanese plants, despite the fact that they are more recent and have a much larger proportion of
 younger workers. One seeming exception is the layoff ratewhich is not much lower in JPUS
 then in the American plants. But the statistic is unduly affected by one large electrical machinery
 plant which laid off 40% of its workers. Without this exception, the layoff rate is, like the quit
 rate, about half as large in JPUS than in U.S. plants. Quite remarkably, as in the comparison of
 tenure-wage slopes, the JPUS turnover rate is abouttwo-thirds of the distance from the higher
 national U.S. rate to the lower national Japanese rate, as shown below in Table 13:
                                                                                                        22
                                             Table 10


                 Training and Recruitment Costs in JPUS and in American Plants

                                               JPUS                   American
 Proportion of worker
 who received training                         24.35                  13.48
 Last year (%)
 Cost of Training per worker ($)               134.2                  52.9
 Cost of Training per new hire ($)             1000.0                 215.0
 Recruitment cost
pernewhire($)                                  759                    411



                                             Table 11

                     Percent Growth in Wage Rate Attributable to Schooling1
                      Work Experience and Job Tenure in the JPUS Plants.
                            American Firms and Japanese Firms (%')


                                                          U.S. (Non-Union
                                                          workers in Textile,      Japan
                 JPUS          JPUS            U.S        Metal, Machinery        (all md-
              (with bonus)     (without) (all industries)    and Food)            ustries)

                                                 ALL AGES
Schooling        18.92         18.78           6.62       8.76                  16.79
Experience        0.57          0.64           0.98                                          (12.335 years)
                                                          0.82                   1.46        (17.415)
Tenure            3.33          3.23           1.54       1.49                  4.75          (9.600)

                                           UNDER 30 YEARS OLD
Schooling         9.74          9.06           6.05              8.53           14.39
Experience        2.23          2.16           1.79                                          (12.655)
                                                                 0.49           3.76          (6.585)
Tenure            5,25          5.00           3.69              4.02           6.36          (3.770)

                                            OVER 30 YEARS OLD
Schooling       22.41          22.60           6.55              8.76       17.16
Experience      -0.19          -0.04           0.53                                        (12.170)
                                                                 0.57         0.66         (23.110)
Tenure            2.47          2.43           1.31              1.30         4.28         (12.550)
Note: The Percentage growth in wage rate attributable to schooling calculated by the equation
      a log W/ E = b + 2CE is the simple average of means years of schooling in the U.S. and
      Japan, which are shown in parenthesis (the common value is given to the above five categories).
      The percentage growth in wage rate attributable to experience and tenure is similarly calculated.
      None of these calculations takes account of marital status which was not available in the JPIJS
      data.
                                                                                                   23




                                             Table 12


                        Turnover Rates in JPUS and in American Plants


                       Annual
                                 us Monthly
                                                             American
                                                          Annual   Monthly

                          19.5         1.7                   28.2        3.5
SeparationrateS                                              17.9        2.3
Quitrates                 9.3          0.8
Layoff rates              7.3          0.7                   8.6         0.9
Layoff rates (b)          1.6          0.1
Percent of plants
with layoff               16.1                               55.0
            (b) Excluding 1JPUS plant which accounted for 40% of all layoffs.



                                              Table 13

                    Tenure-Wage Growth and Turnover in Three Environments

                                     Japan          JPUS             U.S..
Tenure-wage
Growth                                47             33              1.5
Separation
Rate (Monthly)                        0.9b            1.7C           35C


 Sources: a-Table 11.
            b - the 1985 Monthly Labor Survey.
            c-Table 12.


        We may conclude that the relation between the wage structure (the tenure-wage profile)
 and turnover is similar in all three cases, but that the (transplanted) hiring and training practices
 of Japanese firms account for about two/thirds of the differential between the U.S. and Japanese
 wage and turnover behavior.
                                                                                                      24

 5. Summary and Conclusions


         The starting point of this study is the proposition that intensive formation of human
 capital on the job is the basic proximate reason for the strong degree of worker attachment to the
 firm in Japan. The greater emphasis on training and retraining, much of it specific to the firm,
 results also in steeper wage trajectories, due to growth of skills inthe firm.
         Several previous studies viewed the differences between Japanese and U.S. labor
 markets in the light of the same hypothesis. We explore this insight more thoroughly by a
 detailed use of micro-data for the two countries: We measure wage profiles and turnover in age
groups, and we i the inverse relation between the two on industry sectors within each ofthe
countries. Numerical estimates of this relation permit us to conclude that about two-thirds of the
differential in turnover between the two countries is explainable by the differences in the
steepness of the profiles.
         As we indicated, the relation between wage slopes and turnover is indirect--attributable to
the effects of human capital formation on each. This is in contrast to theories of seniority wage
incentive schemes which encourage worker effort, therebypermitting reductions in monitoring
costs. In such theories, the effects of wage profiles--which rise more rapidly than productivity--
on turnover is direct. In our opinion, this interpretation of differences in wage profiles between
the U. S. and Japan is inappropriate, prima facie, in view of the traditional reputation of Japanese
workers for discipline and loyalty to the firm. Moreover, there is evidencethat supervision plays
a larger role in the careers of Japanese workers--but the purpose is to guide worker development,
and not to monitor shirking behavior. Neither do we agree with the view that cultural attitudes are
the major reason for the inter-country differences especially because the system we observe has
been changing over time. We do not deny that cultural factors may play a facilitating role.
      The question remains why the emphasis on human capital formationon the job is so
much greater in Japan than in the U.S. Our answer is that suchemphasis is conditioned by rapid
economic growth. More specifically, Japanese labor policies in the firmrepresent adjustments of
worker skills and activities to very rapid technological changes of the past decades.
       Several indications lead us to this hypothesis: (1) The timing ofstrong reductions in
turnover during the 1950's, when economic growth accelerated in the postwar period. (2) The
lack of deceleration in the wage profile of mature workers relative toyounger workers in Japan--
suggesting continuous training and retraining processes characteristic of rapid technological
change. (3) Actual obsolescence of skills reflected in larger declines (than in the U.S.) in wages
of workers who interrupt labor force participation for several year periods. (4) Earlier retirement
age in sectors with more rapid productivity growth in Japan. Research on U.S. data suggests
                                                                                                  25
that the more rapid productivity growth in an industiy the greater the demand for education and
training in it.
        Using productivity growth indexes for industries in the U. S. and in Japan we test the
hypothesis that rapid technical change which induces greater and continuous training, is
responsible for steeper profiles, hence indirectly for lesser turnover. The hypothesis isconfirmed
on the sectoral level in both countries. We conclude that differences in productivity growth
between the U. S. and Japan account for 70- 80% of the differences in the steepness of wage
profiles, hence indirectly for the differences in turnover.
        Finally, we try to standardize for the cultural background of workers, by observing a
sample of Japanese plants in the U.S. which employ American workers, and use Japanese labor
policies in recruitment and training. We fmd that the steeper tenure-wage slopesand lower
turnover place this sample closer to Japan than to the U.S.--about two/thirds of the distance.
        The question whether these transplanted policies are profitable and may serve as a model
for American industry to emulate is not easily answered, certainly not within the scope of this
study. In answering such questions one should keep in mind that the JPUS ventures are highly
selective in regard to: tax advantages and other incentives provided by local governments to
induce their location, non-unionized and carefully recruited employees, and industrial activities in
which their parent firms excel.




                                          FOOTNOTES

         1
             Explicated by Mincer and Jovanovic (1981).
         2 References: Kuratani (1973), Shimada (1981), Tachibanaki (1984), Hashimoto (1981),
 Hashimoto and Raisian (1985).
         3 See Becker and Stigler (1974), and Lazear (1981).
         4 Some evidence is cited in note 26, below.
         5 References in footnote 3.
         6 In his survey of the steel industry, Koike (op. cit.) found that tenure lengthened over
 that decade. A similar finding is shown by Saxonhouse (1976) for cotton textiles.
           See Lillard and Tan (1986), and Section 3 below.
         8 According to Koike's survey (op. cit.) there was a large number of rotations within
 Japanese plants. By contrast he finds that rotation in U.S. firms is infrequent. Mary Brinton
  (1987) emphasizes rotation as an important component of trainingin Japanese firms.
                                                                                                    26
         9 Parsons uses NLS data, Tan the CPS.
         10 Similar findings are shown by Lillard and Tan (1986) in CPS and NLS data.
              Most studies of Japanese wage structures use the Wage Structure Basic Survey
  (Shimada (1981), Hashimoto and Raisian (1985)). Thereasons for employing the E in this
  paper are as follows: (1) While the WSBS is an establishment survey, the         is a household
  survey which is comparable to the PSID (Mellow and Sider (1986) suggest that there are
  discrepancies between the estimated results of wage equations in establishment data and
 household data). (2) We were required to employ micro data which contain information on
                                                                                              wage,
 job separation and other related variables at the same time, and the     is the only nationwide
 data source available in Japan which satisfies these conditions. (3) While the WSBS conducts a
 survey of wages in June only for the employees in firms with more than 10 workers who
 worked for more than 18 days a month and more than 5 hours a day, the           covers annual
 earnings and working hours of all workers.
         12
                 1979 E contains a question about the annual working days. In addition, the
 survey asked workers with more than 200 working days a year and workers with less than 200
 working days who worked regularly during the survey period about their weekly working hours.
 But seasonal workers and day workers did not provide information on their weekly working
 hours. So, these workers are excluded from our wage data because information about both the
annual working days and the weekly working hours is necessary for calculating the annual
working hours. (These workers are included in the sample for the separation equations). The
seasonal employees and the day workers account for just 3.6 percent of the total employees in
 non-agricultural industries. The annual working days and the weekly working hours were
answered on a multiple-choice form. The annualworking hours was calculated as the median of
the selected answers to both questions.
        13 Working age upper limits of 55 in Japan and 60 in the U.S. are comparable,
                                                                                          as they
precede imminent retirement.
        14 The human capital interpretation of the coefficients is provided in the
                                                                                   note following
the description of findings. See Mincer (1974) for the theoretical development.
        15 Greater
                   homogeneity in abilities, and/or larger inequality in opportunities inJapan
could lead to such differences (See Becker 1975, Chapter 3).
        16 Cf. Koike (1984) and Brinton (1987).
        17 For a discussion of this bias in the wage-turnover relation, see Mincer and Jovanovjc
(1981).
       18 A possible reason is provided in the analysis of early retirement (section 3
                                                                                         (b)).
                                                                                                   27
        19 The notion of "proprietary" technological knowledge is stressed by R. Nelson (1981).
In an unpublished paper Hong Tan (1987) translates this notion into firm technology-specific
worker skills.
        20 This appears to be an initial phase for technological adaptations in American industries
(Bartel and Lichtenberg, 1986). According to Saxonhouse (1976) the unavailability of skills
embodying new technology on the outside of the firm, led to major firm specific efforts to mold
worker skills in Japan in the 1950's.
       21 This resistance, or fear that workers "will work themselves out of a job" is a common
theme in the industrial relations literature. As Koike (1984) puts it, the job rotation training
system in Japan produces a "deeper" career pattern of company specific skills which underlies
worker attitudes toward technological change and their commitment to the company.
          22Lfflard and Tan (1986), Tables 3.4 and 3.5.
          23 We combined some of the indexes in order to apply them to the smaller number
(aggregated) of industries in our data sources (PSID in the U.S.).
       24 These slopes were estimated by interacting industry dummies with tenure in the micro
wage equations shown before.
      25 See Becker (1975), pp 73-74.
      26 The R2 is .43 in 26 industries, excluding public utilities and textiles. Data are from the
1983 Survey on Welfare Facilities Systems for Employees, and 1983 Survey on Employment
 Trend.




                                         REFERENCES

 Becker, G. (1975), Human Capital, 2nd ed., U. of Chicago Press.
 Becker, G.S. and G. Stigler (1974) "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance,and Compensation of
        Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies, 3,January.
 Brinton, M.C. (1987) "Women Workers and Human Resource Development in Japanese
        Firms," paper presented at the 1987 Association of Asian Studies Meeting in Boston.
 Brown (1983), "Are Those Paid More Really No More Productive?" Princeton Working Paper
          #169.
  Bartel, A. and F. Lichtenberg (1987), "The Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in
          Implementing New Technology," Review of Economics and Statistics, February.
                                                                                              28
  Conrad, K. and Jorgenson, D.W. (1985) "Sectoral
                                                 Productivity Gaps between the United
         States, Japan and Germany, 1960-1979" Probleme und Perspektiven de.L
        Weltwirtschpfljchen Entwicklug, Berlin, Duncker and Humblot.
 Gustalson, Siv (1977), 'Depreciation Rates of Human Capital Due to Nonuse," mimeo,
        Stockholm University.
 Hashimoto, M. (1981) "Firm-Specific Human Capital as a Shared Investment," The American
        Economic Review, Vol. 71.
 Hashimoto, M. and Raisian, J. (1985) "Employment
                                                    Tenure and Earnings Profiles in Japan,"
       The American Economic Review, Vol. 75.
 Higuchi, Y. (1987) "Labor Force Withdrawal,
                                              Re-entry and Wages by Educational
        Attainment in Japanese Women," Columbia University Center on Japanese Economy
        and Business. Discussion Paper. No. 7. Paper presented at the 1987 Association of
        Asian Studies Meeting in Boston.
Higuchi, Y. (1987,A) "A Comparative Study ofJapanese Plants Operating in the U.S. and
       American Plants: Recruitment, Job Training, Wage Structure and Job Separation,"
       Columbia University Center on Japanese Economy and Business. Discussion Paper No.8.
Koike, K. (1984) "Skill Formation System in the U.S. and Japan: A Comparative Study" in
        IbEnQrni Analysis of the Jananese Firm, edited by M. Aoki, North-Holland.
Kuratani, M. (1973) "A Theory of Training, Earnings, and Employment: An Application to
       Japan," Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia University.
Lazear, E.P. (1981) "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions" Iii
       Aneticpn, Economic view. Vol. 71.
Lillard, L.A. and Tan, H.W. (1986) "Private Sector Training Who Gets it and What are its
        Effects," Rand Corp.
Mincer, J. (1974) Schooling. Experience and Earnings. NBER and Columbia Press.
Mincer, J. (1983) "Union Effects: Wages, Turnover, and Job Training," in Research in
       Economics, Supplement 2, edited by R. Ehrenberg, PAl press.
                                                                                       La
Mincer, J. (1984), "Labor Mobility, Wages, and Job Training," DOL Report.
Mincer, J. (1984A), "Human Capital and EconomicGrowth," Economics of Education
       Review, Vol. 3, No. 3.
Mincer, J. and Jovanovic, B. (1981) "Labor Mobility and Wages," Studies in Labor Markets,
       edited by S. Rosen. The University ofChicago Press.
Mincer. J. and Polachek, S. (1974) "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and Restoration
      of Human Capital," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82. No. 2.
Mincer, J. and Polachek, S. (1978). "Women's Earnings Reexamined," The Journal of
       Human Resources, Vol. 13, No. 1.
                                                                                             29
Nelson, R., (1981), "Research on Productivity Growth and Differences," Journal of Economic
       Literature, September 81.
Parsons, D. (1986), "Wage Determination in the Post-Schooling Period," Ohio State, Center
      for Human Resources.
Saxonhouse, G.R. (1976) "Country Girls and Communication Among Competitors in the
      Japanese Cotton-Spinning Industry," in JIpanese Industrialization and its Social
      Consequences, edited by H. Patrick, University of California Press.
Shimada, H. (1981) Earnings Structure and Human Investment: A Comparison between the
       United States and Japan Keio Economic Observatory.
Tachibanaki, T. (1984) "Labor Mobility and Job Tenure," in The Economic Analysis of
       Japanese Firm, edited by M. Aoki, North-Holland.
Tan, H.W. (1987) "Technical Change and its Consequences for Training and Earnings," Paper
       presented at the Labor Workshop at Columbia Univ.
                                                                                              30


                                             Table Al
                            Means and Standard Deviptjpns* of Variables

                               U.S.      Japan      U.S.       Japan       U.S.
                             (18-60)    (15-55)                                      Japan
                                                  (18-30)     (15-30)     (31-60)   (31-55)
 Log wage rate **             1.470      9.030     1.308       8.696       1.564    9.191
                              (0.42)     (1.58)    (0.37)      (1.51)     (0.42)    (1.59)
 Schooling(E)                12.73       11.94     12.83       12.48      12.67
 (Year)                                                                             11.67
                             (2.70)      (2.49)    (2.10)      (2.32)     (3.00)    (2.52)
Totalworkexperience)          16.30      18.53     6.24        6.93       22.10     24.12
(Year)                       (10.93)    (10.63)   (2.66)      (3.99)      (9.60)    (7.98)
Tenureatthecurrent            7.85      11.35      2.82        4.72       10.75     14.35
firm(T), (Year)              (8.31)     (8.94)    (2.52)      (3.61)      (9.07)    (8.99)
Separationrate(S)            0.166      0.049     0.281       0.086       0.100     0.035
                            (0.377)     (0.22)    (0.45)      (0.28)      (0.30)    (0.18)
Married(M)                   0.874      0.757     0.814       0.382       0.910     0.938
                             (0.33)     (0.43)    (0.39)      (0.49)      (0.29)    (0.24)
Sample size                  8103       21140     2963        6881        5140      14259

Sources: The 1979 Japanese Employment Status Survey.
         The 1976-8 1 U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics.
Note: * Figures in parenthesis are standard deviations.
The Japanese samples consists of male employees. The U.S. sample consists of white male
employees who are household heads.

**The Japanese wage rate is shown at 0.1 yen/hour
  The U.S. wage rate is deflated by the 1979-basedCPI (in dollars/hour)
                                                                                                 31

                                               Table A2
                       Regressions of Male wage Equations in Japan and in the U.S.
                         (Log
                           Japan (1979                            The U.S. (1976-8fl
                     (A)         (B)         (C)             (A)        (B)          (C) (D)
Equation Type                                                18-60     18-60      18-60  18-60
 Age Group           15-55       15-55        15-55
Constant            3.511**      4.414** 4.588**             0.5185** 0.5752** 0.5706** 1.0587**

                    0.5668** 0.4491** 0.4489**               0.0198**   0.0144     0.0141     0.0070
E
                     (12.66)      (10.15)     (10.17)         (2.13)     (1.59)     (1.56)    (0.79)
                    0.0149** 0.0114** 0.0116** 0.0019** 0.0021** 0.0021** 0.0026**
                     (-8.43)      (-6.51)      (-6.81)        (5.26)     (5.72)     (5.74)    (7.16)

                                                             0.0347** 0.0237** 0.0231** 0.0233**
X                   0.0843** 0.0390** 0.0167**
                                                                                              (14.30)
                     (22.37)       (8.87)      (3.35)         (22.87)   (14.33)    (13.95)


x2                  0.0013** 0.0007** 0.0003** 0.0006** 0.0004** 0.0004**0.0005**
                     (-13.71) (-6.85)  (-2.93)  (-14.87)  (-10.96) (-10.72) (-10.90)

T                                0.0629** 0.0491                        0.0231     0.0158** 0.0137**
                                   (14.80)     (10.23)                  (14.16)     (8.46)     (7.40)
                                 0.0008** 0.0004**                      •0.0004** 0.0002**0.0002**
T2
                                   (-5.89)     (-2.77)                   (-7.24)    (-3.32)   (-2.69)

C                                            0.1070**                              0.0964**0.0923**
                                              (-1.78)                               (-7.60)    (-7.38)

                                              0.2639**                             0.0725** 0.0664**
M                                                                                             (5.65)
                                                (8.22)                               (6.07)
                                                                                              0.1308**
 U
                                                                                               (15.13)

                       0.098        0.129       0.134          0.268      0.305      0.313     0.333
 R2

 Note: Figures in parentheses are t-values.
                   *: Significant at the 10 percent leveL
                   **: Significant at the 5 percent level.

    The dependent variable is the log wage rate. E is the number of years of schooling, X is total work experi
    T is tenure at the current firm, C is a dummy for a job changer, M is a dummy for a married person, U is a
    dummy for a union member. In the Japanese data, the information of whether the worker is a union memb
    non-union member is not available. Year dummy variables are added to the above independent variables ft
    U.S. equations. These coefficients are omitted in this table.
                                                                                                 32

                                         Table A2 (Continued')

                      Regressions of Male Wage Equations in Japan and in the U.S.

                           Japan (1979')                         The U.S. (1976-81')
Equation Type      (A)         (B)        (C)        (A)           (B)        (C)
Age Group         15-30       15-30      15-30                                            (D)
                                                    18-30         18-30      18-30       18-30
Constant        3.9588**    4.4086** 4744** 0.3914** 0.5048** 0.4963** 1.0806**
                  (7.54)     (8.34)      (8.95)     (2.14)        (2.85)      (2.79)     (6.73)
E               0.5121**    0.4456** 0.4395**      0.0224         0.0099     0.0122     -0.0093
                 (6.20)       (5.37)   (5.30)      (0.81)         (0.37)     (0.46)     (-0.38)
                O.O138** 0.0117** 0.0118** 0.0017* 0.0020** 0.0019** 0.0030**
                 (-4.34)     (-3.67)    (-3.72)     (1.62)        (1.97)     (1.87)      (3.32)
X               0.1138**    0.0587** 0.0333* 0.0790** 0.0442** 0.422** 0.0383**
                 (7.21)      (3.31)     (1.77)      (7.51)        (4.11)     (3.90)      (4.31)
x2              0.0035**    -0.0016     -0.0009   0.0036** 0.0020** 0.0019** 0.0016**
                 (-3.14)    (-1.28)     (-0.74)    (-4.48)        (-2.44)    (-2.35)    (-2.50)
T                          0.0982** 0.0422*                      0.0769** 0.0637** 0.0498**
                             (5.84)     (1.71)                    (9.62)     (5.81)     (5.41)
                           0.0046** -0.0009                  0.0052** 0.0041** .00030**
                             (-3.45)    (-0.57)                  (-5.69)     (-3.69)    (-3.36)
C                                      -0.1243                              0.0340* 0.0366*
                                       (-1.26)                               (-1.64)    (-1.95)
M                                      0.2054**                             0.0456** 0.0506**
                                         (4.86)                              (2.83)    (3.41)
U
                                                                                       0.1794**
                                                                                       (14.17)

                 0.055       0.064      0.070      0.173          0.223      0.225      0.293
                                                                                      33


                                    Table A2 (Continuecfl

                 Regressions of Male Wage Equations in Japan and in the U.S.


                   Japan (1979                        The U.S. (1976-8fl

Equation Type    (A)      (B)      (C)      (A)      (B)     (C)       (D)
                31-55    31-55    31-55    31-60    31-60   31-60     31-60
Age Group
Constant      3.4884** 4.4255** 4.281** 0.5871** 0.6538** 0.6115** 1.0833**
               (10.11)  (12.96)  (12.55)   (8.50)   (9.72)  (8.90)   (15.16)

E            0.5396**   0.4295** 0.4146**       0.0182*     0.0138     0.0120     0.0046
                         (7.91)                                         (1.19)    (0.45)
              (9.75)                 (7.66)      (1.76)      (1.37)


E2           O.0133** 0.0103** O.0099** O.0020** O.0021** 0.0022** 0.0027**
              (-6.01)    (-4.74)     (-4.57)     (4.76)      (5.06)     (5.30)    (6.25)

X            0.0905** 0.0404** 0.0388** 0.0281** 0.0180** 0.0188** 0.0216**
              (8.80)      (3.94)     (3.79)      (9.73)      (6.14)     (6.42)     (6.71)


x2           0.0014** 0.0007** 0.0007** 0.0004** 0.0003** 0.0003** 0.0004**
              (-6.64)    (-3.48)     (-3.52)     (-6.97)     (-5.27)    (-5.57)   (-5.93)

T                       0.0658** 0.0527**                   0.0184** 0.01369** 0.0115
                         (13.54)     (9.65)                  (9.98)     (6.43)     (5.25)

                        0.0009**    ..00005**               0.0003** 0.0001** -0.0001
                          (-5.80)    (-3.39)                 (-4.19)    (-2.02)   (-1.32)

C                                   0.1398*                            0.0836** 0.0855**
                                     (-1.59)                            (-4.19)    (-3.96)

M                                   0.43 14**                          0.0875** 0.0792**
                                      (8.22)                            (4.99)     (4.27)
                                                                                  0.0961**
 U
                                                                                   (8.21)


               0.089      0.130       0.136       0.216       0.260      0.266     0.277
                                                                                                34


                                              Table A3

                 Regressions of Male Separation Equations in Japan and in the U.S.
                                 Japan (1982)               The U.S. (1977-81)
 Equation Type           (A)           (B)           (A)            (B)        (C)
 Age Group              15-55        15-55         18-60          18-60       18-60
 Constant            0.2677**      0.2102**      0.4908**       0.4689**    0.4756**
                       (6.23)        (4.90)        (7.54)         (7.43)      (7.56)
 E                   0.0l50**       -0.0043       0.0027         0.0075      0.0121
                       (-2.31)      (-0.68)       (0.28)         (0.83)      (1.34)
                      0.0003       0.00002       0.0007*        0.0008** -0.001 1**
                      (1.31)        (0.09)        (-1.89)        (-2.19)     (-2.98)
 X                   0.0082**      0.0017**      0.0194**        -0.0017    -0.0018
                      (17.99)        (2.80)       (-12.51)       (-1.04)    (-1.07)
x2                  0.0002** •0.00004**          0.0003**        -0.0000    -0.00000
                      (13.03)     (-2.59)          (7.48)        (-0.13)     (-0.14)
T                                 0.0156**                     0.0377** 0.0361**
                                   (-26.07)                     (-22.99)    (-21.95)
T2                                0.00037**                     0.0010* 0.0010**
                                    (21.25)                      (17.30)    (16.66)
M                                 0.0177**                     0.0588** 0.0565**
                                    (-4.35)                      (-4.89)    (-4.73)
NUR                                              -0.0101       0.0070**     -0.0088
                                                 (-1.28)         (-0.93)    (-1.16)
U
                                                                           0.0708**
                                                                            (-7.85)
R2                    0.020         0.050         0.063          0.137      0.142
Fval. onE            50.63**       12.58**       71.47**        47.06**    48.86**

Note: Figures in parentheses are t-value.
*: Significant at the 10 percent level
**: Significant at the 5 percent level.
The dependent variable is the dummy for ajob separation. We exclude exitsfrom and entries into the
labor market. Consequently, job separation is synonymous with job change in our data. The total work
experience (X) and the tenure (T) is defined on the basis of the information in theprevious year of the
survey period. The nationwide unemployment rate (NUR) is that of white malesage 18-60 in each year.
                                                                                   35


                                Table A3 (continued

                  Japan (1982                         The U.S. (1977-8fl
Equation Type    (A)         (B)             (A)          (B)           (C)
                15-30       15-30           18-30        18-30         18-30
Age Group
Constant        0.5698**   0.3671**       1.0871**     0.9268**      0.9673**
                 (4.54)      (2.97)        (4.96)        (4.41)        (4.30)

E               O.O5O4**    -0.0056        -0.0490      -0.0299       -0.0275
                (-2.83)     (-0.32)        (-1.50)       (-0.96)       (-0.82)

                O.0013**   -0.00006        0.0007        0.0002       -0.0001
                (2.15)      (-0.10)        (0.55)        (0.14)       (-0.04)

X               0.0154**   0.0081**       0.05O8**      -0.0021        0.0033
                (-7.06)      (3.24)         (-4.79)     (-0.19)        (0.28)

x2              0.0006**   O.0004**       0.0021**      -0.00005      -0.0004
                 (2.85)     (-1.65)         (2.70)       (-0.06)       (-0.41)

T                          0.0695**                    0.1039**      0.1057**
                            (-16.22)                    (-12.37)      (-10.98)
                           0.0037**                     0.0065**      0.0071**
                            (11.60)                       (7.02)        (6.24)

M                           0.0062                     0.0389**       0.0447**
                            (0.80)                       (-2.03)       (2.24)

NUR                                        0.0272*      0.0239*       0.0333**
                                            (-1.88)      (-1.73)       (-2.28)

U                                                                     0.0901**
                                                                       (-5.10)

 R2              0.018          0.074       0.046         0.133            0.135

 FvaI.onE        51.38**    29.08**        45.21**       30.87**       31.04**
                                                                                  36


                                   Table A3 (Continue

                    Japan (1982)                        The U.S (1977-81)
 Equation Type      (A)         (B)           (A)            (B)
 Age Group         31-55       31-55                                      (C)
                                             31-60          31-60        31-60
 Constant        0.2134**    0.1713**       0.3341         0.3164       0.3095
                   (4.95)     (4.02)        (5.15)         (5.03)       (5.02)
 E               O.0104*     -0.0011        -0.0064       -0.0020       0.0045
                  (-1.64)     (-0.17)       (-0.73)        (-.02)       (0.53)

                  0.0002     -0.00003      -0.0001        -0.0001      -0.0005
                  (0.89)      (-0.14)       (-0.15)        (-0.36)      (-1.42)
X                0.0063**    0.0010       0.0084**        0.0048*      0.0043*
                  (-6.16)     (0.98)        (-3.07)        (1.81)       (1.71)
x2               0.0001**   -0.00002       0.00008       0.0001**     0.0001**
                   (5.58)    (-0.70)        (1.41)        (-2.24)      (-2.20)
T                           0.0118**                     0.0291**    0.0294**
                             (-21.20)                     (-18.76)     (-19.01)

                            0.0003**                     0.0007**     0.0007**
                             (16.68)                      (13.60)      (13.93)
M                           0.0349**                    0.0494**     0.0438**
                             (-7.15)                      (-3.28)      (-2.99)
NUR                                        0.0022         0.2253       0.007 1
                                           (0.25)         (0.64)       (0.87)
U
                                                                      -0.0478
                                                                       (-4.93)
R2                0.004      0.039         0.017          0.114        0.120
Fval.   onE      32.13**    11.06**        13.05**       11.21**      12.11**
                                                                                              37



                                            Table A4
            The Coefficient of Industry Dummy in wage Equations and Separation Equation
                                                 The U.S
                          18-60                          18-30
Age Group                                                                                  Separation
              Wage                Separation   Wage              Separation   Wage
              (IndT)              (md1)        (Ind1T)           (md1)         (IndT)      (Ind)
Lr"v           0
                   (cx)
                                  0
                                      (B)
                                               0
                                                 (cx)
                                                                 0
                                                                  (B)
                                                                              0
                                                                                  (cx)
                                                                                           0
                                                                                             (B)
1.
2.             0.01198**          O.09626**    0.05601**         0.08985** 0.00828**      0.10040**
3.             0.01412**          0.04778**    0.05815**         0.06179* O.01057**       0.05390**
4.             0.0169l**          0.06792**    0.07166**         -0.04074  0.01287**      0.09275**
5.             0.00816**          0.03639**    0.04647**          0.02604     0.00477**   0.07182**
6.             0.01256**          0.08634**    0.04687**         -0.03799                 0.11906**
               0.00113**          0.10275**    0.04726**         0.16591**    0.00797**   0.06274**
7.
8.             0.001428**         0.03401*     0.05607**         -0.02892     0.01055**   0.04259*
               0.01290**          0.O9895**    0.05801**         0.07102*                 0.12117**
9.
               0.00628**           0.06231**   0.02151**          0.09546** 0.00913**     0.03368
10.
                                  -0.00804     0.03950**          0.01869    0.00430*     -0.03087
11.            0.00772**
                                  -0.00170     0.04345**          0.02506    0.01806      -0.02436
12.            0.02113**
                                                                 -0.06499    0.00903**    -0.01639
13.             0.01239**         -0.03012     0.03666**
14.             0.00076           0.06661** 0.03193**            -0.04993     -0.00252    0.07939**
15.            0.00465**          0.06183** 0.02249**            0.07684*     0.00742**   0.08012**
16.            -0.00115            0.02791     0.04952**          0.10032**   0.00550**   -0.02982
                0.01122**         0.10450**    0.03447**         0.10463**    0.00848**   0.10478**
 17.



Note: *: Significant at the 20 percent level.
        **: Significant at the 10 percent level.
The coefficients of Industry No.1 are zero because the industry is assumed to be base-industry for
estimation.
The coefficients of constant term, E, E2, X, X2, M, Unemployment (also C, T,T2, Union and year
dummy in wage equations) are omitted in this table.

 The U.S. Industries classification: l.Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing. 2.Metal prod. 3.Machinery, 4.
 Transportation equipment, 5. Lumber stone work & Furniture, 6. Food & Kindred prod., 7. Chemical
 md. 8. Transportation and Communication Services, 9. Public utility, 10. Retail trade, 11. Wholesale, 12.
 Finance, Insurance & Real estate, 13. Publishing, Printing & Allied md., 14. Health care services, 15.
 Education, 16. Other services, 17. Public Administration.
                                                                                                          38


                                        Table A4 (continued)
           The Coefficient of Industry Dummy in wage Equations and Separation Equation

                                                     Japan
                            15-55                             15-30                    31-55
                  Wage              Separation       Wage              Separation      Wage
                  (Ind1T)           (Ind)                                                             Separation
                                                     (IndT)            (Ind)           (Ind1T)        (Ind)
Industry          (cx)              (B)                                (B)
1.            0                0                 0                    0              0            0
2.            0.00651**        0.00424            0.03366**       -0.02636           0.03754**
3.            0.00079                                                                             0.00918**
                               0.00499            0.00134         0.03367*           0.00776**    0.01297**
4.            0.01135**        0.01508*           0.01337**        0.00742
5.                                                                                   0.04787**    0.01317*
              0.01007**        0.02056**          0.00640         -0.00174           0.05054**
6.            0.00347** -0.00428                                                                  0.02416**
                                                 -0.00115         0.03277*           0.02798**    0.00075
7.            0.01099** 0.01458*                  0.00808**        0.06690** 0.03971**
8.            0.01237**
                                                                                                 -0.00367
                               0.01656*           0.00735**       -0.01747           0.05215**   0.01 180*
9.            0.01562** 0.01294*                 0.02653**        0.04860*           0.03851**   -0.00623
10.           0.00740** -0.00300                 0.00865*         0.00033            0.04430**   -0.00491
11.           0.01565**       0.01932**          0.02332**        0.00596*
12.           0.01346** 0.01603*                                                     0.04141** 0.01205*
                                                 0.01566**        -0.04110           0.04071**   -0.01098
13.           0.01143**        0.01072*          0.00547          0.02908*           0.04497**   0.02000**
14.           0.01235** 0.02158**                0.01238**        0.07268**         0.03654** -0.00893
15.           0.01705** 0.01172*                 0.01505**        0.07807**         0.01990**   0.01425**
16.           0.01612** 0.01084*                 0.01464**        0.05395**          0,01605**   0.00038
17.           0.01402**        0.00512           0.01968**        0.04941**         0.04599**
18.
                                                                                                 0.01885*
              0.01125**        0.00332           0.01329**        0.07184**         0.04842**    0.02234**
19.           0.01195**        0.02762**         0.01081**
20.           0.02732** 0.01835**
                                                                  0.02261           0.05293**    0.01802**
                                                 0.04310**       0.08956** 0.07425**             0.00020
21.           0.02576**        0.04535**         0.00925          0.07955**         0.06964**
22.
                                                                                                 0.03064**
              0.01182** -0.00065                 0.01982**       0.05060** 0.03667**   0.01049*
23.           0.01357** 0.01285*                 0.01274**       0.05598** 0.05225** -0.00123
24.           0.00900** 0.01331**                0.00768*        0.03609** 0.04787** -0.00613

The Japanese Industries Classification: 1. Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing, 2.
Mining,   3. Construction, 4. Food & kindred products, 5.
                                                      Textile prod., 6. Lumber
& wood prod., 7. Pulp, paper & paper work prod., 8. Publishing, printing &
Allied md., 9. Chemical & Allied md., 10. Ceramic, Stone & Clay prod., 11. Iron
and Steel, 12. Nonferrous metal prod., 13. Fabricated metal prod., 14. Machinery,
15. Electrical machinery, 16. Transportation equipment, 17. Precision trade, 20.
Finance & Insurance, 21. Real estate, 22. Transport & Communication, 23. Public
Utility, 24. Services.
                                                                                             39



                                                  Table A5
              The Coefficients of Industry Dummy x Tenure (INDiDfindIndustry Dummy (TNDI1
                                           in U.S Wage Equations

                   18-60                  18-30                 3 1-60             Non-Union
Age Group                                                                           (1 8-60
         IND1T             ND1 IND1T              IND1     IND1T         IND      INDT IND
___________                        (a1)                   (j)                                (a,.
1.       0             0           0           0        0        0         0        0
2.        0.0040* 0.1054** 0.0319*            0.0585    0.0105** 0.2476** 0.0066 -0.0424
3.       0.0130** 0.2815** 0.0067             0.3558** 0.0132** 0.3357** 0.0137** 0.2111**
4.       -0.0004  0.0944** -0.0029            0.1035** 0.0017 0.1443** 0.0014 0.070*
5.       0.0114** 0.2259** -0.0091            0.1322** 0.0159** 0.3389** 0.0136** 0.2210**
6.        0.00003 0.0568*          0.0024     0.1237** -0.0022 -0.0252     0.0070* -0.0275
7.        0.0026       0.0942** -0.0129       -0.0399     0.0065* 0.1754** 00077* -0.0405
8.        0.0036* 0.0582* -0.0181              0.0255      0.0079** 0.1466** 0.0047           0.0405
9.        0.0017        0.0110    -0.0181         0.0824* 0.0073** -0.0992    0.0052          0.0254
10.      -0.0006       -0.0500     0.0062     0.1183** -0.0008       -0.0516      0.0020     -0.0127
11.      -0.0018   0.1870** 0.0014 0.1820** -0.0003 0.2415** -0.0004 0.1565**
12.       0.0181** 0.1657** 0.0245* 0.2328** 0.0163** 0.1685** 0.0178** 0.1107**
13.       0.0035* 0.0536* 0.0046 -0.0694 0.0065** 0.1227** 0.0082** -0.0605
14.       0.0022   0.0635* -0.0057 -0.0640 0.0058* 0.1374* 0.0051 -0.0422
15.      -0.0007   0.2417** 0.0320** 0.1428** 0.0036 0.3309** -0.0014 0.1769**
16.       0.0061** 0.1574** -0.0182 0.0831* 0.0111 0.2475** 0.0090** 0.1212**
Notes: Controls included are E, E2, X, X2, T, T2, M, U and year dummy variables.

         Industries:    1. Mining, 2. Foods, 3,. Textile, 4. Lumber, Stone and Furnitures,
                        5. Publishing and printing, 6. Chemical, 7. Metal prod.,
                        8. Machinery, 9. Transportation Equip., 10. Miscellaneous mfg.
                       11 .Trade, 12. Finance, Insurance and Real estate,
                       13. Transportation and Communication, 14. Utility,
                       15. Services, 16. Public Administration.
                                                                                              40


                                              Table A6
                    Productivity Indexes by Industry (% Growth over the PeriocD

                         U.S
               1960-79
                                                           Japan
                                1970-79                               1960-79       1970-79
Industry                                      Industry
1. Mining               -0.46 -0.50            1. Agriculture               -0.06    0.02
2. Foods                 0.00 -0.03
3. Textile               0.33 0.16
                                               2. Mining                    Ø34 0.11
                                               3. Construct                -0.13 -0.03
4. Lumber, Stone
   and furnitures       -0.01 -0.07           4. Foods
5. Publishing &                                                            -0.18 -0.17
   printing              0.21 0.20            5. Textile                    0.27     0.10
6. Chemical             0.13 -0.03            6. Lumber& wood               0.45     0.14
7.Metalprod.            0.03 -0.02            7.Pulp&paper                  0.17     0.00
8. Machinery            0.27 0.12             8. Publishing & print        -0.11    -0.18
9. Transport Equip.     0.13 0.05             9. Chemical                   0.45     0.05
10.Misc. Mfg.           0.05 -0.03           10. Ceramic & Stone            0.26 -0.05
11. Trade               0.19 0.06            ii. Iron &Steel                0.18    0.06
12. Finance & Ins.      0.08 0.08            12. Non-ferrous metal          0.01    0.02
13. Trans. & Com-
    munications         0.21 0.11           13. Fabricated metal            0.48    0.12
14. Utility             0.00 -0.14          14. Machinery                   0.25 -0.01
15. Services           -0.05 0.02           15. Electrical Machinery       0.89      0.31
                                            16. Transport Equip.           0.21     -0.02
                                            17. Precision Instr.           0.65      0.32
                                            18. Miscellaneous mfg.         0.54      0.23
                                            19. Trade                      0.28     -0.01
                                            20. Finance & Insurance        1.19      0.43
                                            21. Transport,& Comm.          0.61      0.19
                                            22. Utility                    0.19 -0.01
                                            23. Services                   0.00 -0.12
Source: Conrad and Jorgenson (1985)
